ſ ſſE C Æ EUCISREſEι,: ſl l ſ. IN bl π h ù 4 l nù2 P&i nuanth nπ,;, Eν uaæ ù. i 3 ππ oreò &àe cievr ſ LInRARCEZPOF Tiin ſonivirSOr icnq;, ud Sππ Pæacuc TURAL AND EXPERIMENT PHILOSOPHY, CONSIDERED IN IT'S PRESENT STATE OE IMPROVEMENT. CRIBING, IN A FAMILIAR AND EAST HAoν RINCIPAL PHENOMENA OF NA nub:cilꝶ wino, AT THEY ALL CO-OPERATE IN DISPLAYI T H E DNESS, WISDOM, AND POWER OFr à BY GEORGE ADAMS, al Inſttument Maker to His Majeſty, and Optician to Highneſs the Prince oſf Wales. VOL. II. LONDON: PRINTED nr R. HINDMARSH, NTER TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OP WAI OLD-BAILEY. SOLD by the AUTHOR, No. 60, FLEET-STREET. aee u l TABLE oOf CON TURE XI OF the nature and properties of water OFf the compoſition and decompoſition Oſ water in a fluid ſtate Preſence of water in the atmoſphere Oſ water as mixed and combined with Of the origin of ſprings and rivers Oſ the ſaltneſs of the ſea a ECTURE XI To produce a great degree of cold An abſtract of Mr. De Lucts General Vĩ deduced from conſideriug the chat water, and water into ice Oſ water in a ſtate of vapour Mr. De Luc's thonghts on the laws of Ofſ veſicular and concrete vapour Oſ mineral waters ſ LECTURE XIV. Of the method oſ reaſoning in philoſophy LECTURE XV On opties E, Deſinitions Of the general principles oſ optical demonſtration Oſ reſraction E, Of the force and intenſity oſ light Oſ images and foci Q Oſ refraction at a plane ſurface Oſ reſraction at a convex ſurſace Oſ reſraction at a concave ſurface Eemes Of glaſs lenſes Oſ burning- glaſſes Eππũ Oſ the ſcioptric ball  m n Of the magic lanthorn Further remarks on convex lqnſes Of concave glaſſes To ſind the focal length of len ſes Of the brightneſs and diſtinctueſs of an image ll A general view oſ the phenomena of lenſes Of catoptries nm Of plane mirrors Oſ convex mirrors To ſind the ſocal length of ſpeculums General properties ol ſpeculums ſe Hπ fmnmpnu un O1ſ pictures ſeen in a concave ſpeculum Page DOFſ microſcapes 538 . Of the optical effect of microſcopes nù 541 . Oſ the ſingle mi E 546 . Oſ the double or compound microſcope 549  Of the ſolar microſcopnpgpe J 551 Generalobſervation rm n 552 ON NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. OF THE NATURE AND PROPERTIES OF WATRER. xDLECTURE XII. PHE ſtudy of nature is as much diſtinguiſhed from other ſubjects by the importance of it's matter, as by the variety of it's topics. But amidſt all this variety, the ſrue philoſopber is intereſted by the objects, only in proportion to the indication they afford of deſign and providence in the government of the world. This conſoling teſtimony you vill find ſpread abundantly over the face of nature; it is every where diſtributed into maſſes and portions, according to the nature of the ſubject. Every object we meet with, great or ſmall, bears the ſtamp of an ALL PERFECT CREATOR, is a mark of his wiſdom, a monument of his power, and a proof of his goodneſs: many inſtances of the order, beauty, harmony, and proportion, in the works of nature, have been exhibited in the foregoing Lectures. The ſubjects that I am going to treat of in this Lecture will furniſh us with more. As you advance in the knouledge of nature's varieties, your mind will be opened, and you will ſind freſh ornament in truth, freſh dignity in devotion, and freſh reaſon in religion. By thus employing your contemplations, you will not only enjoy the pureſt pleaſure, but you vill learn in the ſcriptural phraſe to walk witb God, and cheriſh towards him a certain loyalty of heart that brings all the ardours and ſenſibilities of our nature to the ſide of religion. From treating of air and fſire, I now proceed to conſider the nature of water, whoſe wonderful properties are alone an abundant ſource of knowledge. It is a ſubſlance that in a certain degree of heat is ſluid, in a leſs it is ſolid, and with a greater degree is convertible into an elaſtic vapour of incredible ſorce. It is capable oſ diſſolving all kinds of ſalts, of abſorbing and detaining in it's ſubſtance the air of the atmoſphere, of being elevated and ſuſpended in immenſe quantities in the regions thereof. In the general æconomy of nature, water promotes ſolution, ſeparation, aſſoc iation, and ſubſidence. It is a ſubſtance which enters into ſo many operations both of nature and art, that to give you a ſull deſcription of it's properties would include thoſe of moſt other ſubſtances. It's weight is uſed as the meaſure of ſpecific gravily. Its lemperature at the changes from ſolidity to ſluidity, and from thence to the elaſtic ſtate, are taken for the ſixed points of thermometers. Water conſtitutes not only the principal part of blood, milk, wine, oil, and other fluids, but alſo enters in a large proportion into the conſtitution oſ the ſolid parts of all animal, vegetable, and of many mineral ſubſtances. Wates Water ſerves to the art and navigation of man, as air ſerves to the wings of the feathered ſpecies. It is the eaſy and ſpeedy medium, the ready conduct and conveyance, whereby all redundancies are carried off, and all wants ſupplied. It makes man as it were a denizen of every country on the globe. It ſhortens every diſtance, and ties the remoteſt regions together. It carries and communicates the know ledge, the virtues, the manufactures and arts of each clime to all. It gives ſprings to induſtry, energy to invention. OF THE COMPOSITION AND DECOMPOSITION OF WABER. * Until very lately this fluid has been always conſidered as a ſimple ſubſtance. The experiments of Mr. Lavoiſier, which I have related to you in a former Lecture, has induced many to conſider it as a compound, conſiſting of inflammable and vital airs: in other words, that the whole maſs of any quantity of water may be converted into inflammable and vital air: and that the combuſtion of theſe airs produces a volume of water proportioned to the weight of the airs employed in the experiment. Though I have already ſhewn you, that the experiments of Mr. Lavoiſier and the French chemiſts by no means warrant the deductions they have made from them, yet as they have made theſe experiments the baſis of a new ſyſtem of chemiſtry, and have invented and appropriated a new ſet of terms, in order to propagate it more readily, it will be neceſſary in this place ſurther to inveſtigate che ſubject. B 2 That e Dr. Prieſtley's Obſervations and Experiments on Alr. That their experiments do not authorize their concluſion, appears from this, that when vital and inflammable airs are decompoſed by heat, we find both from the experiments of Dr. Prieſtley and the French chemiſts, that the nitrous acid is always formed; and though this acid has been ſaid to come from the phlogiſticated air, which could not be wholly excluded in the proceſs, there are ſeveral conſiderations that prove the acid could not have this ſource; the more ſo, as this proceſs does not at all decompoſe, or in the ſmalleſt degree affect phlogiſticated air. In what ever manner, ſays Dr. Prieſtley, vital and inflammable air be made to unite, ſome acid is produced, and in no caſe pure water. If iron, containing phlogiſton, be heated in vital air; or if precipitate per ſe, containing vital air, be heated in inflammable air, fixedair is always formed; whereas, according to the modern hypotheſis, water ought only to be produced in both caſes. Water, they aſſert, is aluays decompoſed when it is made to paſs over red-hot i iron; the iron according to their opinion imbibing the acidifying principle, the remainder going oſf in inflammable air. Nov it is unfortunate ſor this hypotheſis, that no ſubſtances will anſuer for this experiment, except ſuch as have aluays been conſidered as containing phlogiſton. It is thereſore moſt probable to ſuppoſe, that the inflammable air is ſormed by the phlogiſton from theſe ſubſtances, water being the baſe; and that if any part of the ſubſtance remain and acquire weight, it receives that additional ueight ſrom uater only. That phlogiſton is an element of water ſeems probable, iſi, becauſe water conducts electricity like inctals and charc cal, into which the ſame principle enters; and ,ù becauſe uhen freſh diſtilled it attracts vital air ſrom the atmoſphere, which is alſo a property of other bodies containing phlogiſton. In this ſenſe it may be ſaid to contain both the principles of the new theory, though it is a ſenſe that entirely overthrous that theory. Without however entering more minutely into this inveſtigation, it is ſuſficient to obſerve, that the formation oſ nitrous acid from the combuſtion of inflammable and vital airs, clearly proves thal water is not a compound of theſe airs; or that it is only ſo, in a certain proportion of theſe EE while nother proportion yields nitrous acid. For by admitting the formation of the nitrous acid from the ſame fluids, the argument for the compoſition of water drawn from the complete ſubſtitution of an equal weight of water to that of the airs which diſappear by combuſtion, no longer exiſts; and as the appearance of a large quantitv of water in theſe experiments is readily explained from the precipitation of the water which is known to be ſuſpended in theſe elaſtic ſluids, or which even make a neceſſary part of their compofition, no fact remains on which the hypotheſis of the ſormation of water from any proportion of inflammable and vital air is grounded. The fundamental experiment of this doctrine, namely, the equal ſubſtitution of water, and nothing but water, to the airs which diſappear, being removed, the ſtructure with all it's ornaments muſt fall, and no other veſtige will remain but the ingenuity and ſkill of the artiſt. OPF WATER IN A FLUID STATE. Water is conſidered as a pellucid, colourleſi fluid, taſteleſs, and without ſmell, nearly incompreſſible, and elaſtic only in a ſmall degree. It adheres to the ſubſtance oſ moſt bodies, but penetrate and incorporates with a ſtill greater number. Ii extinguiſhes flame. It is capable of paſſing through various ſtates of aggregation, from the ſolidity of ice to the tenuity oſ vapour. Many have conſidered i⸗e as the natural ſtate of water, and the fluidity thereoſ as a ſtate of violence, or as ice kept in continual ſuſion, and returning to it's former ſtate, when deprived ofſ a certain quantity of fire. Were you to deſine lead and water, you would call one a ſolid, the other a fluid, eſtceming theſe their natural condition. Yet ifſ water be not acted upon and combined with a certain quantity of fire, it becomes a ſolid. We call tha: ſtate natural which falls immediately under our obſervation. If we had lived in Saturn, we ſhould have given but one name to ice and water, although we might now and then have ſeen it liqui fied in ſummer; and on the other hand, had we been born in Mercurv, we ſhould have deemed lead a fluid. The particles of water, though moveable amongſt themſelves with the greateſt eaſe, yet adhere together with a certain ſorce; thus a drop of water remains ſuſpended at the end of the ſinger, although the inferior particles only touch other particles of the ſame fluid. This adherence of the particles prevents ſmall needles, or very thin plates of metal from ſinking therein, as they reſiſt diviſion more than the exceſs of the ſpecifie gravity ot theſe bodies over a relative volume oſ water. Water can only be compreſſed in a very ſmall degree, ſo ſmall that it may in general be conſidered as incompreſſible, as will be evident to you by conſidering the Florentine experiment which I have alrcody mentioned to vou. ſthat it is, however, compreſſible in a ſmall degree, may be proved by an eaſy experiment: put uater into a bottle with a ſtum nicely graduated, obſerve the degree at which it ſta1ds, and place the bottle under the receiver ol an alr-pump, and exhauit the air thereſrom; when the preſſure of the air is removed, the fluid will riſe a little. We have no fluid more ſubtil and penetrating than water, except ſire; it enters into the minuteſt particles and pores of matter, the fineſt veſſels of animals, and the ſmalleſt tubes of plants, and will pierce through ſubſtances which will detain air itſelf. This penetrative power of water, together with it's ſmoothneſs and lubricity, renders it a fit vebicle for the eaſy conveyance of the nutritious matter of all bodies. It enters into the compoſition oſ all the ſubſtances belonging to our earth. There is probably no ſubſtance, whether animal, vegetable, or mineral, without it. Every being with life, in a great degree lives by it; and v hatever grous, through it receives it's growth; and wherever it enters, according to the œconomy of providence, it promotes and ſuſtains life, preſerving all material nature in their proper claſſes of exiſtence. It bears a part in the formation and decompoſition of all the mineral kingdom. It is neceſſary to the free exerciſe of the functions oſ the animal body, and haſtens and ſacilitates the deſtruction of both vegetables and animals as ſoon as they are deprived of life. But whether you conſider it as productive of health to animals and vegetables, as requiſite to the beauty and exiſtence of the earth, or as one of the great powers by which Gob works in the ſuſtentation and action of the whole univerſe; you cannot but admire the ſublime propriety with which, as a ſenſible image, it is uſed in the ſacred ſcriptures, to repreſent divine truth, and the holy influence of our Gob and SavIOUR. PRESENCE OP WATER IN THE ATMOSPIERE. So great is the neceſſity, uſe, and importance oſ this fluid in all things, that ſome ancient philoſophers were impreſſed with a notion of it's being the firſi principle of univerſal life. It ſeems to be univerſally diffuſed. And it will be eaſy to convince you ol the great quantity contained in the air. You may be ſaid to walk in an ocean; the water indeed oſ this ocean does not become the object oſ our ſenſes, ue cannot ſee it, nor, whilſt it continues thus ſuſtained in the air, do we feel that it wets us; but it is ſtill water, though it is neither viſible nor tangible; juſt as ſugar, when diſſolved in water, is ſtill ſugar, though we can neither ſee it, nor feel it. Some are puzæled to find water enough to form an univerſal deluge;  to aſſiſt their endeavours it may be remarked, that were the uwhole precipitated which is contained in the air, it might probably be ſufficient to cover the ſurface of the whole earth to the depth of above 30 feet. If a bottle of wine be fetched out of a cool cellar in the hotteſt and drieſt day of ſummer, its ſurface will ſoon be covered with a thick vapour, which when taſted appears to be water. Ihis watery vapour cannot proceed from any exudation oſ the wine, through the pores of the bottle, for the glaſs is impervious to water, and the bottle remains full, and when wiped dry it is found to weigh as much as when taken out of the cellar. The ſame appearance is obſervable on the outſide of a ſilver, or any other metallic veſſel, in which iced.water is put in the ſummer time; and it is certaim, that the uater which is condenſed on the ſurface of the veſſel does not proceed merely from the moiſture exhaled by the breathing of the people in the room, where you may notice the experiment, becauſe the ſame effect will take place if the veſſel be put in the open air. Water which is cooled by the ſolution of any ſalt, or even ſpringwater which happens to be a few degrees colder than the air, produces a ſimilar condenſation of vapour vapour on the outſide of the veſſel in which it is contained. Theſe, and other appearances of the ſame kind are to be explained on the ſame principle. When warm air becomes contiguous to the outward ſurface of a veſſel containing cold liquor, the fire by which the water is ſuſpended in the air, and quits and paſſes through the veſſel into the liquor, to reſtore it to the temperature of the place, and the water ceaſing to be ſuſpended in the air, attaches itſelf to the ſurface oſ the cold veſſel. Another method of proving the exiſtence of water in the cleareſt air, is, to obſerve the increaſe of weight, which certain bodies acquire by expoſure to the open air. Dr. Watſon put into the open air eight ounces of ſalt of tartar, which had been well dried on a hot iron; the day was without a cloud, the barometer at 30 inches; in the ſpace of three hours, from I1I to 2 in the afternoon, the ſalt had increaſed two ounces in weight. In the courſe of a few days it's weight was increaſed to 20 ounces; it was then quite fluid, and being diſtilled, it yielded a pure water, equal in weight nearly to the increaſe it had acquired from the air. Strong acid of vitriol is another body, which abſorbs humidity ſtrongly from the air. An ounce of this acid has been obſerved to gain in twelve months above ſix times its ovn weight. The increaſe of weight experienced by the human body (in many caſes from the water, which the pores of the body ſuck in from the air) is another very ſenſible proof of the great quantity of water ſuſpended in the air. The Biſhop of Llandaff mentions, among many inſtances, one of a lad, at Newmarket, a few years ago, who having been almoſt ſtarved, in order that he might be reduced to a proper weight for riding a match, was weighed at nine o'clock in the morning, and again at ten, and was found to have gained near thirty ounces in weight in the courſe oſ an hour, though he had drank only half a glaſs of wine in the interval. The wine, probably, ſtimulated the action of the nervous ſyſtem, and incited nature, exhauſted by abſtinence, to open the abſorbent pores oſ the whole body, in order to ſuck in ſome nouriſhment ſrom the air. It is well known, that perſons, who go into a warm bath, come out ſeveral ounces heavier than they went in, their bodies having imbibed a correſpondent quantity of water. Part of the utility of medicated vapourbaths depends on this principle of imbibition by the pores. There is a circumſtance oſf importance concerning the human ſrame, uhich ſeems to have eſcaped the attention of moſt phy ſiologiſts, namely, the nature of animal moiſture, and the means by which it is ſupported and kept up. I have ſhewn vou, in this Lecture, uwhat a quantity of moiſture the human ſrame uill take from the air; and this might have been ſupported by a greater variety of facts, if there had been any further neceſſity for proof. There are ſeveral conſiderations independent of theſe facts, which vill oſ themſclves lead you to conclude, that animal moiſture cannot be altogether ſupported, or accounted for, by what is received internally, as meat and drink; and you vwill be led to think that the greater part is received from the atmoſphere; and that it is probable that the human frame has a power of decompoſing ſome of the acrial fluids, which abound in the atmoſphere, and procuring water from them. The conſiderations alluded to above, are, that the fluids conſtitute more than half the bulk and matter of the animal frame; that the baſis of theſe fluids is water; that they have a ſtrong vapori fic tendency, and are continually heated to 96 degrees; that a vaſt ſurface is expoſcd to the drying power of the air, not only the whole external ſurface, but that alſo of the lungs; and that every vital fibre and particle is not only expoſed to this heat, but alſo to the motion ariſing from the rapid circulation of the ſyſtem. If to all theſe circumſtances, we take in the great heat to which the body is expoſed in warm climates, I think we may, with little heſitation, ſay, that if the ſame quantity of water, that is contained in the human frame, were expoſed to as large a ſurface of air, more than one half would be evaporated in 24 hours; for you are to conſider that moiſture can tranſpire through our ſkin; and that the ſkin is always moiſt, and is continually acted upon by animal heat, the air, and the general circulation; and that without a continued and ſucceſſive ſupply of moiſture, the ſkin would be quite parched up. Add to this, the immenſe diſcharges which are conſtantly iſſuing out of the human ſyſtem, by inſenſible perſpiration, by the great diſcharges from the lungs, by the natural evacuations, by urine, ſaliva, &c. Take theſe altogether, and I think it will be impoſſible ſor you to conceive theſe are all ſupplied by the mouth. Mr. Harrington ſays, that he has often, in winter, examined his evacuation by urine, and found it to exceed in quantity, the moiſture received into the ſyſtem by the mouth. Whence then could the ſuperabundant quantity ariſe? and what ſupported the other evacuations? what under a heat of 96ꝰ kept every minute part moiſt, ſoſt, and pliable? Many more facts might be adduced in ſupport of this opinion; but ſor them I muſt refer you to-your own obſervation, and Mr. Harrington's work. 1 OF WATER AS MIXED ANDCOMEINED wWITH BOoDres. You may conſider the vacr, that s in bllics, in two ſtates, either that of ſimple nυ or that of combination. In the firſt ſtate, it renders bodies hum i, is perceptible to the eve, and may be diſengaged ſfrom them with facility. In the ſecond ſtate, it exhibits no character whereby you can diſcover that it is thus combined. It exiſts in this ſorm, in cryſtals, ſalts, plants, animals, &c. Water, exiſting in a ſtate of combination, concurs in imparting to them hardneſs; and the tranſparent ſalts, and moſt ſtony ervſtals loſe their tranſparency, when they are deprived of the water of cryſtalliuation. Many bodies are indebted to water for their fixity; the acids, for example, only acquire ſixity by combining with water. Water, when mixed with carth or aſhes, is formed into a veſſel, which when baked will bear the utmoſt force of the hotteſt fire that art can contrive. Thus you ſce a body, whoſe fluid and diſſolvin qualities are ſo obvious, gi-ing conſiſtence an hardneſs to all the ſubſtances of the earth. In this ſtate nature often unites it to bodies, with which art has not yet learned to make it enter into combination. Pure water will, indeced, unite immediately only with a certain number of ſubſtances; but aſter heing united with theſe, it becomes capable of diſſolving other ſubſtances in a ſucceſſion, whoſe limits we cannot determine, becauſe the further we advance in the knowledge of ſubſtances, the greater reaſon we have for pereciving our ignorance of the number which exiſt diſtinctly, and oſ the intimate ingredients even oſ thoſe that are 3 knoun. known. IMater is the baſc of all menſtrua: we concentrate them to a certain point by evaporation; but bevond this point the liquid cither produces nothing but 3ꝑupour, or eicapes entirely. An eſſential part of ſhe art of ches nſtry conſiſts in the compoſition of nienstrua, and in the precipitations operated therein: in theſe proceſſes water itſelf oſten cnters into new combinations. If, in his operations, the chemiſt falls upon any lucrative proceſs, of which he himſelſ is ignorant of the intimate cauſes, he makes a ſecret oſ it. But how many ſuch ſecrets are to be found among the o rations of nature? How many that will be concealed from us ſor ever, becauſe the primitive ſubftances are arrived at a ſtate that cannot be changed by the agents of the preſent operations in nature. When uwater, by a ſucceſſion of diſſolutions, contains different ſubſtances, they may be ſucceſfively precipitated, in tuo ways, by the diſſolution of new ſubſtances, or by the emiſſion of expanſible fluids, ſome of whoſe ingredients were united with the ſubſtances in the Iiquid. Ancient chemiſts knew ſcarce any thing of this laſt proceſs, nor of the various combinations of fire and light. It is to modern diſcoveries on theſe heads, that we are indebted for the preſent advancement oſ theſe ſciences; but if the chemiſt, in theſe purſuits, neglects the ſtudy oſ meteorology and geology, both for directing his inveſtigations of the nature of expanſible fluids, and appreciating his deciſions on the intrinſic nature of ſubſtances, he will run the riſk of accrediting errors by the very facts which ſhould have ſeparated him from them.Water may be conſidered as a kind of general cemont. The ſtones and ſalts, which are deprived oſ  See De Luc's Letters, dans le Journal de Phyſique, for 12790-91-92, &c. of it, become pulverulent, and fall away into a maſs of ſhapeleſs duſt. Water facilitates the coagulation, re union, and conſiſtence of the particles of ſtones, of ſalts, &c. as you alſo ſce in the operations perſormed uith plaſters, lutes, mortar, &c. The ftock of water afforded by the drieſt bodies is ſurpriſing; hartſhorn kept forty years, and thereby become as hard and dry as any metal, ſo that if ſtruck againſt a flint, it would give ſparks oſ ſire; upon being diſtiſied, aſforded one eighth part of it's quantity of water. For a conſiderable time water was thought to be a fluid earth. The carthy reſidue, leſt aſter the diſtillation, trituration, and putrifaction of water, gave credit to the opinion that it was convertible into earth. Mr. Lavoiſicr has ſhew n, that this earth ariſes from the wear of the veſſels; and Scheele has proved the identity in the nature of the carth vwith that oſ the veſſcls in which the operations were made. In a ſuid ſtate water combines ſo caſily with other fubſtances, that it is never to be found in a pure ſtate; the moſt genuine is mixed with exhalations, and diſiolutions of various kinds. Rainwater, which is a fluid of nature's oun diſtilling, and which has been raiſed ſo high by evaporation, is nevertheleſs a very mixed ſubſtance, impregnated with exhalations oſ all Kinds; ſalts, ſulphurs, and metals, are combined with it. Mr. Chaptal, ſrom experiments made at Montpellier, found rain-water in ſtormy weather more impure than that which came in gentle ſhowers; the water which falls firſt, is leſs pure than that which falls aſter ſeveral hours or ſeveral days rain: that the water which fell when the wind blew from the ſca to the ſouthward, contained ſea-ſalt, while that which .as produced by a northerly wind did not contain a ſingle particle. The water caught pouring from the tops of houſes is impregnated with the ſmoak of the chimnies, the vapours oſ the ſlates and tiles, and with ſuch impurities as birds and animals have depoſited there. It is the ſame uith river-water;: plants, minerals, and animals, all contribute their ſhare to add to it's impurities; wherever the ſtream flous, it receives a tincture ſrom it's channel. Oſ the various river-waters, thoſe oſ the Indies and the Thames are ſaid to be the lighteſt and moſt wholeſome. Waters in general are ſuppoſed to be more pure as they are more ſoft; ſnow-water is very ſoft; rainwater comes next to it; ſpring-water, though the cleareſt and moſt tempting of all to look at, is the leaſt pure, and of all others the lcaſt fit for common uſe. Spring-uater is pure, or polluted, in proportion as the earth through which it ſtreams is more or leſs impregnated with ſulphur, ſalts, arſenic, minerals, &&. Thoſe that are ſtrained through a ſandy foil, free from ſaline or metallic ſubſtances, are the pureſt. The eye is no adequate judge on this occaſion. It wiil indeed teach you not to drink or uſe foul or dirty water, but it will leave you in the dark as to thoſe contents of the water which may be ſuſpended in it imperceptibly. Tranſparency is certainly a very agreeable quality in water, but cannot be relied on as a proof of ſalubrity, for ſea-water is as tranſparent as that which is freſh. The water of ſtagnate lakes and pools is in general very impure, and may be conſidered as a jelly of floating inſects, the whole teeming with ſhapeleſs life, growing more fruitful by increaſing putrifaction, forming a maſs of corruption, diſpleaſing to the ſenſe and injurious to the health. The atmoſphere itſelf may be looked upon not only as the general receptacle of all aqueous vapours, but likewiſe of all mineral exhalations oſ the ſtcams which are conſtantly ariſing from the perſpiration oſ whatever enjoys animal or vegetable life, and ſrom the inſtantaneous putreſcence of thoſe ſubſtances when deprived of life; oſ the ſmaller ſeeds of terreſtrial and aquatic plants, of the egęs oſ an infſinite ſpęcies of imperceptible animalcules, of the acids and oils ſeparated by combuſtion from all ſorts of fuel, of the matter of light, of electric eſſluvia, and a variety of other ſubſtances. From theſe ſources are derived many of the impurities which have been diſcovered in all atmoſplierical water, which muſt vary according to the nature oſ the ſubſtances, the climate, the ſeaſon of the ycar, the direction of the winds, and many other unknown cauſes. Aſter all, we muſt be contented with but an impure mixture for our beverage, and yet even this may often be more ſerviceable to our healths than thoſe decmed purer. Experience alone muſt determine its uſcful and noxious qualities; ſuch water is in general to be preſerred that ſits light upon the ſtomach, that is of a freſh, lively, agreeable taſte, that boils readily, and boils garden ſtuff, and particularly peas and pulſe quickeſt, and which mixes perfectly and readily with ſoap without curdling. Water is puriſied by diſtillation. As it is of importance on many occaſions to have very pure water, it will be neceſſary to point out to you the means by which it may be thus purified. The operation is performed in a veſſel called an alembic; the alembic conſiſts of two pieces, a boiler or cucurbit, and a covering callcd a capital or head. The water is put into the cucurbit, ſrom which it is raiſed in vapour by means of ſire, and theſe vapours are condenſed by cooling the head with cold water. The vapours thus condenſed ſlow into a veſſel deſigned to receive them. This is called diſtilled water; and is purified ſo ſar as it leaves behind it in the cucurbit the ſalts and other fixed principles which alter it's purity. The diſtillation is more ſpeedy and quick in proportion as the preſſure of the air is leſs upon the ſurface of the ſtagnant ſluid. A true diſtillation is carried on every where ut the ſurface of our globe. The heat of the ſun raiſes water in the ſorm of vapours, theſe remain a certain time in the atmoſphere, and afterwards fall in the form of dew by ſimple refrigeration. This riſe and fall of water waſhes and purges the atmoſphere of all thoſe particles, which by their corruption or developement might render it infectious. It is perhaps this combination of water with various miaſmata, which renders the evening dew unwholeſome. OPF THE ORIGIN OF SPRINGS AND RIVERS. The quantity oſ water raiſed in vapour from the ocean, has rather extravagantly been thought by ſome to be equal to that which is poured into the ocean by all the rivers upon earth; and they therefore ſuppoſe, that what the ſea gets by the rivers, it loſes by evaporation, and that thus a mutual and equable interchange is preſerved; that all the rivers are ſupplied with water by the vapours that are raiſed from the ſea, carried thence by the wind, condenſed againſt the ſides of mountains, where trickling down through the crannies of the rocks, they enter the hollow places thereof, and ſorm collections of water, from whence they iſſue out at the firſt orifice they can find, and by this means conſtitute ſprings and rivers. There is another theory to account for ſprings and rivers, which refers this cauſe to a great abyſſ oſ waters, occupying the central parts of our globe. It aſſerts, that all the phenomena of ſprings are chiefly derived ſrom the vapours, veins, and iſſues of this great abyſs, into which they are all returned; and that a perpetual circulation and equality is kept up, the ſprings never failing, and the ſea by reaſon of its communication with the ſubterranean waters never overflowing. From the earlieſt ages theſe phenomena have engaged the attention of every inquiſitive mind.  The ſun ariſeth, fays Solomon, vand the ſun goeth down, and pants for the place ſrom whence he aroſe. All things are filled with labour, and man cannot utter it. All rivers run into the ſea, yet the ſea is not full. Unto the place whence the rivers come, thither they return again. The eye is not ſatisfied with ſeeing, nor the ear with hearing. At ſo early a period was curioſity employed in obſerving theſe great circulations of nature. The inquiry whence rivers are produced, whence they derive thoſe unceaſing flows of water, which are continually enriching the world with fertility and verdure, has been variouſly conſidered, and divided the opinions of mankind. But as the two abovementioned theories are thoſe which generally prevail, and to which moſt others may be reduced, we ſhall only examine their merits. e It ſeems almoſt unkind to diſenchant the beauties of the proſpect, which the firſt of the two foregoing theories preſents to our minds. A romantic imagination can form nothing more ſtriking than this unceaſing rotation of waters; clouds ariſing from the ocean, travelling till they daſh againſt the tops of the higheſt mountains, then deſcending feebly in little ſtreams down their ſides, entering the ſubterranean caverns of the earth, burſting forth forth into ſprings, and at laſt aſſembling into rivers, which carry the united torrent again to it's parent ocean. This is amuſing ſpeculation, but alas! it is but ſpeculation, and is ſo preſſed with difficulties, that a more perfect theory is highly deſirable. Calculation has been preſſed to favour this ſyſtem, and ſo great a quantity of evaporated water contrived to ſupport it, that iſ it fell, would drown inſtead of refreſhing our earth. That the rain and vapour which fall upon the earth are inadequate to the ſolution of the phenomena, and cannot poſſibly account for the origin of ſprings and rivers, will be made evident to you from a variety of conſiderations. Monſ. Gualtieri, by comparing the rivets of a country with the rains that fall upon it, has ſhewn that aſter making more allowances than are reaſonable in favour of the evaporating hypothelis, they exceed the rain in quantity: he has alſo ſhewn, that it is utterly impoſſible for the rain-water to keep up the continual courſe of rivers and ſprings. The waters diſcharged by the rivers of Italy into the ſea, are to the rain which falls upon the land, as 55 to 27, that is, more than twice the quantity. The earth is conſtantly moiſtened to a greator depth than the rain of the year will account for. Mr. De la Hire brought this hypotheſis to the teſt of experiment, by examining the moſt eſſential article thereof, namely, the depth that rain and ſnow-water did really deſcend into the earth. To know this, he dug a hole in the lower terraceof the obſervatory at Paris, and placed therein, eight feet under ground, a large leaden baſon, a little inclined towards one of it's angles, to which was ſoldered a pipe 12 feet long, which, aſter a conſiderable deſcent, reached into an adjoining cellar. After having covered the head v the pipe with ſeveral finte of difſerent ſizes, to prevent the oriſice ſrom beirg ſtopped, he threw in a quantity of earth to the depth of cight feet; the earth uas of a nature between ſand and loam, and thus eaſily perineable by water. He judged, that if rain or ſnow-water penetrated the carth to the depth that ſome ſprings are found at, (which in digging wells and mines are diſcovered to be at all depths from 8 to 80o feet,) or till they meet with the ſirſt clayey or compact ſtratum to ſtop them; that if this were the caſe there would ſoon be a ſpring burſting ſorth through the leaden pipe into the cellar. But on the contrary, aſter having kept the baſon in this ſituation for no leſs than ſfteen years, and the ground all the while expoſed openly to all the rains, ſnow, or vapours that might ſall, yet he could not obſerve that a ſingle drop of water had ever paſſed through the leaden pipe into the cellar. At the ſame time that Mr. De la Hire commenced the above deſcribed experiment, he placed another baſon about eight inches under ground, and choſe a place where the rain and vapours might fall, and yet the ground be ſcreencd from the heat of the ſun and the action of the wind; taking care to pull up the graſs and herbs that grew over the baſon, uhat all the water which ſhould fall on the ground might paſs unintcrrupted to the bottom oſ the baſon, wherein there was a little hole with a tube to convey the watet to another veſſel. In eight months, that is, ſrom the 1ath of June to the iqth of February following, no water came by the tube, and though it began to run on the i19th of February, this was entirely owing to the great quantity oſ ſnow which had fallen, and was then melting. From that time the carth in the baſon was always very moiſt, though the water would only run a ſew hours after raining, and it ceaſed running when the quantity falling was drained off. i Ayear aſter he repeated the ſame experiment, but buried the baſon ſixteen inches under ground, taking care that there was no graſs on the ground, and that it might be ſcreened ſrom the ſun and wind; the effect was much the ſame as before, excepting thar when a conſiderable time paſſed withount raining, the earth would grow a litrle dry, ſo that a moderate rain coming on it would not moiſten it ſufſiciently to make it run. The conſumption of moiſture by vegetables, and the fruits, is much greater than has been commonly ſuppoſed, or generally allowed for; ſo great, that all the rain that falls is not ſuſſicient to ſupply them with the quantity equal to what their growth demands. Mr. de la Hire planted herbs on the ground over the baſon mentioned in the laſt experiment, and found that when theſe were grown up a little, the ground was ſo far ſrom ſending any water aſter rain, that all that fell was not ſuſlicient to ſuſtain them, but that they would droop and wither unleſs reſprinkled from time to time with water. Dr. Hales found, that a plant in o13 days drew ofi all the water of the earth on which it grew, ſo that uithout a farther ſupply from beneath it would periſh after that period; and yet he has made no allowance for what the earth in queſtion perſpired at the ſame time in vapour. Theſe conſiderations, which might be ſupported by many more, abundantly prove, not only that rain-water ſcarcely penetrates ſo ſar as two feet, but that the quantity which falls is not ſufſicient to ſurnich what is requiſite for the growth of vegetables; ſo that we muſt call in ſome foreign aſſiſtance for their ſupport. here are ſprings, and thoſe common every uhere, ſo equal and conſtant in yielding their water at all ſeaſons, and which are neither afſected by rains nor droughts, that we cannot ſuppoſe them to be dependent on theſe for cauſes. The Reverend Mr. Derham * deſcribes one ſuch under his own inſpection, which was by no means conſiſtent with the hypotheſis of rain and vapour. There are ſprings alſo too near the ſummits of the higheſt grounds in the country to derive themſelves by deſcent from the water which falls on the ſurface of the ground, there being no declivity adequate to the purpoſe. The evaporation from the ſea being condenſed by high mountains, and ſoaked in there, is by no means ſufficient for the production oſ ſprings and rivers; t for whatever effect this vapour may ſeem to have in ſouthern climates, and in iſlands placed in the middle of the ocean, it cannot fairly e applied to the ſprings oſ inland countries and northern climates. Nor have the advocates for this hypotheſis conſidered, that where the evaporation of the day is ſo copious, the dews of the night which fall again on the ſame ſurface (ſea or land) are nearly in the ſame proportion; ſo that much leſs has been gained in this way than has been generally ſuppoſed. Dr. Derham ſhews alſo, that springs occur in great plenty, and are conſtant in eir courſe, even in times oſ the greateſt drought, where the country is in general very low, and there are no mountain tops to condenſe the vapours. The vapours and rain fall alſo upon the ſea as well as upon the land; and the ſurface of the ocean is conſidered to be as large again as that of the dry land: ſo that we may juſtly ſuppoſe, that two thirds of whatever is raiſed in vapours returns from whence it came without falling upon the dry land. No one vwill deny that rain and melted ſnow will produce many temporary ſprings, and increaſe the  Philoſ. Tranſ. No. 289, and 315. * Memoirs of Literature, Aug. 1725. Jones's Phyſiological the diſcharge oſ rivers; but this is a partial conſideration, and by no means adequate to that conſtant ſupply, and to that vaſt quantity of waters which are to be accounted for, and which ure conſtantly in action. I ſhall, therefore, now conſider the ſubterraneous ſtore, * and the vapours that ariſe from them. And here it is a well known fact, that we never fail to find water when we penetrate deep enough into the bowels of the earth; and the deeper we go, the waters occur in greater plenty. Ihis does not look as if their ſtores depended upon any accident at the ſurface, for then they would rather be diminiſhed and fail us when we work lower, their ſupplies being extended according to this account in ſprings and rivers upon the ſurface: but the contrary is always the caſe; therefore the ſources are not above, but belowm. This concluſion ſeems too obvious to be avoided. In ſinking mines it is very common to break in upon veins, and ſometimes large and powerful courſes of water in incredible quantities, which either overflow the works. or require continual afſiſtance to drain them. When the earth is cut through, it yields water, as naturally as the body, which abounds with veſſels. yields blood when it is wounded. The deeper the wound the greater is the effuſion of blood, becauſe the largeſt channels lie deep, and the largeſt of all which feed the reſt, are placed in the central parts of the body. Thus it is with the body of the earth, the effuſions of water obſervable near the ſurface have their ſupply from reſervoirs which lie deeper, and they in their turns are fed by larger and deeper, till we come to the grand repoſitory C4 of a Thoſe who wiſh to ſee ſtrong evidence in favour of theſe ſubterraneous ſtores, ſhould conſult Calcott on the Deluge, and of all, which keeps up a general communication between the waters of the land and thoſe of the ſea. Thoſe who have been eye-witneſſes of what paſſes within the earth, have been generally of opinion, that ſteam and vapour is in continual action there, though more at ſome times than at others; that there is ſrequently a very ſenſible warmth at the greateſt depths, and many tokens oſ moiſture ariſing upwards from the lower parts. Scheuchæer, who was very converſant in theſe reſearches, ſays, e firmiter perſuaſus ſum, copioſiſſimus ex imis montis viſceribus ad cacumen ſublevari caloris ſubterranei ope vapores aqueos. Nouw as the waters of the ſea are ſalt, while the ſpring waters of the land are freſh, and conſequently lighter, a column of ſea water will be a counterpoiſe to an higher column of ſreſh water. If thereſore the waters oſ deep ſeas have any communication with the land, and their weight has due offect, water may riſe to any required height upon ſtatical principles, either by running channels, or by ſap and percolation; for water underneath a maſs of dry ſand will be ſoaked upuards to it's ſurface.  Sir Iſaac Newton tried this experiment on a tube filled with dry aſhes, and found the vater aſcend through them with eaſe. In the rocky caverns of mountains much may be eſfected by the ſlow aſcent of ſteam, which will be condenſed as it comes near to the air, and diſtil downwards through thoſe cracks and chaſms where it finds an outlet. When we dig for ſprings in ſmall iſlands, and lands lying near the ſea coaſts, it is common to nnd veins oſ brackiſh water; theſe are certainly derived ſrom the ſca. The water that is more remote *Since this work went to the preſs, a machine has beer publ ſhed for purilying water by alcent. The contrivanęe j mote, and at a greater elevation from the ſea, becomes freſh by degrees; therefore it ſweetens in it's progreſs by percolation. Here the proceſs is palpable. But the earth being full of open veins and fiſſures, and ſtrata of looſe and permeable matter, muſt have a communication with the ſea to great diſtances; and where the diſtance is ſo great that the lateral ſupply cannot take place, thoſe deeper communications, of which there are ſo many evidences, will never fail us; and where percolation cannot reach, the ſubterraneous vapours, which are always circulating, muſt have their effect. In ſhort, wherever you dig beneath the ſurface of the earth, except in very few inſtances, water is to be found, and it is probable that by this ſubterraneous water ſprings and rivers, nay a great part of vegetation itſelf, are ſupported. It is this ſubterraneous water raiſed into ſteam by the internal heat of the earth that feeds plants. It is this ſubterraneous water that diſtills through it's interſtices, and there cooling, forms fountains. It is this that by the addition of rains is increaſed into rivers, and pours plenty over the whole earth. This reaſoning may be illuſtrated by a pleaſing apparatus, which is ſold in our ſtreets by the itinerant Italians. The tube is about three feet high, and is fixed to a board, the tube near the top is globular, and will hold a large quantity of water, from whence it is rontinucâ of a leſs ſize to the bottom, where it is curved upwards, and annexed to another globe, from whence proceeds upwards another ſmaller tube, bent in an irregular meandering manner to the top, where it is curved as you ſee downwards, and is joined to the upper globe. In the inſide of the lower globe, one part of the tube is ſo contracted as to form a fit paſſage for a ſpring, or jet d'eau, to ariſe from it. I pour coloured ture, letting it riſe therein till it has filled the upper globe; the air in the lower globe will be condenſed by the preſſure of the water endeavouring to riſe to it's level, the reaction and ſpring of the air will impel the water you ſee upwards through the ſmall tube and all it's meanders, and make it fall into the upper globe, and thus cauſe a conſtant circulation as long as any water remains in the upper globe. Now if you ſuppoſe the upper globe to repreſent the ſea, the lower globe to repreſent the abyſs, and the jet d'eau to be a ſpring breaking out thereſrom into the hollow parts of the earth, and from thence continued through ſmall winding fiſſures to the ſurſace, and from the channels of the river into the ſea again, the one may be allowed to be a proper repreſentation of the other, and an experimental illuſtration of the poſſibility of ſuch a circulation. OF THE SALTXESS OF THE SEA. No ſooner have we endeavoured to diſcuſs one queſtion, than another preſents itſelf for our conſideration, one ſor which philoſophy has not yet found a ſatisfactory ſolution. To diſcover the primary cauſe of that peculiar bitteriſh ſaltneſs which characterizes ſea-water, has exerciſcd the naturaliſts of all ages; and Father Kircher long ſince obſerved, that the fiuctuations of the ocean were ſcarcely more various than the opinions of men concerning it's ſaline impregnation. Dr. Halley, who oſten endeavoured by weak ſpeculations to leſſen the authority of the Bible, thought he had hit upon a principle, which would diſcover the cauſe oſ the ſaltneſs oſ the ſea, and carry us back almoſt with demonſtration to the true date of the creation. o Phil. Tranſ. No. 344. Watlſon's Chemiſtry, vol. ii. p. 93. creation. He laid it down as a principle, that the water of the ſea derives all it's ſaltneſs from the land, that a ſmall portion of ſalt is continually waſhed down from the land by rivers, and carried into the ſea, which has gradually acquired it's preſent quantity of ſalt from the long continued influx of rivers. The water which is thus carried into the ſea by the rivers, is again feparated from it by evaporation, nothing but freſh water riſes from the ſea in vapours, the ſaltneſs remains behind. The ſalt thus carried into the ſea muſt for ever remain there, it muſt therefore be a perpetually increaſing quantity, and the ſea muſt every year become more and more ſalt. If therefore, ſays the doctor, the increment of ſalt could be ſfound for any given term of years or ages, we ſhould then be able to work bac kwards by the rule of prortion, and diſcover the time when the ſea firſt egan to grow ſalt; that is, when the world began to exiſt. It is rather mortifying ſor infidelity, that the problem requires ages for it's ſolution. The idea of ſalting the ſea with freſb water, -is alſo rather uncommon, but worthy of a ſceptical philoſopher. The reaſoning is defective in many points. For allowing that the ſea evaporates into freſh water, and that thus the ſalt it contains is left behind, yet we are ſtill no nearer than before, unleſs while the ſea is loſing ſreſh water by evaporation, you could ſtop all the rivers, ſo that no freſh water might be added in the mean time. For Dr. Halley maintained, as you ſaw before, that as much freſh water is carried to the ſea by the rivers as it loſes by evaporation, that the rivers therefore will all be running on, and bringing in freſh water, while the vapour is riſing ſrom the ſurface; thus you ſee when things are compared together, the arnt will end in a cyphèr. The poſtulatum, on which the argument is built, is itſelf erroneous, as it ſuppoſes the water of the ocean was freſh at the beginning of the world; and the whole inquiry ſeems to be aſter the cauſe of a phenomenon whieh has probably no ſecondary cauſe at all. The ſuppoſition that the water of the ocean was originally freſh, is an opinion concerning a matter of fact, which can never be proved either way; and it is ſurely extending ſpeculation too far, when we attempt to explain a phenomenon coeval with the formation oſ the earth. The ſaltneſs of the ſca is as neceſſary to the conſtitution of that element, and to the well-being of the terraqueous globe, as the redneſs of the blood is neceſſary to the improvement of the ſerum in the animal ſyſtem. The ſea is no more ſalt by chance, than the blood is red by chance. It is a wiſe proviſion of the CrREATOR, that the immenſe body of water which occupies more than two thirds of the globe ſhould be thus ſalted and ſeaſoned for it's own preſervation, and for the ſalubrity oſ the atmoſphere; on which account the ocean is ſalter under the torrid one, where the heats are more productive of putrifaction, and the ſaltneſs decreaſes as we approach the pole, all indicating deſign, and if it be true that the agitation and ventilation ofſ the ſea is not ſufficient in vaſt tracts and deep waters to keep it ſweet without a due proportion oſf ſalt, Dr, Halley's ſcheme would have poiſoned the world. The degree of ſaltneſs in the ſea varies in the ſame place at different ſcaſons, ſometimes at different depths. Dr. Watſon informs us, , that from ſome exeriments made in a voyage from England to Romba. in the Eaft Indies, that the weight of ſeavater was the greateſt, not preciſely at the equator, but where the ſun was vertical, and where in ſimilar circumſtances the heat was greateſt; and that the the weights of equal bulks of Thames-water, of ſeawater at Teneriffe, and at St. Jago, were 659, 673 3. 780 1 grains, the proportion of which number may be expreſſed thus: Thames water 1ooo, Teneriſfe ſea-water 1022, St. Jago ſea-water 1 I 84. In general, ſea-water poſſeſſes about s or s5 oſ it's weight in ſalt. He alſo mentions the following ſimple method for eſtimating the quantity of ſalt in ſea-water; a method ſo ſimple that every common ſailor may underſtand and practiſe it. Take a clean towel, or any other clean cloth, dry it well in the ſun or before a fire, then weigh it accurately, and note down it's weight, dip it in ſea-water, and when taken out wring it a little till it will not drip; weigh it in this wet ſtate, then dry it, and when it is perfectly dried, weigh it again; the exceſs of the weight of the wetted cloth above it's original weight is the weight of the ſca-water imbibed by the cloth; and the exceſs of the weight oſ the cloth aſter being dried above it's original weight is the weight of the ſalt retained by the cloth; and by comparing this weight with the weight of ſca-water imbibed by the cloth, you obtain the proportion oſ ſalt water contained in that ſpecies of ſea-water. Congealed ſea-water will, when thawed, yield freſh water. To prove this, ſome ſea-water was taken up oſf the North Foreland; it was expoſed to a freezing atmoſphere, and it afforded an ice perfectly free from any taſte of ſalt. The ſpecific gravity of the water produced from the melting of the ice was ſomewhat greater than that of diſtilled rain-water, and ſomewhat leſs than a mixture of rain and ſnow-water taken out of a water-tub. The degree of cold at which the ſea-water froze was 282 of Fahrenheit's thermometer, or 34 lower than that in which common water freezes. This difference will vary according to the quantity oſ ſalt contained in the water. The freezing of ſeawater was formerly practiſed, and is probably ſtill ſo in the northern parts of Europe, vith a view to leſſen the expence and trouble of extracting ſalt from ſea-water. Avariety of attempts have been made in our own and other countries to procure freſh from ſeawater: the means uſed for this purpoſe is diſtillation, and the moſt approved methods are thoſe of Dr. Irving, and Mr. Poiſſonier. To give you an idea of this method, ſuppoſe a tea-Kettle to be made without a ſpout, and with a hole in the lid in the place of the knob; then the kettle being filled with ſeã-water, the freſh vapour which ariſes from the ſea-water as it boils, will iſſue out through the hole in the lid; into that hole fit the mouth of a tobacco-pipe, letting the ſtem have a little inclination downwards: then will the vapour of freſh water take it's courſe through the ſtem of the tube, and may be collected by fitting a proper veſſel to its end: this will give you a general though imperfect idea of an apparatus for this uſeful purpoſe. I have already mentioned to you the diſſolving power of water, and, in one oſ the preceding Lectures, given you ſuch reaſons as will probably induce you to think that this power is chiefly to be attributed to it's combination with, and the preſence of fire acting in it. Salts are the ſubſtances which it diſſolves the ſooneſt, and in the greateſt quantity; it will not diſſolve equal quantities of all kinds ofſ ſalts, ſome being more ſoluble therein than others; all ſalts are more ſpeedily diſſolved in warm than in cold water. When water is ſaturated with any kind of ſalt in a definite degree of heat, it will retain that ſalt as long as it retains it's heat; but if the heat be leſſened, the tranſparency of the ſolution will be deſtroyed, a part of the ſalt will become viſible, and fall to the bottom; vhat AND PROPERTIES OF WATER. 31 thus falls down will be re-diſſolved as ſoon as the water regains the fire it had loſt. Thus the quantity of the ſalt which is precipitated from the cooling of the water, will depend partly on the degree of heat in which the ſolution is ſaturated, and partly on the degree of cold to which the ſolution is reduced. Thus water of 80 degrees, when ſaturated with ſalt, contains more fult than it would do if it had only 70 degrees of heat; and in being cooled to so degrees, the precipitation will be greater in the firſt inſtance than in the ſecond. Salt is much longer in being diſſolved when it is in a compact ſtate, than when it is reduced into a fine powder, becauſe when it is in the form of powder it preſents a much larger ſurface to the water than when it is one ſolid lump. When ſalts are mixed with water, a conſiderable quantity of air is ſeparated from the water,. and the whole of the fluid appears muddy, occaſioned by a number of very ſmall bubbles, which riſe to the top ſo as to form a ſcum; when all are riſen, the water again becomes tranſparent. This phenomenon ſhould be noticed, as many have been deceived by it, eſpecially thoſe who have written on mineral waters; they often ſpeak of an efferveſcence in them where there.really is none, and the appearance of it is nothing more than the air eſcaping. Fhe more ſalt you add to water, the more ſſowly it will be diſſolved; aſter a certain quantity it will diſſolve no more; the points at which the ſalts ceaſe to diſſolve is called the point oſ ſaturation. The proportion of water is very different with reſpect to diſſerent ſalts. Sir Iſaac Newton ſuppoſed, that there was an equal diſtribution of ſalt through a determined ſpace of water; hence their depoſition in regular order. The ſalt oſten requires ſome time before it can be ſo difſeminated tances throughout the whole fluid; intime, however, this is effected. Throw a heavy ſalt, as blue vitriol, into a glaſs of water, it at ſirſt ſinks to rhe bottom, and after ſome days begins to impart it's colour and qualities to the particles of water immediately ſurrounding it: as that part of the water which is in contact only acts on the ſalt, it is ſoon ſaturated, and being thus rendered heavier, remains round the ſalt as an atmoſphere; the reſt oſ the water acts on this ſurrounding atmoſphere, therefore in a little time another ſtratum will be formed containing leſs ſalt than the former; innumerable horizontal ſtrata will at length be formed containing leſs and leſs ſalt: hence the diffuſion is very ſlow, unleſs it be aſſiſted by agitation. The vitriolic acid is uſed in bleaching, being diluted in the water in which the linen is ſteeped. The bleachers at firſt thought it was enough merely to throw the acid into the water; this, houever, aluays corroded ſome of the linen, becauſe the vitriolic acid always ſinks to the bottom, and remains there a long time heſore it ia regularly diſſuminatetd When mixed thoroughly by agitation, the ſalt will never ſeparate again. There is another phenomenon attending the ſolution of ſalts, namely, the production of cold; this we have already explained to you, and ſhewn that it depends on the quantity of fire abſorbed tq maintain and keep up the ſluidity of the ſalt. LECTURE. XIII. OF WATER IN THE STATE OF ICE. HAVE ſhewn you, that water is in a fluid I ſtate only on account of its combination with fire; that if it loſes the fire, which is thus combined with it, it's particles cohere together, and form a hard ſubſtance called ice. Water in freezing parts with the fire, with which it was combined. If a thermometer be immerſed* in a veſſel of freeZing water, the mercury vill riſe ſome degrees above 329, while another thermometer, in the open air, will remain fixed at or ſome degrees below that point; part of the fire which wvas fixed in the water being diſengaged, eſcapes into the air when it aſſumes a ſolid form. A ſimilar diſengagement of ſire is perceived in the cryſtall iZation of ſalts. On the other hand, when ice melts, it combines itſelf with a conſiderable quantity of fire, which at the ſame time does not increaſe the temperature, which you may prove by this experiment. Let there be a pound of ice at 326 mix a pound of water at 172 therewith, and, in a fev moments, the ice will be melted, and the temperature of the mixture will be 325 a seantiss of fire, which raiſed the thermometer 1400 (140-32æ172), was abſorbed by and combined vith the ice to give it a fluid form; but the fire, thus abſorbed, does not produce any effect upon the thermometer. The ſire, which the water abſorbs, when it acquires a ſluid ſor m, is again ſeparated from it by congelation; ſor if a pound of uater at 32 be mixed with an equal quantity of ice at 4, nearl) 1 oſ the water will be ſroren, and the temperaturc oſ the mixture will be 32. Nov, in this experiVoL. ment, the ice is raiſed from 4e to the freezing point, that is, 28e. It is thereſore plain, that by the congelation oſ ꝗ of a pound of uater, a ſuſficient quantity of ſire is evolved to raiſe a pound of ice 28 degrees: now five times 28 is 1409, ſo that the ſire, which is extricated by congelation, is preciſely equal to that which is abſorbed by the melting ice. Meſſis. Lavoiſier and de la Place have given us this general idea of this phenomenon. Ihe heat, neceſſury to melt ice, is equal to tbreefourths of ibat which would elevate the ſame weight of water, at ihe freexing point, to that of boiling water. The external air promotes the formation of ice; water in a cloſe veſſel freezes very ſſowly; but if expoſed to air of the ſume temperature, ice will very ſoon be formed. A ſimilar phenomenon is ſaid to be obſerved in the cryſtallization of ſalts; many ſaline ſolutions, wliich will remain in that ſtate in cloſe veſſels, diſplay eryſtals almoſt as ſoc as you open the mouth of the veſſel, and expoſe them to the contact of the atmoſphere. Gentle motion, or a ſlight agitation of the fluid, facilitates its converſion into ice: nearly in the ſame manner, ſome ſaline ſolutions are determined to ceryſtallization by a ſlight agitation. It is probable, that the two above-mentioned circumſtances ſacilitate the ſeparation oſ the combincd fire from the water. Boiled water may be brought a greater number of degrees below the freeæing point without congealing, thun unboiled water, uwhich contains more air. Subſtances, which leſſen the rranſparency ol water, render it at the ſume time more diſſicult to be cooled below 320 without ſreczing, and diſpoſe it to ſhoot more readily into ice. Foreign ſubſtances chemically combined, or diſſolved in water, do not take away it's property of being cooled, though they alter the degree at which that property commences. Striking the bottom of a tumbler with cooled water againſt a board, will produce inſtant congelation; when ſtirring the water, or ſhaking it in the hand, will have no eſfect. The moſt certain method of bringing on congelation is, that of rubbing a bit of wax on the ſide of the tumbler, but under the water; a particular roughneſs in the motion is felt, and a cruſt of ice is immediately perceived under the wax upon the glaſs. Theſe methods ſucceed beſt in proportion as the water is more cooled below the frecuing point; unleſs the cooling amounts to 4 or s degrees, the friction from the wax is often in vain. When vater is cooled below the freezin point, the contact of the leaſt particle of ice wiff make it inſtantly congeal; the glacial cryſtals ſhooting all through the liquor, from the ſpot where the ice touches, till the whole comes up to the freezing point. Few experiments of the minute Kind afford a more ſtriking ſpectacle than this, eſpecially when the water has been cooled, nearly as much as poſſible, below the freering point; both from the beautiful manner in which the cryſtals ſhoot through it, and the rapidity with which the mercury in the thermometer immerſed in it, runs through a ſpace of 10 or 1 degrees, ſtopping and fixing always at 32 in pure water. The effect of ice, in haſtening congelation, explains ſome phenomena. In a calm day, when the temperature of the air was about 206, two veſſels, with diſtilled water, were expoſed to tha cold; one of them was ſlightly covered with paper, the other was left open; the former bore to be cooled many degrees below the frecæing poin. whilſt a cruſt of ice totay formed on the ſurfa c of the other, before the thermometer immerſed in the middle oſ it, came to the freeæing point; moſt probably ariſing from the frozen particles, which, in froſty weather, are generally floating in the air. Oil ſpread over the ſurſace of water has been found to prevent it from ſreeæing, when other water ſimilarly expoſed, has had a cruſt of ice upon it; the oil preventing the frozen particles from coming in contact with the water. In frigorific mixtures the congelation is oſten brought on by raiſing the immerſed thermometer a little out of the uwater, and lowering it again, ſome of the adhqering water having ſroren on the ſtem. To inſure the greateſt degree of cold in water without freezing, you muſt cool it in a very gradual manner, keeping the cold of the frigori ſic mixture regularly, only tuo or three degrees below that of the water. Sudden cooling may be conſidered as one of the cauſes which haſten congelation. Metullic or too thin velſels are not proper for theſe experiments, as they tranſmit ſire too readily. The frigoriſic mixture ſhould be kept a little below the edę e oſ the water in the tumbler, otheruiſe the congelation quickly begins at that place. Fahrerheit cooled water 15 degrees below it's common freezing point uithout freering; Mr. de Luc to 140. It is not improbable, that if water could be thoroughly purged of air, it might be cooled 18 below the freesing point without congelation. Other fluids will bear to be cooled much more below their proper point of congelation. When water is nearly congealed, it augments in bulk, as we ſhall ſuew you hy this ſimple cxperiment. I ſtall take this tube ſilled to I., and plunge the bulk thereoſ in the mixture of ſalt and ice; you will obſerve that the wacer at ſirſt riſes in the tube, on account oſ the ſudde bntraction oſ the bulb on being immerged in this cold medium; the water now contracted in it's turn ſalls again, and will remain for ſome time at the ſame poin; in a little time it will begin to expand; it has now riſen to H, and ſoon will riſe with ſome violence much higher; ĩt is now got to I; the water in the bulb you ſee loſes it's tranſparency, and grows cloudy, and is freezing during the congelation; and while the ice is harde ning, the water riſes in the tube; it now runs over it. rnis expanſive force of ice is very great, as you will be convinced, by the detail oſ a few intereſting experiments. The Rev. Mr. Jones made a long cylindrical metal box with a ſtrong rim; to this he applied a cover, fitting them with great exactneſs by grinding them one upon the other in a turning-lathe. Ie then prepared ſome water, firſt by boiling, and ſecondly by exhauſting the air from it, which was ſo far effected, that Vhen cold it did not yield the leaſt bubble of air, on trying it by the air-pump. LHe filled the box with water, till it ſtood convex above the rim; and having applied a wet leather to the cover, he ſcrewed it down firmly upon the box with four iron ſcrews. In this ſtate, it is probable, the box could not have been ſeparated from it's cover by a eight leſs than half a ton. He plunged the whole into a freeæing mixture, in leſs than half an hour rhe water was froze into a ſolid maſs, and as it's bulk increaſed, the three ſcreus were forced by the violence of the preſſure, and the cover uas raiſed up on one ſide a quarter of an inch above the rim. To meaſure this force with more exactneſs, the ſame gentleman made another experiment, uſing the ſame box, and fſilling it as beſore with vater purged of it's air, and being covered, but not ſcrewed down; it was placed upon an onken pedeſtal, which had foi it's baſe a flat hewn ſtont of about a foot ſquare. The ſhorter arm of a very ſtrong lever was made to preſs upon the cover; HBEEE compounded with two more to increaſe the pouer; at the extremity of the longeſt arm oſ the moſt remote lever a cord was faſtened, which ran over a pulley, and had a weight of 28lb.5 by all theſe combined, the cover oſ the box vas preſſed with a ſorce of above 2296lb.; while it was ſo preſſcd down, the water within it was froze, and the agent by which the water was congealed overcame the whole force of the machine. The experiment, however, was not complete; for when the water began to frecrze, and the cover of the box to be raiſed from the rim, the ground vielded under the preſſure, and the flat ſtone, which ſerved as a baſe to the pedeſtal, ſunk a little below it's firſt poſition; by this means the force was at firſt ſpent upon the ground, and did not take place in the machine till the ground would give way no nore. It was, however, ſo ſenſibly perceived in the machine, as to prove that it was at leaſt ſuperior to one ton tao hundred and ninety-ſix pounds. The box contained 5 ſ5 cubic inches. May not this force proceed from fire, not as giving, but as reſtoring an equilibrium, which has been interrupted? For light and fire may have powerful eſſects in nature, where they give no ſenſible heat. By the expanſive force of ice, Huyghens burſt an iron tube of half an inch in thickneſs. In the experiments of the academy del cimento, bombſhells and the ſtrongeſt veſſels being filled with uater, were burſt in pieccs by the fiuid on it's congelation. QWhnen vater is congealed into ice, a great number of bubbles are produced and impriſoned in it; as theſe bubbles are produced in rhe act oſ ſreeing, they extend the bulk of it's water, and render the ice ſpecifically lighter, and capuble oſ floating thereon. That theſe bubbles are, in a great meaſure, the cauſes of this expanſion, is clear from the experiments of Marriotte and Mairan who found ice made with water, well purged oſ air, ſenſibly heavier than that formed ſrom the ſame quantity of common water. According to Mairan, ice formed of water, purged of air, exceeded , in bulk the volume oſ water which formed it; while ice made from water, not purged oſ air, exceeds the water 1 or à; in bulk; therefore floats with about one tenth part of it's thickneſi out of, or above the water that bears it. From hence you may infer the amazing thickneſs of the ice in the northern ſeas, where the portion above the ſurface is higher than the maſts of the ralleſt veſſels. When a tract of ice in ſtrong maſſes is ſpread over the ground, and other ice continues to be formed underneath, where there is not room ſor it's expanſion, as in the glaciers of Switzerland, the ice underneath ſometimes expands with ſuch force as to rend the ſuperior ſtrata with violent exploſions. In the froſty climates of the polar regions, theſe exploſions are frequent, and ſometimes as loud as a cannon. The expanſive force of ice is applied on ſeveral occaſions to ſave the labour of man, and perform ſuch things as are beyond the reach of art. Blocks of ſſate- ſtone, which is formed in thin plates or ſtrata, not ſeparable by a tool, are taken out of the quarry and expoſed to rain, which ſoaking into the pores of the ſtone is there frozen into ice, which, by it's expanſion, breaks the ſtone into thin plates. In the iron works, they ſometimes, in order to break an old bomb-ſhell, fill it with water, then faſten up the vent and expoſe it to the froſt, which burſts it into pieces without farther trouble. If you expect, therefore, that any liquor will freeZe, and wiſh to preſerve your veſſel, leave room therein ſufficient ſor this accidental extenſion. The effects of this expanſion are obſervable in a thouſand phenomena. Trees are burſt, rocks are rent; walnut, aſh, and oak-trees, are ſometimes cleft aſunder, and this with a noiſe like the exploſion of fire-arms. Nor are the effects of extreme cold leſs wonderful; metallic ſubſtances will then bliſter the ſkcin like red-hot iron; the air, when draun in, hurts the lungs, and excites coughing. When the French mathematicians wintered at Tornea, in Lapland, the external air, when ſuddenly admitted into their rooms, converted the moiſture of the air into uhirls of ſnow. Their breaſt ſeemed to be rent when they breathed it, and the contact of it was intolerable to their bodies; and the aqueous parts oſ ſpirit of wine, which had not been highly rectiſied, burſt ſome oſ their thermometers. Extreme cold oſten proves fatal to animal liſe; 7000 Swedes periſhed at once in attempting to paſs the mountains, which divide Norway from Sweden. In caſes of extreme cold, the perſon attacked firſt fecls himſelf extremely chill and uneaſy, he begins to turn liſtleſs, is unwilling to walk or uſe the exerciſe neceſſary to keep him warm, and at laſt turns drouſy, ſits doun to refreſh himſclf with ſſeep; but wakes no more. An inſtance of this was ſeen at Ierra del Fuego, where Dr. Solander, with ſome others, having taken an excurſion up the country, the cold was ſo intenſe as to Eill one of their compuny. The doctor himſelf, though he had warned his companions oſ the danger of ſteeping in that ſituation, yet could not be prevented from making that dangerous experiment himſclf; and though he uus avuked u o nll poſſible expedition, his body was ſo much ſhrunk in bulk, that his ſhoes ſfell off his feet, and it was with the utimoſt difficulty he was recovered. In thoſe parts of the world, where vaſt maſſes of ice are procured, the accumulation thereof by abſorbing the fire ſrom the atmoſphere, occaſions great sterility in the neighbouring countries, as is particularly the caſe with the iſlands of Iceland, Greenland, Statenland, &c. Ice is ſubject to a conſtant diminution of it's weight when expoſed to the common air. Mr. Boy le expoſed tuo ounccs ofſ ice to a ſharply freezing air a little before midnight, and found it in the morning diminiſhed 10 grains in weight. In long continued ſroſts, the ice formed in ponds, and other ſmall collections of uater, is ſenſibly diminiſhed every day, and often wholly evaporated; and a fall of ſnow may be ſeen coniiderably waſted in a few days in the ſevereſt ſcaſon. The principal cauſe of this loſs of weight ſeems to be the inceſſant action and abraſion oſ the air upon the ſurface oſ the ice. Notulthſtanding this loſs of weight to which both ice and ſnow are ſubject in the coldeſt weather, and the thaw which they experience in the hotteſt, ſome have doubted, whether the quantity oſ congealed water be not an increaſing quantitt. A philoſopher, * well acquainted with the nature of the Alps, expreſſes himſelf upon the ſubject in the following manner: c One cannot doubt concerning the increaſe of all the glaciers oſf the Alps; iheir very exiſstence is a proof, that in preceding ages, the quantity oſ ſnow whrch has ſallen during the winter, has exceeded the quantity melted during the ſummer. Nou, not only the ſame cauſe ſtill ſubſiſts; but the cold, occaſioned by the maſs oſ ice already formed, ought to augment it ſtill ſtill farther, and thence more ſnow ought to fall and a leſs quantity of it be melted. Though this be admitted, it by no means ſollous that there is an annually increaſing quantity; ſor, beſides the heat oſ the air in ſummer, there is another cauſe, which tends to prevent any indefinite æeugmentation of congealed water, tbe internal heat of the eartb. The gencral heat oſ the ſprings of water, ſituated deep in the bowels of the carth, is 48 degrees. In mountainous countries it may be ſomewhat leſs, but ſuſſicient notwithſtanding for the purpoſe here mentioned. When the ſnow, incumbent on any ſpot of ground, is but thin, it may ſo far cool the earth, that the internal heat mayv not be able to diſſolve it; but when the bed is rhick enough to protect the earth from the influence of the atmoſpherical cold, that ſurface of the earth may, even in the coldeſt winters, receive more heat ſfrom the earth, than cold from the atmoſphere, and be thereſore diſſolved at all ſeaſons of the yecar. * This reaſon is corroborated by fact; ſor it is ſaid, that ſtreams of water iſſue from the bottom oſ the glaciers in the Alps, in the greateſt ſeverity of winter; ſo that whether the internal heat of the carth be adinitted or not, as a cauſe ſufſficient to explain the phenomenon, a conſtant thaw of the ice or ſnow, which is contiguous to the ſurface of the ecarth in the Alps, cannot be denied; and this, added to other cauſes, may render it probable, that the quantity of congealed water has it's limit, even in the coldeſt country. Ice appears to be a kind of conſuſed cryſtallization. Mr. De Mairan obſerved, that the necdle-formed cryſtals of ice unite in an angle of 60 or 1206. Iſ a piece of ice, which contains xater in it's internal part, be broken, the water runs runs out, and the internal cavity is found to be ſined with beautiful tetrahedral priſms. Theſe priſms are often articulated and croſſed. When it ſnows at Moſcow, and the atmoſphere is not too dry, the air is obſerved to be loaded with beautiful eryſtallizations regularly flattened, and as thin as a leaf of paper. They conſiſt of an union of fibres which ſhoot from the ſame center to form ſix principal rays; theſe rays divide themſelves into extremely ſmall blades. Mr. Macquart has obſerved ſeveral of theſe flattened radii, which were ten lines in diameter. Hail and ſnow are modifications of ice. Hall is probably produced by a ſudden diſengagement of the fire by which water is rendered liquid, and is generally accompanied by thunder. Hail, ſnow, and ice, are wonderful images of the great operations in nature; and if your ſenſes had not acquainted you how theſe things are created out of ſomething, and are themſelves only the properties of ſire, air, and water, brought out of a prior ſtate into ſuch a compaction and creation as is called ſnow, hail, and ice, philoſophy would have leſt you as ignorant of their nature, as it is of moſt material ſubſtances. Mr. Chaptal relates the following curious obſervation, made by himſelf at Montpellier, OCt. 29, 1786. On that day four inches oſ water fell at Montpellier, a violent exploſion of thunder was heard about ſour in the afternoon, which appeared to be very near, and was accompanied by a moſt violent ſhower of hail. At this inſtant, a druggiſt, who was employed in preventing the miſchief occaſioned by the filtration of water through the wall, was greatly aſtoniſhed by perceiving the water that came through the wall inſtantly changed into ice. He called in ſeveral of his neighbours to partake of his ſurpriZe. Mr. Chaptal viſited the place about a quarter of an hour aſterwards, and found about ten pounds of ice at the foot of the wall: he was well aſſured it could not have paſſed through the wall, which did not exhibit any crack. Did the ſame cauſe which determined the formation oſ hail in the atmoſphere, act equally in the cellar?, A maſs of ice formed by a Ilow congelation, appears very homogeneous, and ſuſſiciently tranſparent for a ſmall diſtance from the ſurface firſt ſroren; but in the interior parts, and particularly towards the middle, there is a conſiderable number oſ bubbles of air. Aquick congelation ſpreads theſc bubbles indifſerently through the whole maſi, vhich becomes thercfore almoſt opake, being compoſed of ſmall parts of diſferent deniities; and the upper ſurface is more rough and irregular than when the congelation has been ſſow and gradual. The ice of running uaters is differently formed from that of ſtanding waters; in theſe the ſurſace is firſt frore, and u Hickens gradually by freezing one ſtratum of water aſter another; and it is carried on much more expeditiouſly than when it is in motion. When the cold is ſuſſicient, the water freezes on the edges of a river. The ice thus formed is, however, oſten broken and carried away by the current; more icce is then formed, which is again broken oſf, and ſo on. The cakes of ice thus formed, are at firſt very thin, and caſily broken by the firſt ſhock, ſo that very few remain whole, but are broken in a thouſand pieces. Thus in a little time the river is covered with ſmall pieces of ice (that the leaſtobſtac le ſtops) floating clo- anit's ſtream. Theſe by degrees, and from a variety of circumſtances accumulate in ſize and number; and the ice thus formed is very irregular and opake, and mixed with a variety of ſmall heterogeneous ſubſtances, as bits of ſtraw, herbs, &c. which had attached themſclves to the pieces of ice. By a continual increaſe in ſie by the various obſtacles to be met with in the courſe of a river, ſuch as bridges, &c. theſe cakes are at laſt ſo joined as to cover the river. In very ſevere froſts, and very cold climates, rivers have been knoun to be froze over with great rapidity. Dr. Goldſmith mentions having ſecn the Rhine frozen at one of it's moſt precipitate cataracts, and the ice ſtanding in glaſſy columns like a foreſt of large trees, the branches of which have been lopt anay. So hard docs the ice become in cold countries, that in 1740, a palace of ice was built at Peterſburg, aſter a very elegant model, and in juſt proportions of Auguſtun architecture. It was 52 fcet long, and a0 fecet high. The materials were quarried from the ſurſace of the river Neva, and the whole ſtood gliſtening againſt the ſun with a brilliancy almoſt equal to his own. To increaſe the wonder, 6 cannons oſ ice, and tuo bombs, all of the ſume materials, were planted beſore this extraordinary ediſice: the cannon were three pounders, they were charged with gunpowder, and ſired off; the ball of onc pierced an oak plank 2 inches thick at ſixty paces diſtance, nor did the piece burſt with the exploſion. In the northern parts of the world ſolid bodies are liable to be hurt by the ſroſt. Timber is oſten apparently frozen, and exceedingly difficult to be ſuued. Marle, chalk, and other leſs ſolid terreſtrial concretions, are oſten ſhattered by long and durable froſts. Metals are contracted by froſt: thus an iron tube 12 feet long, upon being expoſed to the air in a ſroſty night, loſt two lines oſ it's length. The expanſion of water I have already mentioned to you. Irees are oſten deſtroyed by froſt, and appear as if burnt by the moſt exceſſive heat. Froſt generally proceeds ſrom the upper part: of a body downwards; but how deep it will reach in the earth is not caſily known, as this depth u lll vary from a variety of cauſes, as the duration of the froſt, the texture of the ground, &c. Afſter a hard froſt of ſome days, Mr. Boyle dug in an orchard where the ground was level and bare, and found the froſt had ſcarce reached 3 inches and a half below the ſurface. Nine or ten ſucceſſive froſty nights froze the ground in the orchard only to the depth of 8 inches and a half. In a garden at Moſcow, the froſt in a hard ſeaſon only penetrated 2 feet. Water, like the ecarth, ſeems not diſpoſed to receive any very intenſe degree of cold at a conſiderable depth or diſtance from the air; the vaſt maſſes of ice found in the northern ſcas being only many flakes and ſragments, which, ſliding under each other, are cemented together by the congelation of tne intercepted water. The great power of froſt on vegetables is a thing ſufficiently known; but the difference between the froſts oſ a ſevere winter, and thoſe of ſpring mornings, have been but little attended to; vou vill, however, find it a ſubject very worthy of your attention. The froſts of a ſevere winter are much more terrible than thoſe of the ſpring, as they bring on a privation of all the products of the tenderer parts of the vegetable world; but they are not frequent, ſuch winters happening but once in an age; but the ſfroſts of the ſpring are more injurious, as they are repeated every ycar. In regard to trees, the great diſſerence is this, that the froſits of a ſevere winter affect their wood, their trunks, and the large branches; whereas thoſe of the ſpring have only power to hurt the buds. The uinter ſroſts happen at a time when moſi of the trees have neither leaves, flowers, nor fruits upon them, and have their buds ſo hard as to be proof againſt ſlight injuries of the weather, eſpecially iſ the preceding ſummer has not been toc wet. Hard froſts, which happen late in the winter, cauſe very great injuries even to thoſe trees which they do not deſtroy. It is not the ſevereſt cold or moſt fſixed froſt tbat does the greateſt injury to vegetables. Though this obſervation is directly oppoſed to popular opinion, it will be found not leſs true, nor any way repugnant to reaſon. It is humidity that makes froſt fatal to vegetable- and therefore every thing that can occaſion humidity expoſes them to theſe injuries. It is well known, that vegetables always feel the froſt very deſperately in low places where there are fogs. The plants which ſtand by a river ſide are often deſtroyed by the ſpring and autumnal froſts; whilſt thoſe of the ſame ſpecies, which ſtand in a drier place, ſuffer but little, if at all. The low and wet parts of foreſts produce worſe wood than the high and drier. The coppice wood in wet and low parts of common woods, though it puſh out at firſt more vigorouſly than that of other places, yet never comes to ſo good a growth; for the froſt of the ſpring killing theſe early top ſhoots, obliges the lower parts of the trees to throw out lateral branches. Froſt feldom hurts the late ſhoots of vine or flower buds, except when it follows heavy dews, or a long rainy ſeaſon, and then it never fails to do great miſchief. Froſt does more miſchief on newly cultivated ground than in other places, becauſe the vapours find an eaſier paſſage there than from other places. Trees newly cut ſuffer more than others by ſpring ſroſts, becauſe they ſhoot more vigorouſly. Side ſhoots of trees are more ſubject to ſuffer from ſpring ſroſts, than thoſe at the top; in general, the effects oſ the ſpring froſts are much greater ncar the ground than elſewhere. On the ſame principles you may explain why the ſouth ſides oſ trecs are more damaged by a ſevere ſroſt than the north. Great damage is alſo done to the weſtern ſide of trees and plantations, when aſter a rain with a weſt wind, the wind turns about to the north at ſun-ſet, which is common in ſpring; or when the caſt blous upon a thick fog before ſun-riſing. In the ſtate of the atrmoſphere we denominate a froſt, there is an intimate union between the air and the water in the air; therefore except in high latitudes, froſty weather is generally clear. When ſuch an union takes place, either in uinter or ſummer, the atmoſphere is inclined to alſorb ſire, and conſequently to produce froſt. Thus in clear ſettled weather, even in ſummer, though the day may be exceſſive hot, yet the mornings and evenings are extremely cold. Tuhe air in froſty ueather, or clear dry weather, being aluays ready to abſorb ſire from every ſubſtance in contact, muſt oſ courſe abſorb part of that contained in the vapour, which floats in it's boſom. Though vapour is capable oſ becoming much colder than water uithout being ſfrozen, yet by a continual abſorption it muſt at laſt part with it's latent ſire, i. e. what is eſſential to it's exiſtence as vapour, and without which it is no longer vapour, but uater or ice. When a froſt has acquired a certain degree oſ intenſity, then the vapours every where diſperſed in the air give out their latent fire, the atmoſphere becomes clouded, the froſt either goes off or becomes milder, and the vapour deſcends in rain, hail, or ſnow, according to the diſpoſition oſ the atmoſphere. To νMAxE ICE. In many countries the warmth oſ the climatc renders ice not only a deſirable, but even a neceſſary article; ſo that it becomes an object of ſome conſequence r1o ſall upon a ready und cheap method of procuring it. Though the cheapeſt method hitherto diſcovered, ſeems to be that by means of ſal-ummoniac or Glauber's ſalt; yet it may not he amiſs to take notice of ſome attempts made by Mr. Cavallo, to diſcover a method of producing a ſufficient degree of cold for this purpoſe by the evaporation oſ volatile liquors. He found, however, in the courſe of.-theſe experiments, that ether uas incomparably ſuperior to any other fluid in the degree of cold it produced. The price of the liquor naturally induced him to fall upon a method of uſing it with as little waſte as poſſible. The apparatus for uſing the leaſt poſſible quantity of ether ſor freezing water, conſiſts in a glaſs tube terminating in a capillary aperture, which is to be fixed upon the bottle containing the ether. Round the lower part of the neck ſome thread is wound, in order to let it fill the neck of the bottle. When the experiment is to be mede, the ſtopper of the bottle containing the ether is to be removed, and the tube juſt mentioned put in it's room. The thread round the tube ought alſo to be previouſly moiſtened with water before it is put in the neck of the bottle, in order the more effectually to revent the eſcape of the ether betwixt the neck of the phial and tube. Holding then the bottle by it's bottom, and keeping it inclined, the ſmall ſtream of ether iſſuing out of the aperture of che tube, is directed upon the ball of the thermometer, or upon a tube containing water or other liquor that is required to be congealed. As ether is very volatile, and has the remarkable property of increaſing the bulk of air, there is no aperture requiſite to allow the air to enter the bottle while the liquor flows out- The heat of the hand is more than ſufficient to force out the ether in. continued ſtream at ghe aperture. In this manner, by throwing the ſtream of ether upon the ball of a thermometer in ſuch a quantity, that a drop might now and then, every 10 ſeconds for inſtance, fall ſrom the bulb oſ the thermometer, Mr. Cavallo brought the mercury down to 30, or age below the freezing point, when the atmoſphere was ſomewhat hotter than temperate. When the ether is very good, i.e. capable of diſſolving elaſtic gum, and has a ſmall bulb, not above 20 drops of it are required to produce this effect, and about two minutes of time; but the common ſort muſt be uſed in greater quantity, and for a longer time; though at laſt the thermometer is brought down by this very nearly as low as by the beſt ſort. The proportion of ether requiſite to congeal water, ſeems to vary with the quantity of the latter; that is, a large quantity of water ſeems to require a proportionably leſs quantity of ether to freeze it than a ſmaller one. In the beginning of the ſpring (ſays Mr. Cavallo) I froze a quarter of an ounce of water with about half an ounce of ether; the apparatus being larger, though ſimilar to that deſcribed above. Now as the price of ether ſufficiently good for the purpoſe, is generally about 18 pence or two ſhillings per ounce; it is plain, that with an expence under two ſhillings, a quarter of an ounce of ice, or ice cream, may be made in every climate, and at any time, which muy afford great ſatisfaction to thoſe perſons, who, living in places where no natural ice is to be had, never ſaw or taſted any ſuch delicious refreſhment. When a ſmall piece oſf ice, for inſtance, of about ten grains weight, is required, the neceſſary apparatus is very ſmall, and the expence not worth mentioning. A ſmall box four inches and a half long, two inches broad, and one and a half deep, contains all che appuratus neceſſary ſor this purpoſe; viz. a bottle capable of containing about one ounce of ether; two pointed tubes, in caſe one ſhould break; a tube in which the water is to be frozen, and a wire. With the quantity of ether contained in this ſmall and very portable apparatus, the experiment may be repeated ahout ten times. A perſon who wiſhes to perform ſuch experiments in hot climates, and in places where ice is not eaſily procured, requires only a larger bottle of ether beſides the whole apparatus deſcribed above. TO PRODUCE A GREAT DEGREE Or COLD. The pover of producing cold belongs particularly to bodies of the ſaline claſs. In a paper of the Philoſophical Tranſactions, Mr. Geoffroy gives an account of ſome remarkable experiments with regard to the production of cold. Four ounces & ſal-ammoniac diſſolved in a pint of water, made his thermometer deſcend two inches and three quarters in leſs than fifteen minutes. An ounce of che ſame ſalt put into four or five ounces of diſtilled water, made the thermometer deſcend two inches and a quarter. Half an ounce of ſal-ammoniac mixed with three ounces of ſpirit of nitre, made the thermometer deſcend rwo inches and five lines; but on uſing the ſpirit of vitriol inſtead of nitre, it ſunk two inches and ſix lines. In this laſt experiment it was remarked, that the vapours raiſed from the mixture had a conſiderable degree of heat, though the liquid itſelf was ſo extremely cold. Four ounces of ſalt-petre mixed with a pint of water, ſunk the thermometer one inch three lines; but a like quantity of ſea-ſalt ſunk it only two lines. Acids always produced heat, even common ſalt with it's own ſpirit. Volatile alkaline ſalts produced cold in proportion to their purity, but fixed alkalines heat. If, inſtead of making theſe experiments, however, with fluid water, we take it in it's congealed ſtate of ice, or rather ſnow, degrees of cold will be produced vaſtly ſuperior to any we have yet mentioned. A mixture of ſnow and common ſalt ſinks Fahremheit's thermometer to o; pot-aſhes and powdered ice ſink it eight degrees farther; tuo effuſions of ſpirit oſ ſalt on pounded ice ſink it more than 1420 below o. This is the ultimate degrec of cold that the mercurial thermometer will meaſure, becauſe the mercury itſelf then begins to congeal; and thereſore we muſt afterwards have recourſe to ſpirit of wine, naptha, or fome other Huid which will not congeal. The greateſt degree of cold hitherto producible by artiſicial means has been 80è below o3 uhich was done at Hudſon's Bay by means of ſnou and vitriolic acid, the thermometer ſtanding naturally at 200 below o. Greater degrees of cold than this have indeed been ſuppoſed. Mr. Martine, in his treatiſe on heat, relates, that at Kircnga in Siberia, the mercurial thermometer ſunk to 118c below o; and Profeſſor Brown at Peterſburg, when he made the firſt experiment of congealing quickſilver, fixed the point of congelation at 350 below o; but Dr. Black, as ſoon as the experiment was made knoun in this country, obſerved, that in all probability the point of congelation was far above this. His reaſons for ſuppoſing this to be the caſe were, that the mercury deſcended regularly only to a certain point, aſter which it would deſcend ſuddenly and by ſtarts 100 degrees at a time. This, he conjectured, might proceed from the irregular contraction of the metal aſfter it was congealed; and he obſerved, that there was one thermometer employed in the experimerit which was not frozen, and which did not deſcend ſo low by a great many dogrees. Expeili rience has ſince verified his conjecture; and it is now generally known, that 400 below o is the freezing point of quickſilver. Since the diſcovery of the poſſibility oſf producing cold by artiſicial means, various experiments have been made on the efficacy of ſaline ſubſtances in this way; all of which, when properly applied, are found to have a conſiderable degree of power. Dr. Boerhaave found, that borh ſal-ammoniac and nitre, when well dried in a crucible, and reduced to fine powder, will produce a greater degree of cold than if they had not been treated in this manner. His experiments were repeated by Mr. Walker, apothecary to the Radclifſe Inſirmary in Oxford, with the ſame reſult: but he found, that his thermometer ſunk 32e by means of a ſolution ꝗ ſaleammoniac s when Boerhaave's, with the ſfame, ell only 280. Nitre ſunk it 19. On mixing the two ſalts together, he found that the pouer of producing cold was conſiderably increaſed. By equal parts of theſe ſalts, he cooled ſome water to 229, che thermometer ſtanding at 470 in rhe open air. Adding to this ſome pouder oſ the ſame kind, and immerſing two ſmall phials in the mixture, one containing boiled and the other unboiled water, he ſoon found rhem both froZen, the unboiled water freezing firſt. Themoſt remarkable experiment, however, was uith ſpirit of nitre poured on Glauber's ſalt, the efſect of which was found to be ſimilar to that oſ the ſame ſpirit poured on ice or ſnow; and the addition of ſal-ammoniac rendered the cold ſtill more intenſe. The proportions of theſe ingredients recommended by Mr. Walker, are concentrated nitrous acid two parts by weight, water one part; of this mixture cooled to the temperature 18 ounces, of Glauber's ſalt a pound and an half avoirdupois, and of ſal-ammoniac 12 ounces. On adding the Glauber's ſalt to the nitrous acid, the thermometes fell ſrom 500 to -19, or 52 degrees; and on the addition of the ſal-ammoniac, to -9e. Thus Mr. Walker was able to freeze quickſilver without either ice or ſnow, when the thermometer ſtood at 450. For the experiment four pans were procured of diſferent ſizes, ſo that one might be put within the other. The largeſt of theſe pans was placed in a veſſel ſtill larger, in which the materials for the ſecond frigoriſic mixture were thinly ſpread in order to be cooled; the ſecond pan, containing the liquor, viz. the vitriolic acid properly diluted, was placed in the largeſt pan; the third pan, containing the ſalts for the third mixture, was immerſed in the liquor of the ſecond pan; and the liquor ſor the third mixture was put into wide-mouth phials, which were immerſed in the ſecond pan likewiſe, and floated round the third pan; the fourth pan, which was the ſmalleſt oſ all, containing it's cooling materials, was placed in the midſt oſ the ſalts of the third pan. The materials for the firſt and ſecond mixtures conſiſted of diluted vitriolic acid and Glauber's ſalt; the third and fourth of diluted nitrous acid, Glauber's ſalt, and ſal-ammoniac, in the proportions above-mentioned. The pans being 8ſted in the manner ulready mentioned, the materials of the firſt and largeſt pan were mixed: this reduced the thermometer to 10e, and cooled the liquor in the ſecond pan to 20, and the ſalts for the ſecond mixture, which were placed underneath in the large veſſel, nearly as much. The ſecond mixture was then made with the materials thus cooled, and the thermometer was reduced to 36. The ingredients oſ the third mixture, by immerſion in this, were cooled to 100, and when mtixed, educ ed the thermometer to 15. The materials for the fourth mixture were cooled by immerſion in this third mixture to about 12e. On mixture they ſunk the mercury very rapidly, and ſeemingly below40 though rhe froth occaſioned by the ebullition of the materials, prevented any accurate obſervation. The reaſon why this laſt mixture reduced the thermometer more than the third, though both were oſ the ſame materials, and the latter of a lower temperature, was ſuppoſed to have been partly becauſe the fourth pan had not another immerſed in it to give it heat, and partly becauſe the materials were reduced to a finer powder. The experiments were repeated with many variations; but only one mixture appeared to Dr. Beddows, by whom the account was communicated to the Royal Society, to be applicable to any uſeful purpoſe. This is oil of vitriol diluted with about an equal quantity of water; which, by diſſolvigg Glauber's ſalt, produces about 460 of cold, and by the addition of ſal-ammoniac, becomes more intenſe by a few degrees. At one time, when Mr. Walker was trying a mixture of two parts of oil of vitriol and one of water, he perceived, that at the temperature of 35, the mixture coagulated as if ſrozen, and the thermometer became ſtationary; but on adding more Glauber's ſalt, it fell again in a ſhort time: but leſs cold was produced than when this circumſtance did not occur, and when the acid was weaker. The ſame appearance of ulation took place with other proportions of cia and water, and with other temperatures. It is obſervable, that this effect of Glauber's ſalt in producing cold, took place only when it was poſſeſſed of it's water of cryſtallization; and thus the mineral alkali alſo augmented the cold of ſome of the mixtures: but when the water of cryſtallization was diſſipated, neither of them had any effect of this kind. AN ABSTRACT OF M. DE LUC'S VIEW OF GENERAàl. CHEMISTRY, DEDUCED FROM CONSIDERING THE CHANGE OF ICE INTO WATER, AND WATER INTO IcE: hete is no phenomenon more important than the change oſ ice into water, and of water into ice. Though I have already conĩidered this phenomenon, I ſhall here again, aſter M. de Luc, analyſe it more particularly, in order to ſhew you, that it includes the important baſis of general chemiſtry. The various operations of chemiſtry may be reduced to the uniting or ſeparatiug of ſubſtances: their general immediate cauſe ariſes from the diſferent tendencies of the particles which compoſe thoſe different ſubſtances: and the changes whioh happen in theſe phenomena are produced by the changes that the particles undergo in their compoſition. Now as the phenomena of water and ice include all theſe different kinds oſ modi fications, they uill furniſh you with a clear and very imporrant idea of the kind of change which is the ſource of chemical phenomena. Now with reſpect to ice: 1. Its particles cannot be ſeparated without a ſenſible effort. 2. hen broken, the portions thercof, although brought within the ſmalleſt poſſible diſtance ofſ each other, ſhew no tendency to unite. 3. When fragments of ice are laid in heaps, the reſpective adberence of the particles, joined to their reſiſtance to motion, makes them remuin in the ſame poſition in which they have been placed. Theſe are ſtrongly marked chemical properties, and the ſubſtance cannot be deprived of them, unleſs the particles undergo an eſſential change. Water, if you were only to judge of it by weight, would be ice itſelf, for the transſormation is made without any diſcernible change in weight though very great changes have taken place in the ponderable particles; for, 1. They may be ſeparated with the greateſt eaſe, their reſiſtance to ſeparation being almoſt inſenſible. 2. They have a tendency towards each other even at a ſenſible diſtance; hence ſmall maſſes, when free, coaleſce, and form a ſpherical drop, the moment they touch; and this is not the effect of gravity, but contrary to it. 3. Theſe new particles ſlide ſo eaſily one over the other, that, excepting the above-mentioned ſmall maſſes, they cannot now be laid in heaps; but yield immediately to the efforts of gravity, and always become level. Let us now conſider how theſe changes in the particles of ice are accounted for. Philoſophers are unanimous in allowing that theſe changes are occaſioned by ſire, a ſubſtance without weight. The quantity of this ſubſtance that produces this effect, is ſuſficiently characterived by it's peculiar properties; but aſter this change, theſe properties are no longer exerciſed, becauſe the particles oſ fire are combined with thoſe of ice. It is this combination that occaſions the chemical changes juſt deſcribed. Now theſe changes are as eſſential with reſpect to phyſical principles, as any other in the art of chemiſtry; ſo that unleſs eſtabliſhed facts ſhould lead us to aſſign a ſenſible weight to other ſubſtances which modify theſe effects in water, this example alone would authoriſe us in conſidering theſe new ſubſtances as imponderable, or without weight. Beſides the above-mentioned chemical phenomena, relative to water and ice, there is another very important one, which will ſerve as a point of compariſon. We find from theſe phenomena but one ponderable ſubſtance, known by the name oſ water, and an imponderable ſubſtance called fire. Now vwhen the particles of water are in a liquia ſtate, a ſtate produced by their union with fire, a certain diminution in the quantity of free fire will bring them to ſuch a minimum of diſtance, and arrangement in poſition, that they will unite in a determined form, and quit the fſire which rendered them liquid: or inverſely, when the particles ol water are ſormed into ice, if the quantity of free fire interpoſed therein be ſufiieient to ſeparate them, it then combines with theſe particles, and conſtitutes water; this may be called the fire of liquifacti on. Now every attentive philoſopher muſt acknowled e that theſe are great phenomena, brought about by the combination of two ſubſtances, one of which is without weight; and that theſe phenomena are probably the general characters of a particular claſs. It is to be regretted that the ponderabòle ſubſtance, which is common both to water and ice, has not a peculiar and appropriate name, for this ſubſtance belongs alſo to aqueous vapours. Mr. de Luc was once inclined to diſtinguiſh it by the term humor. You vill, I hope, be careful to diſtinguiſh the caſes in which I ſhall ſpeak of water as a ſubſtance modified neither by fire, nor by any other ſubſtance. To render you more attentive to this diſtinction, I ſhall ſometimes uſe the word humor. The foregoing analyſis will enable you more clearly to comprehend the nature of meustrua, a claſs of ſubſtances of which the knowledge is very important. I ſhall confine myſclf to a few inſtances. The name of acids has been given to liquid ſubſtances, which ſeem to be nothing more than water joined to certain imponderable particles. Thus acid liquors are to be diſtinguiſhed from the acids themſelves. The general phenomena of acid liquors are the affinities exerciſed by their particles, as well amongſt themſelves as upon other ſubſtances. But ater (conſidered here as humor) being united to fire, exerciſes certain affinities, as well in itſelſ as upon other ſubſtances: other particles, therefore, as imponderable as fire, may produce ſuch changes therein as may alter, in ſome reſpects, it's natural affinities; and we are authorized to think that this is the caſe, unleſs the ſuppoſition be contradicted by facts. To ſee this, let us examine the formation of acid liquids, and alſo their different products. Now when acid liquids are formed, we have every reaſon ſor ſuppoſing the preſence of water, either in the ſolid or liquid ſubſtances employed, or in the vital or atmoſpheric air, which on decompoſition is joined thereto. Thoſe who adopt the hypotheſis of M. Lavoiſier may object to the preſence of water in theſe airs: for in the combuſtion of ſulphur, orphoſphorus, &c. they conſider vital air as the acidifying principle, and the ſubſtances as acidifiable baſes. But this ſuppoſition is neither neceſſary nor natural. It is not neceſſary, becauſe the phenomea na may be as well explained without it. If there be a ſufficient quantity of vital air, all that we perceive is, the production of an acid liquor; i.e. ſaccording to our opinion) a quantity of water whoſe particles are united to an acid. Now if water is the ponderable part of all aeriform fluids, an hypotheſis which is ſufficient to account for every chemical phenomenon, and is the only one that accords with meteorological phenomena; it is eaſy to conceive, that on the decompoſition oſ vital air, a quantity of water united toacid particles may be liberated. For example, we conſider ſulphur as containing an acid, phlogiſton, fire, water, and other unknown ingredients, combined together in a ſolid form (of which I ſhall treat hereaſter): that vital air contains water and fire, which at a certain degree of heat acquire the power of uniting with phlogiſion and thus you perceive, as ſar as it is poſſible to ſee into nature, why on the decompoſition of theſe two compounds by combuſstion, a liquor reſults, in which the particles of water are united to an acid, diſtinguiſhed by the name of the vitriolic. Vith reſpect to the French hypotheſis, it ſhould ſeem, that every man would conſider himſelf as relieved of a burden, when he found it no longer neceſſury to admit a ſubſtance, which, without being acid itſelf, was yet the cauſe of acidity. Further, though acids may be ſuppoſed to exiſt, they can only act in liquids, or expanſible fluids. So that theſe operations, inſtead of furniſhmg us with an idea of acidiſication, of which we have no conception, leads us only to conſider theſe acids as liberated, and enabled to act by their union with a liquid. It may therefore be aſſerted, with confidence, till ſomething more ſolid is produced, that the operations by which acid liquids are ſformed, conſiſt in liberating water and the acid particles ſrom their preceding combinations; and thus to produce water charged with certain particles to which no weight can be aſſigned, and which are only diſcerned by their properties in the ſubſtances containing them. Now as ſoon as the water thus modiſied receives the fire of liquifaction, it's particles being free to follow their tendencies, enter into new combinations, by means of the acid particles from which it has received theſe new faculties. Let us then purſue theſe particles in the exerciſe oſ their acquired tendencies; and firſt in the phenomena of the conugelation and liquifaction of the liquids they form. The water of acid liquors preſerves it's general faculty of exiſting, according to the difference of temperature, in a ſolid or liquid form; but it has undergone two changes, one, by which it's particles do not abandon the fſire of liquifaction, but by a greater diminution of heat; by the other, when they do abandon it and unite, they aſſume a different arrangement. Here we only perceive different ſpecific characters of the ſame generical modification. The particles of water (humor) whether alone, or whether combined with an acid, can unite with the fire of liquifaction; but in the laſt ſtate they preſerve it in a lower degree of heat; and when they loſe it, inſtead of grouping themſelves like pure water in a form in which their volume is increaſed, they, on the contrary, occupy ſomewhat leſs room. By the experiments of Mr. M Nab, at Albany, in Hudſon's-Bay, we find, that ſpirit of nitre undergoes, according to it's degrees of acidity, two kinds of congelation, diſtinguiſhed by Mr. Cavendiſh into the aqueous and ſpirituous. In the firſt, the ice being produced by the pure uater, ſwims above the reſt of the liquid; in the other the liquid itſelf ſreezes, and the ice thereoĩ falls to the bottom of the part yet liquid. In the laſt phenomenon the point of congelation changes with the degree of acidity, but is far from following the laus thereof. Mr. Cavendiſh had determined by other experiments, that the true point of congelation cannot be obtained, but by preſerving therein ſome icicles of a former congelation. It is thus that the points of congelation in the following table were determined: the degrees of acidity oſ the ſpirit oſ nitre are expreſſed by the quantity in weight of marble it was able to diſſolve, compared with it's own vweight. The thermometer uſed was on the ſcale of Fahrenheit; the correſpondent terms are the reſults of experiments, reduced to a regular ſeries of degrees of acidity. . Spirituous Congelation.  Aqueous Congelation. Degrees of Point of Degrees of Point of acidity. conge lation. acidity. congelation. οo.5668  245.5 06.243 -d44.2 Oo. 533383 30. i O.210 - 17.0 O. 5306E - TI1I8. I o.478 79.4 Oo.448  --4.I1 o.418 - 2.4 Oo. 38 8  4.2 .358 OP97 Oo.328  TI7.7 o.298  27.7 ..243 - --44.2 hbeginning oſ the aqueous congelation. From theſe phenomena, analyſed according to Mr. de Luc's theory, it appears, 1ſt, That by a degree of acidity æ 568, ſire may remain combined with the particles oſ water (humor) even as low as45. 5 of Fahrenheit. adly, That as the degree of acidity is ſucceſſivelg weakened, the particles of water acquire the faculty of uniting at higher temperatures, and of quitting the fire oſ liquifoction; but this progreſs towards a maximum, vwhich is at a degree of acidity nearly a mean between the two terms of ſpirituous congelation, the acidity is then 418, and at -2.4 the particles of water unite. 3dly, The acidity continuing to be diminiſhed to 298, the particles of water loſe ſucceſſively the power of approaching without ceaſing to be liquid, ſo much ſo, that at this point fire is ready to combine with them at 22,7. 4thly, This loſs of power relative to the particles of water, continues till the acidity is reduced to 243, and at this point the fire of liquifaction does not quit them, but at the temperature oſ 44.2, which very nearly correſponds to what happened at the greateſt acidity 568: but now a new phenomenon takes place; the particles of water being leſs charged with acidity, again tend to cryſtallize in their own way, and thoſe that are moſt favourably diſpoſed thereto, quit their acid and the fire ofſ liquifaction, and become common ice. Laſtly, from this point, the more the acidity is diminiſhed, the ſooner the particles of water unite, ſo that when the acidity was only 210, ice (of pure water) was formed at the temperature of 17. Theſe ſingular phenomena are not peculiar to ſpirit of nitre, they have been alſo obſerved in ſpirit of vitriol, as may be perceived by the reſult of experiments formed into a table. Strength. . Freezing point. o1T I 918 - - a26 848 - - 4 46 846 - - t 42 758 -4S6s From hence we may conclude, that oil of vitriol has not only a ſtrength of eaſieſt freeæing, but even a ſtrength ſuperior to this; it has another point oſ a contrary flexure, beyond which, if the ſtrength be increaſed, the cold neceſſary to freeze it again begins to diminiſh. From the weakeſt degree of the acid 758, to that of 848, there is an increaſe of 9r1e in the freeæing point. The acidity increaſing to 918, the freeving point falls again 720, and riſes 27, when the acidity becomes 977. lli Now there are in theſe phenomena of acid liquors no ſymptoms which ſuffer us to conſider them as ſimple ſubſtances ponderable im their nature, or as compounds of two ſubſtances, the one acidiſiable, the other acidifying, and both ponderable. According to the firſt of theſe notions, in which the acids are conſidered as diſſolved in water, we find no point at which to ſtop in order to de. termine their proper weight; in the water they are only perceived by their effects, in other compounds they are not diſcerned: thus, nothing here hinders our conſidering rhem as imponderable, if other circumſtances conduct us to this concluſion. The ſecond notion ſeems to exclude this ſuppoſition, becauſe a known teight is attributed to the acidifiable and acidifying particles; but the foregoing experiments deprive this idea oſ all probability; it cannot explain the extraordinary changes in the freexiug point, occaſioned in the ſame ponderable ſubſtance, mercly by the addition of more or leſs water. . But to be more particular, when the pondernble part of vital air is emploved as an acidifying rinciple to produce an acid, is it a liquid, a ſubfance by it's nature capable of being froxen and liquified ? Here the advocates for this theory leave us in the dark; we call in vain for explanation, If the ponderable part of vital air, by being joined to the ponderuble part oſ inflammable air, produces water, can it in the ſame operation, the combuſtion of ſulphur for inſtance, produce an acid? Here alſo we receive no explanation. If in the combuſtion of ſulphur, part of the vital air is uſed to form an acid, part with inflammable air to produce water, what is the ratio of the two portions? By what means ſhall we dliſtinguiſh them? What is the acidifiable ſubſtance in ſulphur, diſtinct from inflammable air? The partizans of the French theory are obdurate, and will afford us no explanation: Iſ, inſtead of this obſcure theory, you conſider the water ſormed by the two airs to be united to an acid, the whole is readily explained, and the double flexure of the freezing point eaſily underſtood. From the cryſtallixation of pure water, we learn, that its ſimple particles are of a certain ; form form, and that they tend towards each other by certain determined ſides. Now the different combinations of the acid with the particles of water may change the tendency of theſe to collect themſelves together, and occaſion the above deſcribed flexures: how chis is effected, might eaſily be ſhewn by geometry, though it cannot be rendered a ſubject for theſe Lectures. It does not appear that the difference in ſpecific gravity between acid liquors and water is owing to any ponderable ſubſtance added to the aater; but rather to this, that the particles oſ water are joincd to an imponderable ſubſtance, by whoſe means they may be brought ncarer to each other without quitting the fire of liquiſaction. Now all the preceding phenomena confirm this theory; for they prove in general, that the parcicles of acid liquors may be brought much cloſer together than thoſe of water, without loſing the fire of liquiſaction; and you vill preſently ſee, by a very clear exarnple, that the cauſes which influence the freexing point, extend their effect to the general ſtate of liquids. I ſhall firſt, however, mention another phenomenon, which furniſhes a direct proof oſ the ſuppoſition before us. If you mix pure water with an acid liquor, the ſpeciſic gravity of the mixture is greater than the mean of the ſpeciſic gravities of the ingredients: a clear proof that the acidity cauſes the particles of water to approach, following an increaſing law thercin; becauſe the mean approach of the particles i is greater than the incan acidity of che united maſſes. This is alſo confirmed by a ſimultaneous effect, that is, the ſudden effect of the preſſure on the free fire of che maſs, uhich augments the heat thereof; as a bar of iron is heated by forging. Ihe preceding remarks on aciq liquors tpply ſo naturally to alkaline liquors, that it will be unneceſſary to mention them here. In neither is there any thing which leads us to think, rLut the difference oſ acid and alkaline liquors from nure water depend on ponderable partic les. Irom the union of acid and alkaline liquors reſult dne liquias, from which afterwards by ſimplecuaporation ue obtain neutral ſalts, that is, ſolids oſ a cruorm, which do not receive the fire ofſ liquiſa tion at the temperature of the atmoſphere, unleſs ve reſtore to the ſalt the water that was couporated ſrom it. Novw iſ acid and alkaline luds are nothing but water modiſicd by certain cerent particles, their ſolid products ſhould be othing more thun water itſelf, modified by the union of theſe particles; and this the water of cryſtallization directly authorizes us to conclude. Let us then conſider this phenomenon further. In ſome ſsalls, aſter the water oſ cryſtallization is evaporated, the remaining maſs is no longer capable of being liquified without an addition of waters in others, the maſs may be liquified alone, by a great degree of heat. Now here, we only ſee the modiſications of the general phenomena of this claſs; namely, different combinations of uhe ticles of water with certain other particles, hich changes conſiderably their faculty of receiving the fire oſ liquifaction; and we even ſee, theſe combinations of water may be ſuch, that it's particles reſuſe to receive the ſire of liquifaction, in ſome caſes without a great degree of heat; but even abſolutely in other caſes. If, aſter ſults have been reduced by evaporation to a refractory ſtate, the water which was evaporated be reſt ored with a ſmall addition, the molecules of water, which form the ſenſible maſs of the mixture, re-acquire the fire oſ liquifaction at the temperature of the atmoſphere, and we obtain ſaline liquids. Dr. Blagden, in his paper on congelation, has ſhewn, that all liquids, ſuſceptible oſ being frozen, would, like water, bear to be cooled ſeveral degrees below the freezing point without congealing. Under the ſame circumſtances acid, alkaline, and ſaline liquors, have the ſame property; a further proof that they are the ſame ſubſtance diſferently modiſfied. Saline liquors quit the fire of liquiſaction ſooner than pure water; but attended with another circumſtance, ſtill confirming the idea of their being a modification of water. When acid and alkaline liquors freeze, the particles of water therein are ſo arranged as not to occupy a greater ſpace, which you have ſeen was the caſe with pure water; but this property appears again in their comporcid ſaline liquids. Thus when the particles of acids and alkalies ſeparately modiſy the molecules oſ water, the moment that theſe loſe the fire of liquifaction, they are grouped into ſolids, which occupy leſs ſpace than was before occupied by the molecules which compoſe chem; but if the particles of water are modified by thoſe of an acid and alkali, they arrange themſelves as if it were pure, but only ſlower, exhibiting only varieties in the modiſication of the ſame ſubſtance. Oils are, probably, nothing more than water modificd by imponderable ſubſtances, among which we are to reckon phlogiſton. There is no phenomenon of acid, alkaline, and ſaline liquids, which can lead us to aſſign a diſcernible weight to any other particles but thoſe of pure water. In all theſe phenomena we only perceive the developement of an ancient principle of chemiſtry, that no ſubſtance can act chemically, unleſs it be diſſolved; for in order that the particles of any ſubſtance may obey it's reſpective ltendencies, they muſt have liberty to move, and this they can only have in liquids and expanſible fluids. The particles oſ water, from their faculty of being united with fire, are ſuſceptible of liquidity, and when in this ſtate, can obey either their nætural tendencies, or thoſe they may have acquired by combination. It is thus that water becomes the univerſal menſtruum; that is, by it alone all other menſtrua exiſt, becauſe it's particles will acquire as many various tendencies, as there are ſpecies of ſubtil particles to unite thereuith, either ſeparately or conjointly. Among the changes in tendency, which take place in the particles of water, there is a claſs of great importunce in the operations of nmature; namely, that which relates to their different aptitude of receiving, and of retaining the fire of liquifaction; from whence, beſides different liquid ſtates, they are capable of aſſuming a great variety in a ſolid form, the ſolidity depending principally on this, that the particles are not capable of being united vith the fire of liquifaction, but at a certain temperature, or by the addition of certain ingredients. Salts are, hitherto, the only ſolids we have conſidered as produced by water; with reſpect to theſe, pure water, whether liquid, or as ice, is a flux, by means of which they are fuſible at the temperature of the atmoſphere, nay even at a low temperature; but conducted by analogy, we may proceed further in the abſtract analyſis of ſolids. When you conſider all the ſolids on the ſurface of our globe, as well organized bodies, as natural joſſils, and examine the certain and uncertain reſults of our analyſes, you will not be able to trace in theſe bodies any ſubſtances ponderable in themſelves, but uter and elementary earths, taking the term, elementary carth, in a general ſenſe. Among the ſubſtances, which are not diſcernible by their weight, we have light, ſire, electricity, acids, alkalies, phingision, and the peculiar particles of cer. tain airs. Every terreſtrial phenomenon ſeems tc announce other imponderable ſubſtances; and fron hence you may conceive how many cauſes of this claſs are conccaled from us by our ignorance. Such then are the ſubſtances by which the immediate ph ſical cauſes produce the phenomena of our globe; the ponderable ſubſtances are wate (humor, and earths; the remaining terreſtrial ſubſtances conſiſt only of particles of diſferent claſſes, but of ſuch ſubtilty,.that whatever be their quantity in the maſſes that we weigh, their weight has hitherto eſcaped. Water will unite with all theſe particles, but at different degrees, and acquires by the union different affinities, ſrom whence immediately reſult various liquids, expanſible fluids, and ſome ſolids, which are fuſible at different temperatures of the atmoſphere, either immediately, or with water for their flux. By theſe combinations in different ſtates with the earths, ſolids are produced, on which theſe means of liquifaction have no power. AllI theſe combinations can only take place in liquid water, in which they have an opportunity of exerciſing their aſſinities: and when ſolids are formed therein, it is in certain caſes, by the addition of ſome ſubſtances, and the ſimultaneous emiſſion of ſome expanſible fluids. Theſe ſolids are no longer ſolvible in the remaining fluid, and in order that it may diſſolve them, they muſt be deprived of their additional ſubſtances, and their expanſible fluids muſt be reſtored to them. Now vith reſpect to the greater part oſ the ſolids of our globe, as well thoſe which were ſormerly formed on it's ſurſace, as thoſe which are daily forming there, theſe combinations are the great ſecret of nature. ; The preceding analyſis developes this ancient principle of chemiſtry, that ſire is the age t oſ all diſſolution. This propoſition is true, but only F 3 mediately; mediately; ſor light is the firſt agent of every chemical operation. By light united to ſome ſubſtance hitherto undetermined, ſire receives it's exiſtence. By ſire the particles of water (humor) receive their liquidity, that is, the power of obeying, although contiguous to each other, not only their own tendencies, but thoſe they acquire by the addition of other particles. By theſe additions the particles of water are more or leſs diſpoſed to retain or to receive the ſire of liquifaction. Marine ſalt may be confidered as a refractory ſolid, and common ice as a fuſible ſolid. Theſe two ſolids being mixed above a certain temperature, have the power of ſeizimg in common the fire of liquiſaction at all points where they touch. This is the general principle of other fuſions by fluxes. For experiment teaches us, that certain ſolids being mixed can receive the fire of liquifaction, ultence the affinities of their ingredients have an opportunity of acting. Experiment has alſo ſhewn, that in order that they may receive more eaſily the fire of liquifaction, or that in their common liquiſaction, the ſolids deſigned to be produced may be formed, or even ſcparate themſclves by a difference in ſpecific gravity, they muſt be deprived oſ certain ingredients. Now here again fire comes in to our aid; by it's agency, and that of atmoſpheric air, certain expanſible fluids are formed, others are abſorbed, and the ſolids thus torriſied are ready to go into the furnace, and reccive the fire oſ liquifaction. ON WATER IN ASTATE OF VAPOUR. Though Ihave explained in my Lectures on fire the more particular phenomena that take place in the paſſage of water into vapour, I have alſo ſhewn you, that water heated to 2125, when the barometei is 291, ſlics oſf in vapour, and becemes an elaſtic fluid, at lcaſt 8o0 times more rare than air. Thi: elaſtic fluid or ſteam is the moſt powerſul agent that can be applied to working of engines, u here great mechanical pouer is required. This ſuhject being thereby rendercd oſ the greateſt importance to arts and manufactures, vou will not, I hope, think your time miſapplied in reconſidering the nature of this wonderful agent; the more as it will in ſome reſpects be exhibited under a diſerent point of view, and vith ſorme circumſtances which we did not before attend to. The quantity of fire neceſſary to turn water into ſteam is immenſely great, as you may eaſily convince yourſelves ſrom the operation oſ a common ſtill, by obſerving the vaſt heat received by the water in the worm-tub uſed to condenſe the vapour. You may ſtrengthen this idea by conſidering, that if a veſſel of water be placed on a good fire, and that though you increaſe the power oſ this fire to the higheſt degree capable by human art, yet you cannot caiſe the temperature of the water above the boiling point. Now vwhat can become of the vaſt acceſſion of fire which the water in the veſſel is conſtantly receiving. It goes off with the ſteam raiſed from the water, and may be again obtained from it by condenſing the vapour. If you prevent the ſteam from flying oſſ, as in Papin's digeſter, it will retain the heat it has acquired from the fire; where the conſined water will be found ſo hot as even to diſſolve bones, and to produce ſuch effects as I have already deſcribed to you. Yet this fire, when combined with the vapour, is as it were neutralized and rendered with reſpect to external objects quieſcent. . To eſtimate the expanſive force of water reduced into vapour, I know no inſtrument ſc convenient as that of Mr. le Chevalier de BettanF -I court.* It conſiſts of a veſſel A placed upon a chafing diſh B, having one opening at top, to which a curved barometer is adapted, and another to which a thermometer is filled, and a third with a cock; theſe are, you ſee, ſo diſpoſed, that when the cock is ſhut there is no'e communication between the interior ſpace and the exterior air. When the cock is open, and the water is not heated, the mercury vill, of courſe, be at an equal height in each of the branches m, m. Iſ the air be then exhauſted ſrom the large veſſel A, and the cock be rhut, the mercury vill riſe from m to k in onc branch, and deſcend from m to k in the other; ſo that the water being ſuppoſed to be at the ſreezing poiut, the difference between k and k will be as inches. Let the water be heated rapidly, and you will perceive the firſt ſigns of ebullition by it's ſtriking againſt the veſſel, which it will do with ſo much force as to ſhake the whole apparatus; at the ſame time the mercury in the thermometer will riſe, and that in the barometer will fall; and when the mercury is at the ſame height in each leg of the ſyphon, the thermometer will be at 212, the preſſure of the ſteam at this temperature being an exact counterballance to the weight of the atmoſphere. If you now increaſe the hcat of the water, the mercury will riſe in the branch on which the air preſſes, and deſcend in the other; the difference will depend on the temperature of the water, ur increaſed expanſive force of the ſteam. If you add to this difference in the two columns oſ mercury, the height of the mercúùry in a common barometer, their ſum will expreſs the height of a ll column  See fig. 1, of pl. 6. vol. i. I have beſore obſerved, that the ectures on water were originally deſigned to make a part oſ tho column of mercury, repreſenting the expanſive force of the ſteam. The difference in the level muſt be uſed poſitively or negatively, according as the thermometer is above, or under 212. There is no occaſion for two barometers; iſ the open end oſ this was ſcaled, it might then be filled like a ſyphon barometer. With this apparatus Mr. Bettancourt made a variety oſf experiments, the reſults oſ which are given in the ſllowing table: T A B L E. Degrees: of Reaumur's thermometer. Expanſive ſorce. o O. OO 10O E, O. IS 20 E 0. 65 30 I. 52 406 nm 2.92 50 5.35 60 ũũũ 9.95 67 ſiiũũũi 14. SO 70 16. 9o 86 n 28.00 90  x 46. 40 95 s 57. 80 100 71. 8O IO4 E 84. OO I 10 98. oO When vapour is expoſed to a great heat, it's bulk, as you have ſeen, is conſiderably augmented; at 2120 water is only rarified to 26; but with the ſame degree of heat vapour is expanded to 13 or 14000 times the volume which it occupied as water. Of this you may eaſily aſſure yourſelves, by taking a glaſs tube with a ball at the end thereof a inches diameter; let a drop of water paſſs into the ball of one line diameter; the ſolidity of theſe two ſpheres will be to each other as 13824 LECTORES ON NATURAL PuILOSOPH?. to 1. Heat the ball ſo as to convert the water into vapour, and it will fill the whole ſphere, and ſorce the air out of the ball, as you vwill find by immerging the end oſ the tube in water, a little warm, leſt the ſudden application of cold ſhould burſt the ball; and in proportion as the vapour is condenſed by cold, the preſſure of the atmoſphere will force the water into the ball ſo as to fill it entirely; proving thereby that the vapour had forced the air out oſ it, had aſſumed a bulk near 14000 times larger than it occupied as water. It is impoſſible to give you an accurate idea of a ſteam-engine without a model. I ſhall therefore content myſelſ in this place with laying beſore you a few oſ the general principles on which it acts. It has been ſhewn you in the Lectures on air, that the preſſure of the atmoſphere, at a mean, may be eſtimated at 14.8 pounds avoirdupoiſe for every ſquare inch. If therefore a vacuum be by any means made in a cylinder, which is ſurniſhed with a moveable piſton, ſuſpended at one end of a lever, or ballance beam, the preſſure oſ the atmoſphere will preſs down the piſton with a ſorce proportionable to the area of the ſurface, and vill raiſe an equal weight at the other end oſ the beam. Water, as you have ſeen, may be rarified near 14000 times, and was capable of forming a vacuum by a degree of heat capable of Ekeeping water in a boiling ſtate: by increaſing the heat vou have alſo ſeen, that the expanſive force oſ the ſteam may be rendered much ſtronger. The ſteam may be condenſcd or reduced to water by a jet oſ cold water diſperſed among it, ſo that 14000 cubic inches of ſteam may be reduced into one cubic inch of water only, and thus a vacuum is partly obtained. Though the preſſure of the atmoſphere be about 145 pounds upon every ſquare inch, yet on account of the piſton of the ſeveral parts, of the imperfection of the vacuum, the piſton in the common engines does not deſcend uith a force exceceding 8 or 9 pounds upon every ſquare inch of its ſurface. In Mr. Watt's improved engine, are about 12 pounds and a half upon every ſquare inch. The piſton being preſſed by the atmoſphere with a force proportionable to it's area in inches, multiplied by about 8 or 9 pounds, depreſſes that end oſ the lever, and raiſes a column of water in the pumps at the other end oſ the beam equal to that weight. When the ſteam is again admitted, the piſton is forced up by it's expanſive power, and the pump rods ſink; but when the ſteam is condenſed, the piſton deſcends, and the pump rods riſe; and ſo alternately as long as the engine works. MR. DE LUC'S THOUGHTS ON THE STATE OF AOUEOUS VAPOUR IN THE ATMOSPHERE AND LAUS OF EVAPORATION. As no perſon has paid ſo much attention to meteorology and the branches of philoſophy relating thereto, as Mr. de Luc, I ſhould not think I had given you an accurate idea of this ſubject without laying before you the reſult of his experiments and obſervations; and I may venture to aſſert, that you will make very little progreſs in this part of philoſophy, unleſs you are maſter of his principles. Mr. de Luc's notions concerning rain were firſt changed from an obſervation on the glacier de Buet, of a degree of dryneſs in the air, abſolutely unknown in the valley at the ſume temperature. This obſervation, followed by others, led him finally to conclude, æ that rain does not proceed from the moiſture which exiſted in the atmoſphere prior to the formation of the rainy clouds. By experiments with his hygrometer he has ſhewn, that air may be entirely deprived of the immediate product of evaporation; the conſequence of which is abſolute dryneſs. The ſame inſtrumeni ſhews, that this product of evaporation has a maximum, variable with the temperature, but conſtani under the ſame temperature. The hygrometer is ſixed by theſe two ſtates of air; no method of drying or of moiſtening make it paſs beyond theſe boundaries, which thus become the extremes oſ a ſcale, referring to a total ceſſation or inaximum oſ moiſture. In the ſame hands the hygrometer has ſerved to ſix our ideas of the cauſe by Uhich water ſimply evaporated in air may be precipitated. Theſe cauſes are the ſame with thoſe, which in air, where the quantity of water ev aporated does not change, occaſion an augmentation oſ humidity, the necesſary forerunner of the precipitation of water. Experience points out two, and only two, the condenſion of air, or it's being coole d. Some philoſophers have thought that humidity was incrcaſed by rarifying the air; forming their opinion from thoſe experiments, where the air in a rceeiver, on being rarified, produced a miſt or fog. Meſſ. Wilcke, Nairne, and de Sauſſure have ſhewn, that if care be taken to exclude from the apparatus every freſh ſource of evaporation, the rarifaction of air promotes dryneſs. The phenomena, on which the contrary hypotheſis is founded, ariſe ſrom water left in the apparatus, and the miſt is produced by the acceleration of evaporation in the rariſied air, and the inſtantaneous cooling of the ſpace containing the air. The water which evaporates, preſerving ſenſibly the ſame heat which acted on it before, ſills the receiver with vapours more denſe than the maximum relative to the momentary diminution of temperature, conſequently they precipitate themſelves ſuddenly Thus this theory correſponds with the rifaction of air, which is unaccountable on the ſuppoſition oſ the diſſolution of water by air: for in the latter hypotheſis the particles of waterare united by aſſinity to the particles of air. But neither the theory of aſſinities, nor any fact concerning them, authorizes us to believe, that two ſubſtances thus united, ſhould acquire a tendency to ſeparate, becauſe the particles of the mixture were removed to a greater diſtance from each other; a circumſtance, which, as it leſſens their tendency to each other, ought to give them a better opportunity for exerciſing their affinity to water. Humidity cannot thereſore be increaſed by this cauſe, ſince the augmentation of humidity wouid be a ſign that water was ſeparating itſelf more efficaciouſly from the particles of air. Now in Mr. de Lucs theory, when an aqueous fluid mixed with air produces moiſture therein, this moiſture muſt be diminiſhed by rarifying the air. And this is really the caſe, for there is leſs water in the receiver after a portion of the vapour has been pumped thereſrom. The temperature is ſoon alſo re-eſtabliſhed by the fire, which paſſes through the receiver, to ſupply the place of that which was carried away with the vapour. Rarifying the air, when the quantity of evaporated water remains the ſame, is therefore a cauſe of dryneſs, inſtead of humidity. Now vith reſpect to the other cauſe of an increaſe of moiſture, the condenſation of the air, it cannot be ſuppoſed in the atmoſphere; there remains therefore but one cauſe by which we can account ſor the precipitation of water which is evaporated in open air, namely cold; and from time immemorial thoſe who have endeavoured to explain rain by this cauſe, have had recourſe to ſtrata of air in motion, which were more or leſs warm than thoſe they mmet; but this explanation is alſo chimerical. When, in a given maſs of air, the evaporated water is at it's maximum in a given temperature; if the heat be increaſed, the particles ſeparate further, and the air will contain more water. If the articles are brought nearer together, the water ſuperabounds, and the exceſs is precipitated. Theſe facts are certain. Now let us ſuppoſe two ſtrata oſ nir of diſſerent temperature meeting each other, cach of them containing evaporated water at it's maximum for the reſpective temperatures; the warmeſt ſtratum vill loſe it's heat, and conſequently it's ſuperabundant water; but the other ſtratum will acquire this heat, and be therefore capable oſ receiving this ſuperabundant water. When Mr. de Luc and his brother were at the bottom of the glacier de Buet in 1770, it had rained for ſome time, the valley and neighbouring mountains were imbibed with water. There was alſo a very great evaporation from the ground ofſ theſe mountains, which was increaſed by the quantity of melting ice. They however experienced a degree of dryneſs unknoun at the ſame temperature upon the plains. Two ycars aſter, returning to the ſame place with an hygrometer, they found that the humidity diminiſhed as they roſe, and when they arrived at the ſummit where the ice was beginning to melt, they ſound that ſame extraordinary dryneſs which had ſo much ſtruck them on their ſirſt viſit. While they were upon the glacier, dry as it ſeemed to be, ſome clouds began to ſorm in the ſtratum where they were ſituated; tRey rolled firſt about the mountain, but they ſoon were formed throughout the u hole ſtratum, extending to a great diſtance towards the plains, and increaſing with ſuch rapidity, that Mr. de Luc and his brother thought it prudent to deſcend; the hygrometer ſtill advanced towards dryneſs. Soon aſter their departure from the glacier, it was covered with clouds, and before they had attained their lodging there was a heavy rain from the very ſtratum, which a little beſore was ſo exceeding dry; the rain continued during the whole night, and part of the next day. Mr. de Sauſſure has confirmed theſe obſervations of Mr. de Luc by many more, which all tend to prove the great dryneſs of the atmoſphere in theſe ſuperior regions. The water which is at the lower part of the atmoſphere is continually evaporating and riſing in the air, but this evaporation does not increaſe the moiſture therein; for in a dry ſeaſon it goes on diminiſhing, the ground at laſt becomes dry, the vapours diſcontinue, and the dew ceaſes every where but near water. This phenomenon does not however appear ſurprizing to thoſe who imagine, that the evaporated water is collected in the higher regions, where the clouds are formed. But this idea muſt be abandoned, for we now know, that in ſerene weathber, before ibe clouds are formed, and even among tbe clouds, the upper regions are at leaſt as dry as ihe lower purt of the atmoſpbere, in its greateſt degree of dryneſs, at lhe ſame temperature. Theſe clouds are not therefore formed from the moiſture of the air. The immediate product of evaporation in ſome manner changes it's nature in the atmoſphere, ſor it does not ſenſibly affect the hygrometer; and it's return to a ſtate of aqueous vapour to produce clouds and rain, proceeds ſrom ſomqę cauſe of which we are ignorant. Of the various hypotheſes to reſolve this diſſiculty, that of Mr. de Luc is the moſt probable, who ſuppoſes, that the aqueous vapours are turnea in the atmoſphere into an aeriform fluid, and thai rain proceeds from the decompoſition of this air. On this hypotheſis it is eaſy to perceive why the hy5 grometer is not affected by the quantity of water that is often exiſting in the atmoſphere. The difference between water as vapour, and as an aqeriform fluid, conſiſts in this; that in vaour the union of water with fire is very weak, and is eaſily deſtroyed by preſſure or cold; but by the addition of another fubſtance it loſes theſe properties, and becomes an aeriform fluid. There are many rcaſons for ſuppoſing that a variety of aeriform fluids are included in the atmoſphere, which by reſiſting the operations uſced to diminiſh the atmoſphere are unknown to us. Novw the operation of theſe, or of other ſubſtances in the air, may decompoſe water conſidered as an aeriform ſfluid, and thus occaſion rain. * The variations of the barometer ſecm naturally to lead us to ſome ſuch concluſion; for when the barometer ſalls as a ſign of rain, it is from a change in the ſpecific gravity of the air; but Meſſrs. de Luc and de Sauſſure have proved, that there never is a ſufficient quantity of vapour in the atmoſphere to occaſion the difference produced by this inſtrument. There are many other phenomena which are not accountable on the uſual principles, and conduct us to look for ſome further change in the theory of the atinoſphere. LaAws OF EVAPORATION BYM. DE LUC. M. de Luc here, as before, conſiders moiſture in the air, as the modification of a particular fiuid, conſiſting of water and fire, mixed with the air, but inudependent thereof. He alſo conſiders evaporation (which occaſions this moiſture) as an operation of ſire without the interference oſ air. Thal  The reader muſt be referred to M. de Luc's Letters, tc learn why the French theory oſ the decompoſition of svater doe; That it is an operation of fire, is plain; fot every liquor cools when it evaporates, becauſe the portion of the fluid that diſappears, carries away d quantity of ſire from the liquor. Mr. Watt has ſhewn, that in the ordinary evaporation of water in open air, the quantity oſ heat loſt by the maſs, bears to the quantity of water carried away, a greater proportion than that which is found in the ſteam produced by boiling water. There is, therefore, no room to doubt that ſteam is formed in the firſt as in the laſt caſe. Whenever water is in a ſtate of evaporation, an expanſible fluid, compoſed of water and fire, is produced. To this fluid M. de Luc gives the name of ſteam. I uſe this and vapour indifferently. As long as ſteam exiſts, it exerts a power of preſſure like air itſelf; but it does not belong to the claſs of permanent elaſtic fluids, as it may be decompoſed either by preſſure or by cooling. There is, as you have ſeen, a material difference between what are called permanently elaſtic ſluids and ſteam, or the vapour of water; the former will undergo every known degree of atmoſpheric preſſure without being decompoſed; but vapour is decompoſed by too great a preſſure. The particles oſ the water being hereby brought nearer together unite, and quit the fire, which in paſſing from them manifeſts it's uſual properties. Permanently elaſtic fluias cannot be decompoſed in veſſels hermetically ſealed, becauſe they are thereby prevented from receiving the action of the bodies with which they have a greater aſfinity than with thoſe which ſupport them in an aeriform ſtate; but ſteam or watery va pours may be decompoſed in veſſels hermetically ſealed, ſrom the tendency of the fire with which it is united to an equilibrium; thus, when the exterior heat diminiſhes, the fire quits the water to re-eſtabliſh the equilibrium oſf temperature. If the ſire becomes ſufficiently abundant on the outſide, it re-enters the veſſel, and vapours are again formed. As the expanĩſive property of vapour depends, every other circumſtance being the ſame, on fire, it is greater in proportion as the particles contain a greater quantity. It appears, that ſteam is decompoſed either by preſſure or by cooling: becauſe at a given temperature it has a certain fixed maximum oſ denſity, which increaſes with the temperature. Thus, when the fluid is arrived at the maximum correſpondent to a certain temperature, it will be decompoſed, either by being cooled, it's maximum being too great for this temperature, or it will be decompoſed by an increaſe of preſſure without any change of temperature; for here it's denſity is too great for that temperature: in either caſe the water is ſeparated ſrom the fire, which ſupported it as ſteam. The degree of preſſure, or expanſive force, exerciſed by ſteam, or which it can ſupport without decompoſition, depends on temperature, and is proportional to it's denſity. Steam is formed at every temperature where a previous ſpace permits it's expanſion; but no ſtcam can be formed where it has to overcome an obſtac le ſuperior to it's expunſive power at that degree of temperature; and if it be formed, becauſe che obſtacle, or preſſure, did not exceed it's pouwer, yet if the preſfure increaſes, or the temperature lowers ever ſo little, it is totally decompoſed. It is theſe circumſtances that determine both rhe degree of heat at which water begins to boil, and the variations of that degree, according to the variations of preſſure; ſor cbullition is that ſtate oſ a liquid in whichſteam is continually formed with- in itſelſ, notwithſtanding the external preſſure; and to produce this expanſive power in ſteam, a certain degree of heat is neceſſury in the fluid, which is determined by the degree of preſſure. As ſor the fixity of the degree oſf boiling water under a conſtant preſſure; it is produced by the equilibrium between the quantity oſ ſire, which continues to penetrate the water, and that which goes ofſf in ſteam; the differences which may happen in the quantity of fire that penetrates the water, having no other ſenſible eſfect than that of producing a more or leſs rapid ſormation of ſteam. From hence we may perceive the difference between the phenomena of common evaporation and cbullition. Ebullition requires a determined degree of heat, becauſe the ſteam cannot be formed within the water, unleſs it is ſuſſiciently ſtrong to overcome the actual preſſure on the water: but in common evaporation. the ſteam and vapour is formed at the ſurface of the water by every degree of temperature; ſor it meets uith no reſiſtance, but what it can always overcome; it mixes only with the air, and this it expands in proportion to it's quantity, in the ſame manner as if it were a new quantity of air. The ſteam, formed by common evaporation, is of the ſame nature with that of boiling water; but with reſpect to the preſſure it undergoes, it is ſimilar to that produced by evaporation under an exhauſted receiver. Under the exhauſted receiver, the reſiſtance the ſteam meets with is from itſelf, and is, conſequently, proportional to it's own expanſive power. In open air, the part of the whole preſſi re incumbent on the ſteam is to that whole, as it's power is to that of the whole maſs, the reſt of the preſſure being ſupported by the air with which it is mixed; which proportion in the preſG ſure ſteam undergoes, brings it exactly to that of the firſt, as is proved by experiment. When the thermometer is at 659, the maximum of evaporation in an exhauſted receiver, * ſupports o.5 inch of mercury in the ſhort barometer gage. That the evaporation in vacuum has the ſame cauſe as in open air, is clear from the loſs of heat by the liquid in this caſe, as well as the other: an equal preſſure is alſo produced, and added to that oſ the air, when the receiver is filled with air, as will appear by the following example: If the thermometer be ſtill about 95, and the receiver be filled with air of the ſame denſity as that in the room, a barometer placed in that receiver, will ſtand at the ſame height as in the open air. If a ſufficient quantity of water be introduced for producing the maximum of evaporation, the incloſed barometer, like the iss will riſe o.5 of an inch. Now as the barometer is, in ev ery caſe, manometer, the phenomena, obſerv ed in cloſe ver ſels, give us a true idea oſ what happens to ſteam in the atmoſphere. When ſteam is mixed with air, be the maſs ſhut up in a veſſel, or be it in a certain part of the atmoſphere, diſtinct by it's place, both fluids will act on the barometer, or on every obſtacle, and thus againſt each other, according to their reſpective power; becauſe no mechanical cauſe can produce the decompoſition of ſtenum, but by forcing it's particles to come nearer cach other, than is conſiſtent with the temperature by which they are ſupported; which caſe cannot happen in the atmoſphere, except by the accumulation of ſteam in ſome part of it; ſince elſewhere it only remains mixed with the air, according to it's own laws, as if there were no air. Mr. Mr. de Luc conſiders the whole theory of hygrology a ſcience, whoſe objects are, in general, the cauſe of evaporation, and the modifications of evaporated water, as comprehended in the foregoing propoſitions. The common ſource of the water thus diſſeminated in the atmoſphere, is the ſurface of the earth; whence in ſpontaneous evaporation, both in air, and in vacuo, as well as in ebullition, we ſee water carrying off latent fire. If the product be collected in a cloſe ſpace, it acts in the ſame manner as a new quantity of expanſive fluid. It is known, by experience, that an expanſive fluid is really produced by ebullition, and by evaporation in an exhauſted receiver; and no good reaſon can be aſſigned to ſhew why the cauſe of evaporation, and it's product, ſhould change in any caſe only by the preſence oſ air; and on examining what may happen in open air, we find no particular cauſe oſ the deſtruction oſ that expanſible fluid, or any difficulty in conceiving it's diſſemination in every part of the atmoſphere. Here we loſe ſight of ſteam; for watery vapours are not diſcernible oſ themſelves, and it is on this account they are not perceived in the atmoſphere. Mixed therewith, they are not to be diſtinguiſhed from it, buecauſe they are as tranſparent as itſelf. In a vacuum they would be taken for an elaſtic fluid, if we judged of them only by their mechanical eſfects, without ſubjecting them to a chemical analyſis. In the air their mechanical action is as little perceivable as that of any ſcattered particles of air; and we ſhould be ignorant oſ their function in the atmoſphere, if it were not for their property of producing moiſture. G 3 ſo) * See Mr. de Luc's paper in the ſecond part of the Philoſophical OF VESICULAR AND CONCRETE VAPOUR. When vapour or ſteam is decompoſed, if it be contiguous to ſubſtances, whoſe heat is leſs than it's own, the fire quits the vapour, and the water is depoſited on the ſurſace of the body in the form of dew, and in drops. When rhe hcat is as low as congelation, the vapours are cryſtalliæcd, and depoſited in regular and curious forms. Pſ there are no ſubſtances contiguous to the vapours in the air, the particles of water unite, and form either ſpherical ſolid drops, hollou ſpheres, or congealed icicles. The ſolid drops unite and form rain. The icicles are the ſirſt elements of ſnow; but as they are often very minute, and remain ſuſpended in rhe air, where they produce different meteors, Mr. de Sauſſure ranks them in the claſs of vapour, and gives them the name of concrete vapour. The exiſtence of the hollow ſpheres, or veſicular vapours, has been oſten ſuppoſed, before philoſophers were able to exhibit them to the ſenſes. The ſimpleſt and moſt inſtructive manner of obſerving them, is to expoſe a cup of ſome warm aqueous fluid, of a dark colour, as coſſee, or water mixed with ink, to the rays oſ the ſun in a fine day, when the air is very calm; a cloud vill riſe from the fiuid to a certain height, and chen diſappear. An attentive eye will ſoon diſcover that this cloud conſiſts of ſmall round grains, of a uhitiſh colour, and detached one ſrom the other. To acquire a more diſtinct idea oſ their form, you may obſerve them as they riſe ſrom the ſurſace oſ the liquor, with a lens oſ about one inch and halſ focuss being careſul, however, to keep che lens out of the vapours, that they may not deprive it of it's tranſparency. i You may thus obſerse ſpherical balls oſ diflllllll ferent ſizes proceeding from the ſurſace with more or leſs rapiditt. The more delicate riſe with rapidity, and ſoon traverſe the field of the lens; the larger fall back into the cup, and without mixing with the fluid, roll upon it's ſurſace like a light powder, which obeys every impulſe of the air, and are blown from one edge of the cup to the other, even when there is no apparent agitation in the air. Theſe globules imay be ſeen on a ſudden to begin to move, the ſmalleſt riſing by an agitation of the air imperceptible to our ſenſes, flying off and diſappearing, whilſt the largeſt remain rolling on the ſurface without quitting it; at other times you ſce ſome of them, which were ſuſpended in the air, deſcend to the ſurface, and there reel a uhile like pigeons on a ground ſreſh ſoun, then on the ſinalleſt agitation riſe again, and ſly away. Ithe lightneſs of theſce ſmall ſpheres, their uhiteneſs, &c. gives them an appearance altogether diſferent ſrom ſolid globules; their perfect reſemblance to the larger balls that are ſcen floating on the ſurſace oſ the liquid can Icave no doubt of their nature; it is ſufficient to ſee them to be convinced that they are hollow bubbles, like thoſe blown from water and ſoap. Mr. Kratzenſtein endeavoured to eſtimate their ſiæe, by comparing them uith an hair, and found they were 12 times ſmaller than the hair, whoſe diameter was the 300th part of an inch, and conſequently one of theſe was only the 36coth part of the ſame meaſure. To obſerve them more readily, Mr. de Sauſſure uſed a kind of eolipile, formed cſ tuwo halls, i. e. a glaſs tube ſcaled at A, ſig. 10, pl. 5, vol. i. open at D; the tuo balls communicating with cach other, and the opening or neck D. He let ſome drops of water paſs into the ball B, and placed it over the flame of a ſpirit of. wine lamp; ſpirit of wine was uſed that the balls might not be obſcured; as ſoon as the water is ſenſibly heated in the ball B (the ball C being yet cold), you may ſee the vapours from the ball B enter into the ball C, and there condenſc themſelves in the form oſ a cloud, which is entirely compoſed oſ theſe veſicles; but when the water boils in B, the torrent of elaſtic vapours that enter C warms this ball, and the vapour being no longer condenſed, neither cloud nor veſicles are ſeen; it becomes perfectly tranſparent, and the jet proceeds from the neck B, as from an eolipile. If you then remove the eolipile from the flame, and cool, by means of cold water, the ball C, the veſicular vapours will again appear: by placing this ball on the ſtage of a microſcope, you may obſerve theſe vapours with the greateſt convenience. You may even, ſometimes, be able to obſerve them in a fog, or in a cloud when on a hill: to this end Mr. de Sauſſure uſed a lens of one and a half or two inches focus, which he held near his eye with one hand; in the other he held any ſmooth, flat, and poliſhed ſurface of a black colour, as the bottom oſ a tortoiſeſhell box; bringing this towards the lens, till it was very near the focal diſtance thereof, he then waited till the agitation in the air brought ſome particles of the cloud into the focus of the lens; when the cloud was thick, this ſoon happened, and he perceived round and white particles paſſing with the rapidity of lightning, others moving ſlowly, ſome rolling upon the ſurface of the tortoiſeſhell, others ſtriking againſt it obliquely, and rebounding like a ball from a wall, others fixing themſelves thereto. Small drops of water might allo be perceived to ſcttle on the tortoiſeſhell; but they were eaſily diſtinguiſhed from the hollow ſpherules, by their tranſparency, their gravity, and their pace. Further, clouds do not form a rainbow; it is produced by ſolid drops; when a cloud is not in an actual ſtate of reſolution, it docs not change the form of the ſtars that are ſeen through it; for nfin itely thin meniſcuſſes do not ſenſibly c hange the courſe of the rays oſ light. But as ſoon as the cloud begins to reſolve itſelf in ſolid drops; even without clouds, when ſolid drops begin to be formed in the air, the ſtars ſeen through them are ill defined, ſurrounded with a diffuſe light, circles, and halos; hence theſe meteors are the forerunners of rain, for rain is nothing more than theſe drops augmented or united. When the veſicular vapours are condenſed by cold, the water which formed the bubble cryſtalliſes, ſometimes into hoar froſt, ſometimes into ſnow; when it does not freeze, they unite in dew, or deſcend in rain.. Many other curious properties concerning the veſicular and concrete vapours are related in Mr. de Sauſſure's excellent Eſſai ſur I Hygrometrie. OF MINERALWATERS. A full inveſtigation of the properties oſf mineral waters is the ſubject of chemiſtry; but ſince the diſcoveries of Dr. Prieſtley it has ſo much analogy with philoſophy, that I cannot paſs it over entirely in ſilence. The name of mineral water is in general given to any water which is found to be ſo loaded with foreign principles as to produce a different effect on the human body ſrom that which is produced by the waters commonly uſed for drink. Our anceſtors were particularly attentive to procure wholeſome water; it was rhis that determined where they would unite together, and regulated their choice oſ the ſituation oſf houſes. Hippocrates, the ſather of medicine, was well acquainted with the influence of water upon the human frame, and aſſirms that the mere quality oſ the uſual drink is capable of modiſving and producing a diſterence among men. When we conſider that many of the ancient philoſophers ſuppoſed that all things were originally derived from vater, it is evident they muſt have had an extenſive view oſ the operations of nature. We ſee that it produces dewu, clouds, rain, ſnow, and other meteors; nor can we help obſerving how every vegetable, and every animal, riſes out oſ it. hen we chemicallv examine the materials ofſ which animaland vegetable ſubſtances are compoſcd, we ſind water to be a principal ingredient. Nothing then remains but the ſolid and inanimate parts oſ the globe; the various earths, rocks, ſtones, and minerals, oſ which the diy land and vaſt maſs of mountains are compoſed, even theſe, the more ue examine them the more ue have reaſon to think, derive their origin from water. In marble, chalk, and limeſtone, we find evident traces of the ſea; we cannot rationally think otherwiſe of theſe ſtrata, than that water has been greatly concerned in their origin. And ſurther, as we ſind theſe ſlrata irregularly mixed with the hardeſt rocks both above and below, we muſt conſider them as ſpringing ſrom the ſame ſource. On examining the rocky ſtrata, you will find marks which plainly point out that they originate from the ſea. Thus the ſtrata oſ ſreeſtone which uare very extenſive, evidently ſhew ſrom their appearance that they were originally ſca-ſand; they are divided into ſmall ſtrata, and are diſtinguiſhed into horizontal layers, and have the ſame undulated ſurface as the ſand oſ the ſea-ſhore. Flinty ſubſtances ſeem to ſorm the ſtrongeſt objections to this ſyſtem, as they reſiſt the action of uùter as much as any ſubſtances in nature: but there are many phenomena in nature which ſhew that calcareous earth is convertible by length of time into a flinty matter; and marine ſhells are not unſrequently met with which have loſt their calcareous nature, and are converted into the hardeſt end pureſt flint. In bitumen and coals we find evident traces of a vegetable origin. The analyſis oſ water is not only uſeſul in a phyſical point of vicu, but alſo as an object of medicine, in order to determine whether any water is uſeful, to know thoſe uhich poſſeſs medicinal virtues, and apply them to the uſes to which they are ſuited; or to appropriate to different works and manufactories the waters beſt calculated for their reſpective purpoſes, to correct impure waters, and laſtly to rmitate the known mineral waters at all places, and at all times. Whether you conſider mineral waters with reſpect to their formation, or the beneſit which ac.rues from them, we have reaſon to eſtimate them as precious giſfts of Divine Providence. But it is with theſe as with many other bleſſings, we are too oſten heedleſs and ungrateful. How many, for whom the wonders oſ creation, providence, and redemption, have been urought, that think them not worthy their attention Angels admire and adore, where man vill not deign to caſt an eye, or employ a thought. The mineral waters are divided into different heads, according to the ſubſtances they contain: 1. The acidulous, which contain an acriform fluid, which gives theſe waters a briſhneſs like that of a ſermenting. IThis briſlneſs is molt apparent when the water is poured ſrom one veſſel to another; it is ſometim⸗?s ſo conſiderable as to burſt the bottle. They redden the tincture oſ turnſole, and precipitate lime-water. 2. An acid is ſometimes found in the waters of ſprings, giving them a very ſenſible acidity; this generally ariſes from the vitriolic acid: this acid has, however, in general, ſo ſtrong a diſpoſition to unite with the various ſubſtances through which the water of a ſpring paſſes, that it is ſeldom found in a feparate ſtate in the water. 3. An alkaline ſalt is ſometimes met with in water; this is in general the foſſil alkali. 4. Neutral ſalts. Of theſe, thoſe that are moſt generally found are common ſalt, and ſometimes nitre. 5. Earthy ſubſtances. Oſ theſe the calcareous is ſometimes found. There are mineral waters which contain ſo much calcareous earth, as to become petrifying to other bodies. 6. Earthy compounds. Thus you may often find calcareous and other earths ſuſpended in water by means of an acid. Thus gypſum is contained in almoſt all waters, Epſom ſalt is found in great quantities, and allum is ſometimes to be met with. 7. Sulphureous waters. Theſe waters havę been long conſidered as holding ſulphur in ſolution; but Bergman has proved that moſt of theſe waters are more impregnated with hepatic gas: this claſs is kcnown by emitting the ſmell of rotten eggs. ili 8. Martial waters. Theſe have a very aſtringent taſte, and exhibit a blue colour by the ſolution of precipitate of lime. The iron is held in ſolution either by ĩixed air, or the vitriolic acid. Sometimes the acid is in exceſs, and the waters have a penetrating ſub-acid taſte, as Pyrmoni and Spa water. Sometimes the acid is not in exceſs, and the waters are not acidulous. In chemical writers you vill find the method of analyſing theſe diſferent waters. When the analyſis is well made, the ſyntheſis is no longer diſficult. And the imitation of mineral waters is now no inſoluble problem. The proceſſes of nature are inimitable only in thoſe operations thatr are vital. In this inſtance we can do more than imitate, we can vary at pleaſure the nature and proportion of the conſtituent parts, and give them, as circumſtances require, more or leſs energyIn artificial waters the ingredients are knoun, while the ingredients oſ waters in their natural ſtate are always unknoun. That which Dr. Johnſon has obſerved oſ a poet is equally applicable to a philoſopher. Io him nothing can be uſeleſs. Whatever is beautiful, and w hatev er is dreadful, ſhould be familiar to his mind; he ſhould be converſunt with all that is avfully vaſt, or elegantly little. The plants of the garden, the animals oſ the wood, the minerals oſ the earth, and the meteors oſ the ſky, ſhouid all concur to enrich his mind. By him no kind oſ know ledge ſhould be overlooked, he ſhould range mountains and deſerts, explore every tree of the foreſt and flower of the vallay, the crags of the rock, the mazes of the ſtream, and the great wide ſea, with it's unnumbered inhabitants; he will ſind them all ſpeak their Moker as they can, But want and aſk the tongue of man: calling upon him to praiſe his redeeming Gob, who in the intellectual, as in the material world, is LOκRD and KIiνG; who is obeyed by the angels in heaven, ſerved by the churen upon earth, and ſ ſeared by the ſpirits impriſoned in deep places beneath. Look at every thing in nature; look at all the variety of creatures therein; conſider it in all its height and depth, in all it's variet of operations; and you vill find it is only for this end, that it may in it's infinite variety of degrees and capacities manifeſt the hidden riches, the inviſible powers, and glories oſ the ſpiritual world; and be as ſo many ſounds and voices, preachers and trumpets, giving glory, praiſe, and thankſgiving to the Gob OrF LOVE. The preſent Lecture has afforded you ſreſſ inſtances of the wonders and variety, the harmony and magni ficence diſcoverable in the works of Gob. There is not, for inſtance, in nature a more auguſt and ſtriking object than the ocean. It's inhabitants are as numerous as thoſc on land; nor is the wiſdom and the power of the Creator leſs diſplayed in their formation and preſervation, ſrom the ſmalleſt fiſh that ſwims to the leviathan himſelf. Nor is there any image which gives us a grander idea of the pouer and greatneſs of God, uho hath this raging element ſo much under his command: hence he is repreſented in holy writ as holding it in ſhe holloto af his hand. There the creatures of God multiply in a much greater proportion than by land, and are maintained without the coſt or attendance of man; they are a ſingular flock, which have no ſhepherd but the CrEATOR himſelf, who conducts them at different ſeaſons in innumerable ſhoals to ſupply the world with nouriſhment. By means of navination Providence hath opened a communication between the moſt diſtant parts of the globe; rhe largeſt ſolid bodies are wafted with incredible ſwiftneſs upon one fluid by the impulſe of another, and ſeas join the countries which they appear to divide. The waters of the ſea are not only prevented from deſtroying the earth, but by a wonderful machinery are rendered the means of preſerving every living thing which moveth thereon. Partly aſcending from the great deep through the ſtrata of the earth, partly exhaled in vapour from the ſurface oſ the ocean into the air, and from thence falling in rain, eſpecially on the tops and ſides of mountains, where they break forth in freſh water ſprings, having leſt their ſalts behind them; they trickle through the valleys, receiving new ſupplies as they go; they become large rivers, and after watering by their innumerable turnings and windings immenſe eracts of country, they return to the place from whence they came. The fertility of the earth is owing to Gob,  who wateretb tbe bills from his chambers. Hence all the glory and beauty oſ the vegetable world; hence the graſs that nouriſheth the cattle, that they may nouriſh the human race; hence the green herb for food and medicine; henee fields covered with corn for the ſupport of life; hence vine and olive trees laden with fruits, whoſe juices exhilarate the heart, and brighten the countenance. They who in old times paid their devotions to the elements, imagined thoſe elements to be capable of giving or withholding rain at pleaſure. Therefore, we find, the prophet &cremiab reclaiming that power to Jenovan, as the Gop who made and governed the world. cAre there any among the vanities of the gentiles that can cauſe rain? Or can the heavens give ſhowers? Art not thou he, O Jenovaiu, our Gob? ltherefore we will wait upon thee: for thou haſt made all theſe things. Among the Greeks and Romans, we meet with a Jupiter soſteſſed of the thunder and the lightning, and an /olus ruling over the winds; but divine rovelation teaches us to reſtore the celeſtial artillery to it's rightſul owuner. Jenovan, the Gob oſ Iſracl, the CREATOR Of the univerſe, the REDEEMER of mankind, contrived the wonderful machinery of light and air, by which vapours are raiſed from the earth, compacted into clouds, and diſtilled into rain. At his command the winds are ſuddenly in motion, and ſuddenly at reſt again. We hear the ſound, but cannot tell whence they come, or whither they go.* Be particularly careful then that you never term any effect natural, with the intention to deny thereby that it is divine, or to exclude Gon entirely out of it; for the GREAT ARCHITECT neceſſarily preſides over and directs every wheel oſ his machine. It is ni that clothes the graſs oſ the field, and ſendeth the ſpring into the rivers. It is ux that gives corn, and wine, and oil. It is nE alſo that ſends famine, ſword, and peſtilence. One time an epidemic diſtemper raged; 2 Sam. xxiv. 17; and that we might not hereafter on ſuch occaſions look alone to the noxious qualities in the air, &c. the veil was for once drauwn aſide, and preſented to open view the deſtroying angel of the Moſt High. Nor let the pert reaſoner flatter himſelf that this is a ſyſtem only for thoſe who believe the bible. It is impoſſible to conceive any religion at all, even excluſive of revelation; that is, in other words, to conceive any truſt, reſignation, repentance, or gratitude, towards the Deity, adapted to the ſucceſſive ſcenes of human life, upon any other foundation. No independence can be aſcribed to the creature; even the ſun, the moſt glorious inftrument of created power, viſible in the univerſe, from his firſt glorious appearance to this good day, never ſhed one ray of light by any intrinſic power, or inherent virtue of his own. The The ſource of life, beauty, and perfection, is too often unperceived by the mere naturaliſt. But he, whoſe eye is opened and illuminated by truth, ſees, contemplates, and adores the AUTHOR AND UNIVERSAL PRINCIPLEOF LIFE; and finds HIM perpetually manifeſting HIMSELF in every object of nature, according to it's capacity or aptitude to receive HIs enlivening beams. Separated ſrom his life-giving energy, the whole creation of beings, material as well as intellectual, muſt remain in a ſtate of death. Nought but uHIs animating breath can call them forth into life, and array them with robes of beauty. l LECTURE XIV. ON THE METHOD OF REASONING IN NATURAI Pi ILOSOPHY. N the propoſals for theſe Lectures, I engaged to point out to you the true method of reaſoning in philoſophy, that you might be enabled to diſtinguiſh what is ſfound and ſolid therein, from what is hollow and vain. This cannot, I think, be done more effectually than by introducing you to the writings of LORD BACON, whoſe plan for the improvement of knowledge comprehends the whole compaſs of nature. He may be conſidered as the great reſtorer of true learning, and the founder of experimenial philoſophy; having done more towards detecting the ſources of former errors and prejudices, and towards eſtabliſhing a true method of philoſophiſing, than was effected by all the philoſophers oſ the preceding ages. He has given us an organum of a diſferent origin and conſtruction from that of Ariſtotle; one which, inſtead of puææling all learning with artificial forms, and perplexing all knowledge with diſputation, puts truthb and nature to the torture by a thouſand trials, and forces them to confeſs thoſe ſecrets, which in ſpite of ſyllogiſ/m had hitherto lain concealed, and by the diſcovery of which arts and ſciences have been advanced, to the great honour of learning and advantage of ſociety. Two circumſtances add greatly to the merit of LORD BACON. The firſt is, that at the time his work was written, the world had ſeen no model of inductive reaſoning, from which it's rules might be deduced with amplitude and preciſion. Poeis and rrators had brought their arts to perfection, ere they were deſcribed by Ariſtotle; his rules were drawn ſrom the moſt perſect models of thoſe arts that have yet appeared: but the art of interpret ing nature was yet in embryo, when Bacon with uncommon energy oſ nund delineated it's manly features and proportions. The ſecond circumſtance which does our noble auchor peculiar honour, is, that he was free from every view of founding a ſect in philoſophy, or aiming to procure followers: he was animated with better proſpects, and more diſtintereſted views. He deſired only to lead mankind as it were by the hand, and to inſtruct them ſo to follow nature, as to be under no neceſſity of following any philoſopher whatſocver. The picture of a true philoſopher cannot be better drawn than hy Bacon's own pencil, and in his own example. You find in him a love of ſcience, it's intereſt and advancement, yet without affecting the pomp of learning; he is a free, impartial, and honeſt cenſor of paſt times, yet without haughtineſs or pride; his judgment is correct and ſolid; his wit, though lively and ſublime, never gives into a wild and profane licence, or rude inſult upon ſacred chings. His imagination was fruitful and extenſive, ranging at large through all the times and regions of the univerſe, ſuggeſting new thoughts and ideas, and ſupplying him with images to expreſs and embody thoſe ideas. In him, with the utmoſt logical preciſion, you have the ſublimeſt eloquence; and you find him in his c AnVANCEMENT OF LEARNING, triumphing over the barbariſm of the preceding ages, and over the pedantry of that in which he lived. His knowledge was ſo comprehenſive and univerſal, that he ſeems to have been the proſeſſor of every ſcience, not only acquainted and familiar with all ages, but admitted as a miniſter into the inſpection and myſteries oſ all nature. Amidſt this maſs of acH quired wealth, the ſtrength and ſplendor of his oun ſtock, ſiining forth unimpuired and unrivalled, lending a luſtre to the authority he produces, his depth, his ſtrength, his dignity, and majeſty, ſct him up above every lettered name. With a capacity of more than ordinary ſize, a giant in the intellectual werld, he breaks through the chains with which authority or tradition had fettered the human mind, ſubdues the errors formed and foſtered by ſuperſtition and ignorance, paſſes the columns ſixed as the boundaries of human Eknou ledge, and opens new tracts of light and regions oſ truth, that were before thought incapable of culture or proſit; intent as it were upon nothing but truth, or in his oun noble language, c vanquiſhed with the immortal love oſ truth. While he detects and proſcribes vulgar errors, he commits no outrage upon the ancient occupiers, nor offers any groſs inſult upon the common ſentiments of mankind. Nor have we, ſays he, ſct oſf ourſclves with glory to draw a majeſty upon our inventions, either by triumphs oſ confutation, or depoſitions of antiquity, an uſurpation oſ authority, or the veil of obſcuritp. Thus with a ſuperiority without the pride of genius, we necd not wonder, that, humble as the humbleſt child of faith, he diſavows whatever does impair or intrench upon ſacred truth, and addreſſes the Lorbo for aſſiſtunce and illumination in his arduous undertaking.* The end of natural philoſophy is to increaſ either the knou ledge or pouer of man, and enable him to underſtand the ways and procedure oſ nature. By diſcovering the laus of nature, he acquires knou ledge, and obtains pouer; for when theſſt theſe laus are diſcovercd, he can uſe them as rules of practice, to equal, ſubdue, or even excel nature by art. Upon the diſcovery oſ theſe laus, depends the perſection of philoſophy, and the enlargement of human knouwledge and power. For this great end Lord Bucon exhibits a more perfect method of employing the rational faculty than mankind had been accuſtomed to; and ſheus them in what manner they may exalt and improve the underſtanding, conquer the difficulties, and remove the obſcurities of nature. The ſirſt part of his NovuM ORGANUM, which may be called a grammar of ihe language of nature, is deſigned to prepare and puriſy the mind, that it may be fit to receive the inſtructions, and uſc the inſtruments laid down in the ſecond part. The human mind, like a mirror, muſt be ſinoothed and poliſhed, freed ſrom falſe imaginations and perverted notions, before it is fit to receive and reflect the light of truth, and juſt information. You may thereſore, with the P ythagoreans, lay it down as a maxim, that human advancements ſhould be preceded by, or accompanied vith, a ſuitable degree of puriſication; for as the diſeaſcd eye endures not, till it be reſtored to health, the view of bright objects, ſo neither can the mind, without due puriſication, ſteadily contemplate the beauty and ſplendor of truth. We muſt thereſore, in the purſuit of truth, diveſt ourſelves of all the 1poLs os falſe notions that poſſeſs the mind. To every bias of the underſtanding, by which a man may be miſled in judging, or be drawn into error, Lord Bacon gives the name of idol; a word that juſtly characteriſes falſe ſcience; for erroneous knowledge is a ſpecies of idolatr; a worſhip puid to falſe gods, which is only due to the true one. All falſehood is oppoſite to truth. Error is that falſehood, which availing itſelf either of the weakneſs of the underſtanding, the depravity of the will, or the undue influence of the imagination, aſſumes the appearance of truth. Truth is the health, error the diſorder of the mind. By purifying the mind ſrom error, you vwill become a fit recepta le for divine truth; by purifying your hearts, you will be conjoined ro divine goodreſs, and will enjoy the happineſs reſulting from ſo exalted a conjunction. The idols of the mind are either acquired or natural, proceeding from the doctrines and opinions oſ men, the perverted and corrupt laws and methods of demonſtration, or elſe are inherent in the very conſtitution of the mind itſelf. Your firſt labour ſhould therefore be to liberate the mind from falſe theories; the next ſhould be to releaſe it from the ſlavery of perverted demonſtrations; and the laſt to put a check upon it's oun ſeductive powers, and either pluck out the inherent idols, or Dio watch over them that the depravities they occaſion may be corrected. It is a long time before we can be brought to ſee any thing amiſs in the way we have been uſed to; and even when we do, it is not caſy to change what is wrong. Where there is a chain of prejudice or wrong lias on the underſtanding, it will neither perceive clearly, nor adhere firmly, to the truth; it will confound things that are different, and obſcure things that are clear. The taſk is difficult, but the reward is great, It is therefore incumbent on every philoſopher to cultivate a diſpoſition of mind, which will make him open ro conviction, and ready to acknowledge and rectify miſtakes. An obſtinate adherence to error generally ariſes from ſelf-conceit, or a bigotted attachment to a ſyſtem. True wiſdom is ever accompanied with diſfidence and humility, Lord Bacon divides the unfavourable prepoſſeſſions of the mind into four claſſes; the rpoLs OF THE TRIBE, IDOLS OF THE DEN, IDOLS OF THE MARKET, IDOLS OF THE THEATRE. * The idols of ihe tribe are thoſe which are common to all men, ſuch as beſet the whole ſpecies; they ariſe ſrom the principles of the human conſtitution, and may have their uſes in the preſent ſtate of human nature; but by exceſs, or defect, or wrong direction, lead us into much error. The human underſtanding reſembles a mirror of an irregular ſurface, which mixing it's own nature with the nature of things, diſtorts and perverts them. Philoſophers ſhould always endeavour to conceive things as forming part oſ the univerſe, and as having their appropriate oſfice and uſe therein; whereas they are too apt to conſider them only as they have ſome particular relation to the ſenſes, a way by which you vill never diſcover their ſyſtematical or coſmical uſe and qualities. The idols common to human nature are ſo numerous, that a few only of them can be conſidered in this place: of theſe the firſt is authority, f by which men are prone to be led too much in their opinions. It affixes, as it were, the ſeal of infallibility on theſe opinions, it bars the door of ſcience, and in a meaſure deſtroys the hopes of poſteritt. We ought ever to preſs forward, nor ever conceive that the labours of one man can have ſet limits to human knowledge, or hearken to thoſe, who, having erected an idolatrous temple to his fame, would have us ſtop and worſhip, nor preſume to paſs the boundaries they have marked for human reaſon.] H 4 There * Idola tribus, idola ſpecus, idola fori, idola theatri. t Reid on the Intellectual Powers of the Mind, 7. 653. ſ Young's Eſſay on the Powers and Mecuaniſm ot Nature There never was more neceſſitv than at preſent to point out the dangers ariſing ſrom the influence of authority, as you will find ſome philoſophers * requiring an implicit faith in the opinions they have adopted; not conſidering that while our know ledge remains imperfect, our opinions muſt be mingled with error. It is ſrom this implicit truſt upon the credit and blind errors of others, that ſpring all thoſe vulgar errors cheriſhed from age to age by the blindneſs of prejudice and inveteracy of habit. In all matters within our cogniſance, every man muſt be determined by his own final judgment, otherwiſe he does not act the part of a rational being. Authority may add weight to one ſcale, but man holds the ballance and judges what weight he ought to allow to authority. No claim can deprive us of this right, or excuſe us for neglecting to exerciſe it. Authority, however, has it's uſe; in the firſt part of life we have no other guide, and without a diſpoſition to receive implicitly what we are taught, we ſhould be incapable of inſtruction, and incapable of improvement. Even when judgment is ripe, there are many things in which we are incompetent judges. In ſuch matters it is moſt reaſonable to rely upon the authority of thoſe, w hom we believe to be competent and diſintereſted. In matters that we have acceſs to knov, authority always will have, and ought to have, more or leſs weight in proportion totheevidence on which our a The ſollowing paragraphs are ſpecimens among many of the undue inſluence given 10 names. ceSir Iſaac Newton is the perſon to whom we owe theſe obligations, and who is henceſorth to be conſidered as our only ſure guide and inſtructor. Again, e Newton has diſcovered the chaos, and ſeparated the light from the darkneſs; his inimitable work, the Mathematical Principles of Natural Philoſophy, contains the true aſtronomical faith; and thoſe uho reject it's doctrines are the worſt of heretics, as they ſhut their eyes againſt the cleareſi our judgment reſts, and the opinion we have of the judgment and candour of thoſe who diſffer from or agree with us. Our reſpect for authority may therefore be too great, or too ſmall. The modeſt man, conſcious oſ his own fallibility in judging, is in danger of yielding too much to authority; the arrogant, of giving too little. adly. The mind is apt to form imaginary relations. and to ſuppoſe a greater regularity and uniformity among things than what really exiſts. Our natural impatience is continually leading us to refer all events to certain general laws, and prevents our following the ſlow, but ſurc method of inveſtigation. And though many things in nature are in ſome meaſure ſingular, or extremely diſſimilar, the mind is ſeigning parallels, correſpondencies, and imaginary analogies, which have no exiſtence. Arguments from analogy readily preſent themſelves to a warm imagination, while thoſc that are deduced from experiment and obſervation require ſtrong exertions of the mind, and cannot be formed without attention and application. In the ſame manner we are apt to conceive a greater ſimplicity in nature, than there really is. To love ſimplicity, and to be pleaſed with it whereever we find it, is no imperſection, but the contrary. There is without doubt in every part of creation all the beautiful ſimplicity which is conſiſtent with the end for which it was made. The more we know, the more we diſcover the uniformity and ſimplicity in nature, when compared with the vaſt extent and variety of operations therein. But if we hope to diſcover how nature brings about it's ends merely from this principle, that it operates in the ſimpleſt and beſt way, we deceive ourſelves, and ſorget that the wiſdom operating in nature is more above the wiſdom of man, than man's wiſdom is above that of a child. It is indeed a maxim in philoſophy, we muſt not impute to many cauſes what can be efſfected by one; this principle is no doubt right, but how are ve to judge what is ſimple, or vhat is œconomical in nature? only by endeavouring to diſcover every thing that is neceſſary to the production of this effect, and muſt uſe in our explanation every cauſe thus diſcovered, whether they be many or few. It was believed for many ages, that all the variety of concrete bodics we find on this globe is reducible to four elements, of which they are compounded, and into which they may be reſolved. It was the ſimplicity oſ this theory, not any evidence ſrom fact, that made it ſo generally received; for the more it is examined, we ſind leſs ground to believe it. When a real cauſe is diſcovered, the ſame love of ſimplicity lcads men to attribute to it effects which are beyond it's province. A medicine that is ſound to be of great uſe in one diſtemper, cornmonly has it's virtues multiplied till it becomes a panacca. In other branches of knowledge the ſame thing oſten happens. When our attention is turned to any particular cauſe capable of producing remarkable effects, there is great danger of extending it's influence, upon ſlighr evidence, to things uich which it has no connection. We are in the dark vith regard to the real cauſes of the greater part of the phenomena of nature, and have, at the ſame time, an avidity to know them; hence ingenious men frame conjectures, which thoſe of weaker underſtandings take for truth. The fare is coarſe, but appetite makes it go down. 3dly. The mind, when it is once pleaſed with certaim things, has a natural tendency to draw all others to conſent and go along with them; and though the number oſ inſtances that make for the contrary is greater, yet it either does not attend to, or deſpiſes them, oſten rejecting them by ſome frivolous diſtinction, pointed out by a ſtrong and pernicious prejudice, in order to maintain the authority of it's ſirſt choice unviolated. Diagoras, on being ſhewed in the temple of Neptune many volive pictures, of ſuch as had eſcaped ſhipwreck, uas aſked by his guide whether he did not acknowledge the divine power? wiſely anſwered, Shett me, ſirſt, vhere thoſe are painted thal vere shipwreched after bavinug thus paid tbeir vocus ? Hence alſo in moſt caſes of ſuperſtition, as of aſtrology, dreams, judgments, &c. thoſe who find pleaſure in ſuch Kind of vanities, always obſerve uhere the event anſwers, but ſlight and paſe by the more frequent inſtances where it fails. The imagination is ſo captivated, that the powers of reaſon are incapable of ſreeing it from the enchantment. This miſchief diffuſes itſelf ſtill more ſubtilly in philoſophy and the ſciences, where that which has once pleaſed infects and ſubdues all other things, though much more ſubſtantial and valuable than itſclf. The mind is always alſo more moved and excited by affirmatives than by negatives, whereas it ſhould duly and equally yield to both. In raiſing of true axioms, negative inſtances have the greateſt force. * 4thly. The human intellect is moſt moved and captivated by thoſe things that ſtrike and enter it at once, ſilling and ſwelling che imagination; but for the reſt, it ſeigns and ſuppoſes them in an imerceptible manner to be like thoſe few that poſfeſs the mind. We have a general diſpoſition to meaſure things leſs known and familiar by thoſe that are better known and more familiar: whereas the underſtanding is ſlow, and unvilling to paſi la to remote and diſſimilar inſtances, whereby axioms are tried as it were by the ſire. This natural proneneſs to judge of things leſs known by thoſe that are ſamiliar and better known, muſt not, however, be altogether laid aſide, as it is the ſoundation of all analogical reaſoning, to which we are indebted for a great part of our knowledge. It is difſicult, however, to judge how far we may venture upon it. The objeſts of ſenſe engroſs our thoughts in the ſirſt part of life, and are moſt familiar through the whole of it. Hence in all ages men have been prone to give human paſſions, frailties, &c. to ſuperior intelligences. Hence the diſpoſition in men to materialiæae every thing, and to apply their notions of material objects to things of another nature. Ience the many crude and ill-digeſted theories on our ideas. * The miſtakes in common life, which are owing to this propenſity, are innumerable. Hence the ſelfiſn man thinks all pretences to benevolence and public ſpirit to be mere hypocriſy, and ſelf-deceit: while the generous and open-hearted eaſily believe fair pretences, and conſider men as better than they really are. sthly. Another idol of this tribe has it's origin in the natural reſtleſsneſs of the human underſtanding, aluays moving, but far too often to no purpoſe, as when it is in ſcarch oſ things beyond it's reach. There is not a greater ſource of error than in the miſapplication of our nobleſt intcllectual pouwer to purpoſes ſor which it is incompetent. The works of men, and the works of God, are not of the ſame order. The force of genius may enable a man perfectly to comprehend the former. What is contrived and executed by one man, may be perfectly underſtood by another. He may from from a part conjecture the whole, or from eſſfects may conjecture the cauſes, becauſe they are the effects of a wiſdom not ſuperior to his own. But the works of creation are contrived and executed by a power and wiſdom inſinitely ſuperior to that of man. And when men attempt, by the force of genius, to diſcover the cauſes oſ the phenomena in nature, they have only a chance of going wrong more ingeniouſly. Their conjectures may appear very probable to beings no wiſer than themſelves; but they have no chance to hit the truth. They are like the conjectures oſ a child, how a ſhip of war is built, and how it is managed at ſca. It gratifies the pride and natural propenſity of the human underſtanding; but it is an attempt beyond our ſorce, like that of Phaeton, to guide the chuot oſ the ſun. Iull liberty muſt be allowed to our inquiry, that natural philoſophy may acquire all the certainty and perſection of which it is capable; but we muſt not abuſe this liberty by ſuppoſing, inſtead of inquiring, by framing ſyſtems, inſtead of deducing the conſtitution of things from obſervation and experience. An attachment to ſyſtems prevents us from attending to the real ſtate of things, or makes us reject them, or interweave therewith our own conceits. Syſtems and hy potheſes in general, framed by philoſophers out of their own ideas, and ſeparated by the mind from the truth of things, were the bane of natural philoſophy, and for centuries oppoſed the advancement of ſcience. l  all inquiries into the conſtitution of nature, human genius may combine, but it muſt not fabricate. It may collect evidence, but it muit not ſupply the uant oſ it by conjecture. It may diſplay * Ibid. p. 669. Maclaurin's Account of Sir Iſaac Newton's diſplay its powers, by putting nature to the queſtion by well-contrived experiments; but it muſi add nothing to her anſu ers. 6thly. Another impediment and deviation oſ the underſtanding ariſes from the dullneſs, incompetency, and fallacies of the ſenſes. Hence the things that ſtrike the ſenſe, unjuſtly overballance thoſe that do not ſtrike it immediately. So that contemplation uſually ends with ſight, and little or no obſervation is made oſ things INVISIBLE. Hence all the operations of the difſcrent airs included in tangible bodies, all ſubtil organizations, and the motion of the parts, are unknown to mankind; yet unleſs tbey are diſcovered and brought to light, no great progreſs can be made in the knowledge of nature; for it is by ſubtil matters in motion that her chief operations are performed. Nor can inſtruments for improving and ſharpening the ſenſes be here of any great ſervice; for all true interpretations of nature are made by appoſite inſtances and experiment, where ſenſe judges of the experiment only, and the experiment judges of nature and the fact. Idols of the den. Theſe are prejudices that take their riſe, not from the conſtitution oſ human nature, but from ſomething peculiar to every individual, from education, cuſtom, and a variety of other circumſtances. Our excellent logician, Lord Bacon, ſeems to have taken this appellation from Plato's beautiful emblem of the cave; for if any one ſhould, in his infancy, be educated in a dark cave, remaining there till he was of full age, and ſhould then of a ſudden be brought into broad daylight, and behold the apparatus of heaven and earth, no doubt many ſtrange and abſurd thoughts would ariſe in his mind. And though we Iive, indeed, in the view of heaven, our minds are confined in the caverns of our bodies, where we receive infinite images of error and falſehood, if we do not conſtantly dwell in the contemplation oſ nature, as it were, in the open day-light. This emblem of Plato agrees well with the ſaying ofſ Heraclitus, That men ſeek the ſciences in thbeir ouwn narrow world, not in the wide one. Further, as in a cave objects vary their appearance according to the form of the cave, and it's manner of receiving the light; ſo I ord BEacon conceives the mind of every man to reſemble a cave, which has it's particular form and particular manner of being enlightened, and which from theſe circumſtances often gives falſe colours, and a deluſive appearance to objects ſeen in it. Hence the perverſion and miſapplication of reaſon, and the abuſe of learning, become the ſource of many errors. Under this head you may reckon the reaſoning from no priuciples at all; the reaſoning from ibe principles of one branch of learning in the method of another; the reaſoning ſrom the principles of one to the truths of ancther; or laſtly, the expecting the ſame kind and degree of conviction in the truths of one, which belaung to another, and which it does not admit. Theſe ſour cauſes ariſing from the abuſe of learning will account for many ſcientific errors. However various the errors oſ the learned may appear to be, they all originate either in the pride or prejudice of the human mind; for according to the obſervation of Lord Bacon, of oppoſite errors, the cauſes of erring are commonly the ſame. Though it may appear abſurd that any one ſhould reaſon from no principle at all, yet is it an error of great and extenſive influence. Great are the powers of the human mind, but her preſumption is ſtill greater. Not content to be employed upon ſuch principles and materials as are provided for her uſe by Providence, and the natural ſtate ofſ things, in a ſſow and ſober exerciſe, vainly preſuming, by an action and operation of her oun, to invent others oſ a ſuperior order, by whoſe aſſiſtance ſhe may ſoar with a rapid wing into the poſſeſſion of the ſublimeſt truths; buoyed up into the air by theſe ſelf-inventions, ſhe attempts unbounded flights into the fertile but deluſive regions oſ imagination. Hence we oſten ſee philoſophers led by trains of ſolid reaſoning to the temple of ſplendid and deluſive errors. The other three cauſes juſt enumerated have their origin in prejudice ariſing from partial and inveterate habiis. Man is altogether the creature of babit; all his virtues are habits; all his vices are habits; habit has it's ſway alſo over his mind both in the elegant and ſcientiſic parts of lcarning. As the ear is prepared and qualiſied by habit for the enjoyment of muſic, the eye for that of painting, and every other part of the mental and corporeal ſrame adapted to it's proper object; ſo is the mind prepared and quali ſied by habit for the ſearch and reliſh of every kind of truth. But this ſame habit, which is the ſriend to all knowledge, by being too long and too cloſely confined to the ſame object, employments, and purſuits, generates a prcjudice, and confirms a partialit which generally cramps and confines, and oſten weakens and deſtroys the powers of the mind. Being addicted to one ſet of principles, habituated to one train of reaſoning, and accuſtomed to one ſpecies of concluſions, they are diſqualified by the very habits of ſtuting, reaſoning, and concluding, and by their very ſucceſs in ſome parts of learning, from proſecuting truth in others.* Men are fond oſ particular ſciences and ſtudies, either when they believe themſelves the authors authors or inventors thereof, or becauſe they have beſtowed much pains upon them, or applied themſelves thereto. A man whoſe thoughts have been confined to a certain track by his profeſſion, or manner of life, is very apt to judge wrong when he ventures out of that track. He is apt to draw every thing within the ſphere of his profeſſion, to wreſt and corrupt every new contemplation with his habitual idea, and to judge oſ things by maxims which have no relation to them. Ariſtotle furniſhes us with a ſignal example of the foregoing obſervations; he made his natural philoſophy ſuch a ſlave to his logic, as to render it contentious, and in a great manner uſeleſs. The mere malhematician is apt to apply meaſure and calculation to things incapable of being meaſured: direct and inverſe ratios have been applied to meaſure human aſffections, and the moral worth of actions. An eminent mathematician attempted to aſcertain, by calculation, the ratio in which the evidence ofſ facts muſt decreaſe in the courſe of time, and ſixed the period when the evidence of the ſacts, on vwhich chriſtianity is founded, ſhall become evaneſcent; and when in conſequence no ſaith ſhall be ſound on the earth. The ancient cbemiſts were vont toexplain all the myſteries oſ nature, and even of religion, by ſalt, ſulphur, and mercury. The great and radical difterence of caprci:ies as to philoſophy and the ſciences, lies, ſays our noble author, in this; that ſome are ſtronger and fitter to obſerve the differences of things, others to obſerve their correſpondences. Aſſteady and ſuarp genius can fix its contemplations, and dwell and ſaſten upon all the ſubtilty oſ difſerences. While a ſublime genius, with a quick conception, perceives and compares the ſmalleſt and moſt gencral agrecment of things: both Kinds caſily ſalling into exceſs; the one by graſping at the dividing ſcale, the other by embracing the ſhadous of things. To contemplate nature and bodies in their ſimplicity, breaks and grinds the underſtanding; to conſider them in their configurations and compoſitions, blunts and relaxes it. The former is ſo taken up with the particles of things, as almoſt to neglect their ſtructure: while the other views the fabrication with ſo nruch aſtoniſhment, as not to enter into the ſimplicity of nature. Both theſe kinds of contemplation ſhould thereſore be taken up by turns, that the underſtanding may at the ſame time be piercing and capacious, and the above-mentioned inconveniences with the idols thence ariſing may be prevented. Different perſons, either from temper or education, have difſerent tendencies of underſtanding, which by their exceſs are very unſavourable to ſound judgment. Some men of genius are wrapped up in the admiration of antiquity, and contempt of whatever is modern; others go as far into the contrary extreme, and are delighted only with what is novel. Some either quarrel with what was juſtly laid down by the ancients, or deſpiſe what is juſtly advanced by the moderns. The unballanced mind of man is alwas ſhifting from one exceſs into another, and rarcly knows to ſuſtain itſelf in that juſt mean which right reaſon and pure religion demand. It is inconceivable to thoſe who are only acquainted with the preſent ſtate of the learncd world, to what an abſurd height this attachment to antiquity uas formerly carried. Both extremes are highly prejudicial to philoſophy and the iciences, as being rather an aflectation of antiquil) and novelty, than any trucjudgment. For truth is not to be derived ſrom any ĩclicity of rimes, which is an uncertain. thing, but from the light of nature and experience, which iscternal. Thelc aſſectations àre therefore to he laid aſide, and care be taken that the underſta.ding be not hurried away with them. Let contemplative prudence, ſays our incomparable author, proceed in chaſing and diſlodging the idols oſ tbe den, and learn to ſuſpect whatever powerfully ſtrikes and detains the mind, uſing then reater caution to preſerve your underſtanding pure and equable. A ſpirit oſ prejudice and prepoſſeſſion is very detrimental to philoſophy, it admits of no improvement but what it brings from it's own fund. When a man has ſtrongly imbibed any particular notions, he inveſtigates nature not to receive information, but to find ſupport for his own opinions. Alove of novelty is alſo very injurious to real truth; the knowledge of any truth apprehended as uſeſui to manckind, is pleaſing to the mind, and our cagerneſs to enjoy this pleaſure makes us oſten entertain a perſuaſion of knowing a thing before we really do, or upon a very weuk ground. I is therefore dangerous to paſs a judgment upon a new diſcovery while it is new; we ſhould wait until time has abated the ſueetneſs of nov elty, and given ſcope ſfor reflection to flov in from different quarters. The proper ſpirit for inveſtigation, is humility, ſobriety, calm conſideration, attentive induſtry, and perſeverance. Lord Bacon ſhews, that of various prejudices, there are none ſo troubleſome as the idols oſ the market, which inſinuate themſelves into the mind from the aſſociation of words and terms, the imperfections and the abuſe of language. Language can reach no further than our notions; and if theſe be vague and ill-defineti, the words by which we expreſs them muſt be ſo likewiſe. A ſtronger inſtance of the abuſe of words can ſcarce be found than in the nomenclature of the French chemiſts, deſigned to prepare the mind for ſlavery by e babbling a dialect of France. For though men believe, ſays Lord Bacon, their reaſon governs words; it alſo happens, that words retort and reflect their force upon the underſtanding; whence philoſophy and the ſciences have been rendered ſophiſtical and inactive. Words are generally impoſed according to vulgar conceptions, and divide things by lines, i. e. diſtinctions or differences, that are moſt apparent to the underſtanding of the multitude: and when a more acute underſtanding, or a more careful obſervation, would remove theſe lines, to place them according to nature, words cry out, and forbid the alteration. Hence it happens that ſerious diſputes frequently terminate in controverſies about words and terms, which it were better to reduce to order by definitions. But in natural and material things, even theſe definitions cannot remedy the evil, becauſe definitions themſelves conſiſt of wvords, and words generate words; ſo that of neceſſity recourſe muſt be had to particular inſtunces, their ſeries and orders. The fourth kind of prejudices mentioned by. our author are the idols of the theotre, which are neither conſtitutional nor ſecretly inſinuated into the underſtanding, but palmed upon it, received from fabulous theories and perverted demonſtrations, ariſing ſrom the ſyſtems or ſects in which ue have been traincd, or which ue have adopted. A falſe ſyſtem once fixed in the mind, becomes as it were the medium through which we ſce objects; they receive a tincture from it, and appear of a different colour ſrom what-they do uwhen viewed by the pure light. ĩn Lord Bacon's method oſ ſtudying philoſophy there is no neceſſity for confuting the various theories; yet that the paſſage to truth may be made eaſier, und the underſtanding the more diſpoſed to cleanſe itſelf, and put away it's idols, without which true philoſophy can never be effectually promoted, (for the ſciences formed by diſtempered minds will partake of their diſtempers,]) he has claſſed ſome of the more ancient kind, and given ſome account of them. He claſſes them all under three heads: 1ſt. The Sophiſtical: ad. Empirical: and 3d. Superſtitious. The firſt are the ſopbiſtical, who haſtily take up vulgar things from experience, without aſcertaining their certainty, or carefully examining and weighing them, committing all the reſt of the work to thought and the diſcuſſion of the wit: theſe he compares to ſpiders, who form their webs from their own bouels to catch unwary inſects in their aerial flights. Common obſervation and obvious experiments are not of themſelves ſuſficient for the foundation oſ a ſerviceable philoſophy; nor is the common logic an engine at all ſuited to deal with experiments, obſervation, and nature. Of theſe we have an eminent example in Ariſtotle, who corrupted natural pbiloſophy with his logic. Hę ſeemed to be morẽ ſolſicitous how men might defend themſelves by anſwers, and advance ſomething that ſhould be poſitive in words, than to come at the inward truth of nature; and where he had experience for his guide, to wind her round, and lead her captive to his opinions. Now as the education of the great ſchools is chieſly Ariſtotelian, we ſhould have a ſtrict watch upon ourſelves in ail philoſophical inquiries, writings, and diſcourſes, that we are not led away with Ariſtotelian notions. All our common reaſoning ſeems infected with Ariſtotelian prejudices, ſo as to be affectedly logical and captious, rather than juſt and philoſophical, or ſormed upon the true nature oſ things. The empirical philoſophers are thoſe, who labour with great diligence and accuracy, in a ſew cxperiments; and then venture to deduce theories and build up ſyſtems, ſtrangely wreſting every thing clſe to theſe experiments. Bacon compares them to inſects gathering up grain, and laying it by as they found it. IThe opinions produced by theſe arc more deformed and monſtrous than thoſc oſ the ſophiſtical kind, as not being founded in the light of vulgar notions (which are in ſome degree general and univerſal); but reſt in the narrow confines and obſcurities of a few experiments: whence ſuch a philoſophy appears probable, and in a manner certain, to the men who daily converſe with theſe experiments, and thereby deprave their imagination; vhilſt to others the theories appear incredible and vain. Of this you will find examples in moſt of the ancient chemical writers, in Gilbert's magnetical philoſophy, and that of many moderns, ſome oſ whom reſolve all diſſiculties by attraction, others by repulſion, &c. You can never uſe too great caution on this head, for the underſtanding is always eager, and precipitated by it's deſire of bounding or flying to general and firſt principles; thus forming theories on very ſceble ground. The infinite variety of natural objects, the ſtupendous coincidence by which all agree and all diſſer, muſt convince you, that no vigouroſ judgment, or warmth of fancy, is equal to the tracing oſ every phenomenon to it's ſirſt principles, or ſorming an hypotheſis adequate to explaining all the operations in nature. There is alſo danger ſrom ſuperſtition and theology (though much leſs ſo than heretoſore); for the underſtanding is as ſubject to the impreſſions oſ fancy as thoſe oſ vulgar notions: by the former it is flattered and courted, and thereſore deceived. We meet with this in all theories, where ſirſt and ſinal cauſes are introduced, and the intermediate ones omitred. We ſhould e careſul in this caſe that we be not led thereby to canonive error, and venerate vanities. Some modern writers have ſo far indulged this ſtrange levity, as to endeavour the founding of natural philoſophy upon the firſt chapter of Geneſis, and other parts oſ ſacred writ; thus seelking the dead among the liviug. Che true philoſopher, Lord Bacon compares to the bee, that gathers the matters from the nowers oſ the ſield, from which with admirable ſkill ſhe makes her honev. Fle neither truſts wholly ro his own underſtanding, nor contents himſelf with recording the hiſtors of mechanical experiments; but by reaſoning ſcilſully ſrom them brings forth truth and ſcience, the great and noble production oſ the human faculties. He very properly reprchends thoſe, who, upon a weak conceit of ſobriety, or ill-applied moderation, thought or maintained that a man can ſcarch too far, or be too well ſtudicd in the book of God's 2ord, or in the book of Ged's vuerâs; but rather he ſays, let men awake themſelves, and chearfully endeavour to purſue an endleſs progreſs and proſiciency in both; only let them beuare, leſt they apply knowledge to pride inſtead of charity, to oſtentation inſtead of uſe. He alſo obſerves, that in the entrance oſ philoſophy, when the ſecond cauſes, moſt obvious to the ſenſes, oſſer themſelves to the mind, we are apt to cleave unto and duell too much upon them, ſo as to forget what is ſuerior thereto: but when we paſs further, and behold the dependence, continuance, and confederacy of cauſes, and the works of providence; then, according to the allegory of the poets, we eaſily believe that the higheſt link of natures chain muſt needs be ticd to the foot of Jupiters chair, or perceive that philoſophy, like Jaucobs viſion, diſcovers to us a ladder, whoſe top rea hes up to the footſtool oſ the throne of Gob. Falſe ſchemes of natural philoſophy may lead to atheiſm, or ſuggeſt opinions concerning the Deity, and the univerſe, of the moſt dangerous conſequences to mankind: and you have the more reaſon to be on your guard on this head, as the philoſophers of France have, for many years, been perverting it to the moſt dire and malignant purpoſes. True philoſophy will lead you to believe in, and adore, the Supreme Being; and as it continually exhibits brighter and brighter inſtances of his wiſdom and power, it removes alſo, in part, that veil ſpread over nature, which conceals ſrom our view it's awful depths and majeſtic heights; and thus enables you to ſee the glories of the Almighty ſhining in this nis exalted creation, and hence inſtructs you to raiſe your voice in praiſes to HIM, who is alone worthy to receive glory and honour and power; for it is by Him that all things were created. and it is by Him that they are continually preſerved. c That ONE great and univerſal MIND, who made all things by his power, and preſerves them in his goodneſs, is the firſt and only cauſe, operating at all times and in all places, and producing, by an excrtion of his will, all the various phenomena of the material ſyſtem. This firſt and univerſal cauſe, however, in the ordinary adminiſtration of his providence, hath condeſcended to employ ſecond cauſes as the inſtruments of his will, by which he acts; which ſecond cauſes Hi: hath alſo appointed in his wiſdom to operate through every art of his creation by general lats. To trace the hand of the ALMIGHTY through all his works, to inveſtigate theſe general cauſes, and to erect them into the laæs of phyſics, is the ſublime, the delectable, and honqurable employment of the natural philoſopher. * . . . To o See Tatham's admirable worh, entitled, Scale and Chart ol To explain, thereſore, with certainty the phenomena of nature, to remove their obſcurities, and obſerve their influence and connection, is the great buſineſs oſ philoſophy; for this purpoſe the obſerver muſt obtain certain fixed points, which may ſerve as ſignals to conduct him in the difficult path he has undertaken, and prevent his wandering too far from the main road. Phyſical logic does not conſiſt in argument, but in diſcovering facts, not what agrees with principles, but the principles themſelves. There is a meaning and deſign in every operation of nature. The natural philoſopher endeavours to diſcover this meaning, and interpret theſe deſigns by a cureful obſervation of her ſteps; but if the mind haſtily imbibes, and without diſcrimination treaſures up the firſt notices of things, error will ever prevail and remain uncorrected; for if theſe primary notices are vitiated, confuſed, or inaccurate, thoſe derived ſrom them vill be equally defective, and the know ledge built thereon like a magni ficent ſtructure on a bad foundation The philoſopher, therefore, avoids the demonſtration of ſyllogiſm, becauſe it continually lets nature and reality ſlip through it's fingers, and wreſts the works thereof to make them ſquare with the works of men; whereas the works oſ men ought to be ſubmitted and formed according to the works oſ nature; ſo that logical demonſtrations applied to phyſical matters are only the play of words. He theresore takes induction for the form of demonſtration, as it guards the ſenſes, preſſes nature cloſe, and rules over her works. Inſtead of flying immediately from the ſenſes, and particulars to generals, (about which diſputes always turned) and deriving intermediate principles from theſe in a ſhort but precipitate manner, a manner fit for controverſy, but untlit to cloſe with nature, he endeavours to raiſe propoſition by degrees, and thus arrive at gencial axiom: axioms not notional, but well defined, and ſuc as are conſormable to the nature of things. Axioms raiſed, ſays Lord Bacon by argumentation can never be uſeful in diſcovering neu works; for there is no mode of raiſing axioms but by a legitimate and proper form oſ induction capable of Teparating experience, and concluding of neceſſity aſter all the proper rejections and excluſions are made. Beginning then with phenomena, the philofopher endeavours to trace out the proximate cauſes, and riſing gradually from particular cauſes, he proceeds to the more gencral, and ſo on by fure and uninterrupted ſteps, man comes without ſtop or gap to the top round, or unity of nature; from whenee he may deſcend in a contrary order, and from eſtabliſhed principles explain the phenomena derived from them. In no other mode can we be ſure that we aſſume the principles which really obtain in nature, or that any ſyſtem we may compoſe, is not mere dream and illuſion. Thus you ſee that the proceſs of induction is an aſcent from particular premiſes to general coneluſion. The evidence oſ ſuch general concluſion is only probable, not demonſtrative; yet if the induction be ſuſſiciently copious and properly conducted, it forces conviction as ſtrongly as demonſtration. Mere reaſoning vill carrę a man but a very little way in moſt ſubjects; but by obſervation and experiments properly conducted, the ſtock of human know ledge may be continually enlarged. Before the philoſopher ſorms his judgment, he muſt, by accurate experiments, and diligent obſervations, ſearch out how ſar the phenomenon he is inveſtigating is inſluenced by others, and this in all poſſible caſes and circumſtances, by what modifications it is affected, and in whar proportion it is combined and connected with other eifects: he will thus endeavour to obtain an exact notion of the object of his reſearches, and marching ſblidly towards truth, he will interrogate nature with ſucceſs; being careſul to ſtop where no experimental proof can be procured, and not preſuming where the ſubtilty of nature carri s things out of his reach; for he might as well pretend to build without materials, as to form without obſervation and experiment a rational ſyſtem of natural ſcience. General principles cannot be eſtabliſhed with ſolidity, without numerous experiments, and manvy obſcrvations on the ſame individual ſubject, and chen on diſferent ſubjects of the ſame ſpecies: their probability is greater as the obſervations on which they are fouhded are more numerous, and accurately performed: all exceptions being then made, a ſound and ſerviceable portion of truth will be leſt behind as a general axiom. c By a repetition of the ſume induſtrious proceſs and laborious inveſtigation, he advances from general to more general, till at laſt he is able to form a few of the moſt general, with their attributes and operations, into axioms, or ſecondary principles, which are the well-founded lats enacted and enforced by the God of nature. Having diſcovered any of theſe laws or cauſes, it becomes the buſineſs oſ philoſophy to trace them in all their effects, and to predict ſimilar appearances from ſimilar previous ſituations. The philoſopher, by knowing what will be thc reſult of putting things into a variety of circumſtances, becomes maſter of the pouers of nature and can apply them to uſeſul purpoſes oſ life; and thus does knowledge, as Lord Bacon obſerves, become power. The ancient logic, ſar ſrom correcting what was wrong, ſerved rather to fix error in the mind than open the way to truth. Loꝶrb Bacons had to begin anew, and lay down ſuch rules ſor the workings of the mind, as would never leave it to itſelf; as if the buſineſs was to be performed by a machine (an organum), which would ſettle the degrees of certainty, and contrive ſuch ways of ſubmitting things to the ſenſes, as that a true judgment might be formed concerning them. Being convinced by careful obſervation, that the human underſtanding perplexes itſelf, and does not make a ſober and advantageous uſe of the real helps vithin it's reach; and that this occaſioned maniſold ignorance and many inconveniences; he employed his utmoſt endeavours to reſtore and cultivate a juſt and legitimate familiarity between the mind and things, by raiſing a new art, in which reaſon and experience ſhould be joined together for the improvement of philoſophy. This eſtabliſument of a new logic is called, by our author, tbe art of interpreting nature. The end of the new logic is, as we beſore obſerved, to find not arguments but arts; not what agrees with principle, but principles themſelves; not probable rcaſons, but plans and deſigns of vorks; a different intention produces a different eſſect. In one the adverſary is conquered by diſpute, in the other nature by works. And ſuitable to this difference of the deſign, is the nature and order of the demonſtrations, which here is purely inductive. Thoſe thereſore who determine not to conjecture, but to find out and knou, not to invent fubles and romances of worlds, but to look into and diſſect the nature of this real world, muſt only conſult things themiſelves. Nor can any force of genius, ſtretch of thought, or ſubtilty of argument, be ſubſtituted for labour, ſearch, and inſpection. The knowledge and power of man are coincident; for while he is ignorant of cauſes, he can produce no effects. Nature is only to be conquered by ſubmiſſion, by condeſcending to inquire into and obſerving her methods of working, as a ſervant would learn thoſe of his maſter. No power of man can break the natural chain of cauſes; ſo that the only method whereby man can rule nature, muſt depend upon learning her ways. And good hopes can only then be conceived of the ſcience, when by continued ſteps, like real ſtairs uninterrupted or unbroken, men ſhall aſcend from particulars to leſſer axioms, and ſo on to middle ones, and from theſe again to higher, and laſtly, to the higheſt of all; and thus diſcover the formsor active laws of nature, by which all tbings exiſi and bave tbeir effects. To the diſcovery of theſc laws we are continually directed by Lord Bacon, as to a thing that alone will conſtitute a juſt and univerſal theory, and direct to an extenſive practice. IHis Inſtauration, or ſcheme for rebuilding arts and ſciences, depends upon the diſcovery of forms. But theſe forms or laws can be truly inveſtigated by no other means than that of induction. It is therefore of the utmoſt importance in philoſophy to aſcertain, as accurately as poſſible, the general pouers in nature, to determine their cauſes, and trace their conſequences; for as the phenomena of nature are infinite, and the faculties of the human mind are limited, theſe phenomena, vwhen coniidered as unconnected with other ſacts, convey but little inſtruction. The infinite not being the object of ſcience, till the forms or laus oſ nature be hnoun, by carefulobſervation and accurate induction, no progreſs can be made in natural philolſophy Hence the neceſſity of collating and connecting correſponding ſacts, and the advantage of reducing them to certain axioms, and applying theſe to account for other phenomena; that we may at laſt advance to a knouledge of the moſt general laws that regulate the ſyſtem of operations in nature. But though we may be warranted to conſider all the phenomena that we ſind connected with theſe general laws, and manifeſtly depending upon them, as ſo many facts explained, ſo many truths knoun and underſtood; yet we ought not to overlook ſuch phenomena, as are not reducible to thoſe general principles; but ſhould view them as ſimple and ſeparate facts, and treaſure them up till a more enlarged experience, and more accurate obſervation lead us to the diſcovery of thoſe powers oſ nature to which they are to be referred. This method of reaſoning founded on experiments and obſervation, by which the general ideas and forms of natural philoſophy are invented, is purely and excluſively inductive. The ſchools are not the theatre in which this philoſophical logic is diſplayed. It does not delight in external appearances and oſtentatious ſormality. It retires ſrom the clamour õf verbal diſputation into the retreat oſ the elaboratory and obſcrvatory, vhere in ſilent inveſtigation it lays the foundation of ſubſtantia learning; and as it mixes with experiment and obſervation, it is incapuble of being adequately deſcribed by words, but is beſt ſecn and underſtood by atrending it in the act, and purfuing it through every ſtage of the analy tical progreſſion. * After men had laboured in the ſearch of truth near 2000 vears by the help of ſyllogiſms, Lora Bacon propoſed the method of indiction as a morc eſſectual engine for that purpoſe. Iis Nocvums Orgauum ganum gave a nevw, uſeſul, and remarkable turn to the thoughts and labours of the inquiſitive, and may be conſidered as forming a grand æra in the progreſs of human reaſon. Neither experience nor experiment muſt, however, be conſidered as ſuch infallible guides, as to juſtify our refuſing information ſrom any other quarter: for they never make us thorough maſters of the ſubject. We may know enough for our preſent uſes, but can never know that there is not more to be learnt, beſides what we have diſcovered. We can only obſerve what effects they work upon our ſenſes, or upon one another, and from thence induce imperfectly the powers belonging to them, and cauſes operating upon them, but can make no juſt deduction that there are not other powers and cauſes whoſe eſfects we have never yet experienced. The greateſt part of human knou ledge reſts upon probable evidence. Indeed we can have no other for general truths, which are contingent in their nature, and depend upon the will and ordination of the maker of the world. He governs the world he has made by general laws. The eſffects of theſe laws in particular phenomena, are open to our obſervation, and by obſerving a train of uniform eſfects with due caution, we may at laſt decypher the law of nature by which theyare regulated. Such is the genuine logic of phyſical learning, which has before it ſuch a vaſt extent and variety of ground, as is ſufficient to employ the joint and ęonfederated labours of philoſophy oſ different ages and countries, aſſiſted by the largeſt collection and beſt arrangement oſ natural hiſtory, which is the proper foundation oſ natural philoſophy. From this ground experience takes it's ſlow but ſteady courſe; it firſt, ſays Lord Bacon, lights the the candle, and then by that candle ſhews the way, beginning with regular and well conducted experiments. not ſuch as are vague and prepoſterous, from whence it derives axioms; and then from axioms well eſtabliſhed deſcends to new experiments. c But however numerous and extenſive the experiments and obſervations may be, they muſt oſ neceſſity come ſhort of the number and extent of nature, which in fome caſes will defeat all poſſibility of their coextenſion, and in others, by it's diſtance, lies out of the reach of their immediate application. In order, therefore, to make his law of general uſe, and ſtretch it over the whole extent of nature, the philoſopher is obliged to have recourſe to analogy, by which he can lengthen out his inductions, which are properly confined to the number of experiments and obſervations actually made, to all others of the ſame kind; concluding the axiom to hold good of all, and that not only for the preſent, but alſo for the future, till it be either confirmed and rectified, or elſe contradicted by better experiments, and a more extenſive and complete induction. For if in reaſoning about natural things, we were confined wholly to experience, our knou ledge muſt fall ſhort of being general, for it would be confined to thoſe alone on which we made our experiments.  This is that juſt and philoſophic method of reaſoning, which ſound logic preſcribes in this, as well as in other parts oſ learning; by which, through the ſſow but certain road of experiment and obſervation, the mind aſcends from appearances to qualities, from effects to cauſes; and, by a fair induction from many particular ſubjects extended by analogy, forms general propoſitions concerning the powers and properties of phy ſical bodies. What can faisly be deduced from facts duly obſerved, or ſufficiently atteſted, is genuine and pure; it is the voice of Gob, and no fiction of human imag ination. The view of nature, which is the immediate object of ſenſe, is very imperfect, and of a ſmall extent; but by the aſſiſtance of art, and the help of our reaſon, is enlarged till it loſes itſelf in an infinity on either hand. The immenſity of things on the one ſide, and their minuteneſs on the other, carry them equally out of our reach, and conceal fróõm us the far greater and more noble part of phyſical operations. As magnitude of every ſort, abſtractly conſidered, is capable of being increaſed to infinity, and is alſo diviſible without end; ſo we find that, in nature, the limits of the greateſt and leaſt dimenſions of things are actually placed at an immenſe diſtance from each other. We can perceive no bounds of the vaſt expanſe in which natural cauſes operate, and can fix no border or termination of the univerſe; and we are equally at a loſs when we endeavour to trace things to their elements, and to diſcover the limits which conclude the ſubdiviſions of matter. The objects which we commonly call great, vaniſh when we contemplate the vaſt body of the earth: the terraqueous globe itſelf is ſoon loſt in the ſolar ſyſtem: in ſome parts it is ſeen as a diſtant ſtar: in great part it is unknown, or viſible only at rare times to vigilant obſervers, aſſiſted, perhaps, with an art like to that by which Galileo was enabled to diſcover ſo many new parts of the ſyſtem. The ſun itſelf dwindles into a ſtar; Saturn's vaſt orbit, and the orbits of all comets, croud into a point, when viewed from numberleſs places between the earth and the neareſt fixed ſtars. Other ſuns kindle light to illuminate other ſyſtems, where our ſun's rays are unperceived; but they alſo are ſwallowed up in the vaſt expanſe. Even all the ſyſtems of the ſtars that ſparkle in the cleareſt ſcy, muſt poſſeſs a ſmall corner only of that ſpace over which ſuch ſyſtems are diſperſed, ſince more ſtars are diſcovered in one conſtellation by the teleſcope, than the naked eye perceives in the whole heavens. After we have riſen ſo high, and left all definite meaſures ſo far behind us, we find ourſelves no nearer to a term or limit; for all this is nothing to what may be diſplayed in the infinite expanſe, beyond the remoteſt ſtars that ever have been diſcovered. If we deſcend in the ſcale of nature towards the other limit, we find a like gradation from minute objects to others incomparably more ſubtil, and are led as far below ſenſible meaſures as we were before carried above them, by ſimilar ſteps that ſoon become hid to us in equal obſcuritt We have ground to believe, that theſe ſubdiviſions of matter have a termination, and that the elementary particles of bodies are ſolid and uncompounded, ſo as to undergo no alteration in the various operations of nature or of art. But from microſcopical obſervations that diſcover animals, thouſands of which could ſcarce form a particle perceptible to the unaſſiſted ſenſe, each of which has it's proper veſſels, and fluids circulating in thoſe veſſels; from the propagation, nouriſhment, and growth of thoſe animals; from the ſubtilty of the effluvia of bodies retaining their particular properties after ſo prodigious a rarifaction; from many aſtoniſhing experiments of chemiſts; and eſpecially ſrom the inconceivable minuteneſs of the particles of light, that find a paſſage equally in all directions through the pores of tranſparent bodies, and from the contrary properties of the different ſides of the ſame ray; it appears, that the ſubdiviſions of the particles of bodies deſcend by a number of ſteps or degrees that ſurpaſſcs all imagination, and that nature is inexhauſtible by us on every ſide. Nor is it in the magnitude of bodies only that this endleſs gradation is to be obſerved. Of motions, ſome are performed in moments of time, others are finiſhed in very long periods; ſome are too ſlow, and others too ſwift, to be perceptible by us. The tracing the chain of cauſes is the moſt noble purſuit of philoſophy; but we meet with no cauſe but what is itſelf to be conſidered as an effect, and are able to number but few links of the chain. In every kind of magnitude, there is a degree or ſort to which our ſenſe is proportioned, the perception and knowledge of which is of the greateſt uſe to mankind. The ſame is the ground work of philoſophy; for though all ſorts and degrees are equally the object of philoſophical ſpeculation, yet it is from thoſe which are proportioned to ſenſe that a philoſopher muſt ſet out in his inquiries, aſcending or deſcending aſterwards as his purſuits may require. He does well indeed to take his views from many points of ſight, and ſupply the defects of ſenſe by a well-regulated imagination; nor is he to be confined by any limit in ſpace or time: but as his know ledge of nature is founded on the obſervation of ſenſible things, he muſt begin with theſe, and muſt often return to them to examine his progreſs by them. Here is his ſecure hold; and as he ſets out from thence, ſo if he likewiſe trace not often his ſteps bac kward with caution, he will be in hazard of loſing his way in the labyrinths oſ nature. From this ſhort view of nature, and of the ſituation of man, conſidered as a ſpectator of it's phenomena, and as an inquirer into it's conſtitution, we may form ſome judgment of the project oſ thoſe, who, in compoſing their ſyſtems, begin at the ſummit of the ſcale, and then by clear ideas pretend to deſcend through all it's ſteps with great pomp and facility, ſo as in one view to explain all things. The proceſſes in experimental philoſophy are carried on in a different manner; the beginnings are leſs loſty, but the ſcheme improves as we ariſe from particular obſervations to more general and more juſt views. It muſt be owned, indeed, that philoſophy would be perfect, if our view of nature, from the common objects of ſenſe to the limits of the univerſe upwards, and to the elements of things dounwards, was complete; and the powers or cauſes that operate in the whole were known. But if we compare the extent of this ſcheme with the powers of mankind, we ſhall be obliged to allow the neceſſity of taking it in parts, and of proceeding with all the caution and care we are capable of, in inquiring into each part. When we perceive ſuch wonders, as naturaliſts have diſcovered, in the minuteſt objects, ſhall we pretend to deſcribe ſo eaſily the productions of infinite power in ſpace, that is at the ſame time infinitely extended and infinitely diviſible! Surely we may rather imagine, that in the whole there will be matter for the inquiries and perpetual admiration of much more perſect beings. It is not, therefore, the buſineſs of philoſophy, in our preſent ficuation in the univerſe, to attempt to take in at once, in one view, the whole ſcheme of nature; but to extend, with great care and circumſpection, our knowledge by juſt ſteps from ſenſible things, as far as our obſervations or reaſonings ſrom them uill carry us, in our inquiries concerning either the greater motions and operations oſ nature, or her more ſubtil and hidden works. Among Among thoſe who have purſued the path pointed out in the Novum Organum, Sir Isaac NEWTON holds the firſt rank. It was on this plan he eſtabliſhed his account of the ſyſtem of the world upon the beſt aſtronomical obſervations on the one hand; while on the other, he performed himſelf, with the greateſt addreſs, the experiments, by which he was enabled to pry into the ſecrets of nature. He has given us two incomparable treatiſes, his Mathematical Principles of Philoſophy, and his treatiſe of Optics. In the firſt, he deſcribes the ſyſtem of the world, and ſhews the pouwers which govern the celeſtial motions. Theſe are extended from the center of the ſun to the utmoſt altitude of the higheſt comet. In the ſecond he treats of light, one of the moſt potent agents in nature. The firſt rule of philoſophiſing laid down by this great man is this: No more cauſes, nor any other cauſes of natural effects, ought to be admitted, but ſuch as are botb true, and ſuſſicient for explainiug ibeir appearances. Ihis is a golden rule. If a philoſopher, therefore, pretends to ſhew you the cauſe of any natural effect, whether relating to matter or mind, conſider firſt, whether there be ſufficient evidence that the cauſe aſſigned does really exiſt. If there be not, reject it with diſdain, as a fiction, which ought to have no place in genuine philoſophy. If the cauſe aſſigned really exiſts, conſider in the next place, whether the eſfect it is brought to explain neceſſarily follows from it: unleſs it has theſe two conditions, it is good for nothing. The ſecond rule of the great Newton is this: That natural effects of the ſame ſort are to be accounted for by ihe ſame cauſes. This rule is ſounded on a juſt appreciation of analogy, on the uniformity of the proceedings in nature. Thus it conſiders the deſcent of a heavy body towards the earth in Europe as an efſect of the ſame ſort with the deſcent of a heavy body towards the carth in America. To ſuch effects, therefore, ſimilar cauſes ought to be aſſigned. The motion of the moon round the ecarth, of the ſatellites round Jupiter or Saturn, and of the primary planets round the ſun, are effects of the ſame kind. Therefore whatever you find to be the cauſe of one oſ theſe motions, you may conclude to be the true cauſe of the others. It is eaſy for you to obſerve, that this rule is deduced ſrom the latter part of the ſoregoing one. Eſfects of the ſame kind may be accounted for by the ſame cauſes. It is right, therefore, to aſſign the ſame cauſes to ſimilar effects; becauſe we ſhould otherwiſe multiply cauſes without reaſon, and ſhould introduce more than are ſufficient for the appearances of nature. Nevton's third rule is built upon induction and analogy, and conſiders Iboſe qualities ihat are sfound invariably to belong to all bodies, upon which e can make experiments, as qualities belonging to all bodies whatſcever. Thcre are many bodies on uhich we cannot make cxperiments; yet if we have frequently made experiments upon other bodies, that ſall immediately under our notice, and find them invariably endued with certain qualities, we may be allowed by analogy to extend pur concluſion to all other bodies, and thus make it univerſal: a way oſ reaſoning, that is agreeable to the harmony of things, and to the old maxim, aſcribed to Hermes, and approved by the obſervation and judgęment of the wiſeſt philoſophers, That what paſſes in tbe beavens above is ſimilar and analogous to what paſſes on the eartb below. - . Thus all bodies, that we have obſerved, are found to gravitate towards one another; they endeavour, iſ they are near the earth, to deſcend by their weight to the earth's center. Now though we have not tried the experiment on every ſtone, or upon every piece of lead that we ſee, yet from what we have tried, we conclude that all of them have this ſame quality. And if this concluſion be juſt, when extended thus far beyond our own obſervation, we may extend it ſtill farther. No one, aſter what he has experienced in all ſorts of bodies that he has been uſed to, can reaſonably doubt, whether other bodies, of different ſorts, are not poſſeſſed of gravity as well as theſe; and from what he has obſerved in all bodies, where he can make experiments, he may conclude, that this property of gravity belongs to all bodies univerſally, and that the moon gravitates towards the earth. It is thus that we are enabled, by a ſuſficient number of particular experiments, to draw general concluſions. If you look back into the ſtate of ghilofo phy in the different ages, you will learn from the hiſtory of every period, that as far as philoſophers conſulted nature, and proceeded on obſervation, they advanced in true know ledge; but as far as they endeavoured to build ſchemes on any other foundation, they only multiplied diſputes and errors. Wiſely, therefore, does Lord Bacon conſider K 4 natural natural philoſophy as a vaſt pyramid, that ought to have the hiſtory oſ nature for it's baſis, an account of the pouers and principles that operate in nature for it's ſecond ſtage, and the formal and final cauſe of things for its third ſtage. But as for the ſummit of this pyramid, the ſupreme ol nature, opus quod nperatur Deus a principio uſque ſinem, he doubts whether it will ever be attainable by man. Itcannot offer to your attention, as a concluſion to this Lecture, any thing more pertinent to the reſearches you are engaged in, than the devout aſpirations of a diſciple of the Stagyrite, * only ſo far altered as to render them more conformable to the plan of this work. Aſſiſt us, O Lord, our heavenly Father, with the light of that reaſon by which thou lighteneſt the world; by which grace and beauty is diffuſed through every part, and the welſare of the whole is uniformly upheld. So teach us to know ourſelves, that we may attain that knovw ledge, which is worth attaining. lllllll Teach us to be fit actors in that drama, where thou haſt allotted every being, great and ſmall, its proper part, the due performance of which is the one chief end of its exiſtence. Enable us to curb deſire, and keep it always within the bounds of rectitude. Be our firſt work to eſcape from wrong opinion and bad habit; that the mind being rendered ſincere, and the heart incorrupt, we may with ſafety proceed to ſeek our genuine good and happineſs. When we are thus previouſly exerciſed, thus duly prepared, let not our love there ſtop where li 1t it firſt begins; but inſenſibly conduct it, by thy inviſible influence, till it is conjoined to thee, in whom only it can find what is adequate and full. Teach us to love thee, and thy divine adminijtration; to regard the univerſe as our true and genuine country; and let the ſtreams of our beneſicence be extended to the whole of mankind. Be it our endeavour by an humble ſpirit, a gentle deportment, and an unfeigned good nature, to ſoften every care, alleviate every pain, and chus render all around us happy. Let our life be a continued ſcene of acquieſcence and of gratitude, of gratitude for what we enjoy, and of acquieſcence in what we ſuffer; and enable us to eo-operate with cheerfulneſs in whatſoever thou ordaineſt; that ſo we may know no other will than thine alone, and that the harmony of our particular minds with thy univerſal may be ſteady and uninterrupted through the period of our exiſtence. Turn our minds from all that is abject, ſervile, and evil, and enable us to embrace and cheriſh only what is generous, lovely, fair, and Godlike. Let it be our ſtudy and delight to behold in the ſilent mirror of contemplation, thoſe forms which are hidden to human eyes; that animating wiſdom, which pervades and rules the whole; that order, irreſiſtible, immutable, ſupreme, which leads the willing, and compels the averſe, to cooperate in their ſtation to the general welfſare; that magic divine, which, by an efficacy paſt comprehenſion, can transform every appearance, even the moſt hideous, into beauty, and exhibit all things fair and good to thee, who art oſ purer eyes than ever to behold iniquity; the fole and only Lord and Saviour, a never-ceaſing, ever overflowing ocean of meekneſs, delight, goodneſs, patience, and mercy, ever giving forth the ſame giſts of goodneſs and truth, of light and love, bleſſing and joy, to angels and men. LECTURE. XV. ON OPTICS. HE advances made in the knowledge of optics in the laſt and preſent age, are ſuch as do honour to human nature and philoſophy. ĩhe theory of light and colours by Sir Iſaac Netwton, is a piece ſo excellent for invention, for judgment in conducting experiments, and for drawing the proper concluſions from them, that had it been Netvton's ſingle work, it would not only have done honour to him, but to the country that gave him birth. Of the faculties called the five ſenſes, ſight is without doubt the moſt noble; the rays which miniſter to this ſenſe, and of which without it we could never have had the leaſt conception, are the moſt wonderful and aſtoniſhing part of the inanimate creation. Of this you will be ſatisſfied when you conſider their extreme minuteneſs; their inconceivable velocity; the regular variety of colours which they exhibit; the invariable laws according to which they are acted upon by other bodies, in their reflexions and refractions, without the leaſt change of their original properties; and the facility with which they pervade bodies of great denſity, and of the cloſeſt texture, without reſiſtance, without diſturbing one another, without giving the leaſt ſenſible impulſe to the lighteſt bodies. Heat and light may be conſidered as the children of fire, as kindred qualities produced by the ſame cauſe, ſometimes exerting their powers ſeparately, ſornetimes united. We are, however, very ignorant of the intimate combinations of light an and it's mode of acting upon different bodies. Experimante upon vegetables give us reaſon to beieve, that light combines with certain parts thereof, and that the green of their leaves, and the various colours of their flowers, are chiefly owing to this combination: for plants, which grow in darkneſs, arc perfectly white, languid, and unhealthy: to make them recover vigour, and acquire their natural colours, the direct influence of light is neceſſary. Somewhat ſimilar takes place even upon animals, and mankind degenerate to a certain degree, when conſined too cloſely, or employed in ſedentary manuſactures. Though the ſun is many millions of leagues from you, yet you ſee it as evidently, and feel it's influence as poerfully, as if it were within your reach: it is within your exiſtence. It ſupplies comfort and life to your animal body and life; and you could not ſurvive an hour without it's influence and operations. Light is diffuſed on every ſide from it's fountain the ſun: joined with air, it gives beauty and fruitfulneſs to the earth, ſupports vegetable and animal life, and the various Kinds of motions throughout the ſyſtem of nature. By their manifold and beneficial operations, as well as by the beauty and magnificence they produce, they point us to HIM who in ſcripture is called the GLORY or Gob, by whom all things were made and are uphalden. And the firmament, the expanſion of the celeſtial elements, ſheweth his handy work, not only as Creatlor, but as Redeemer of the world. The labours of our inſtructors in the natural world know of no intermiſſion, but inceſſantly lecture us in the ſcience of divine wiſdom. The ſun ſhines ſorth by day, the moon and ſtars by night; though they are not endowed like man with the faculty. of ſpeech, yet they holder in another way, by the way of picture and repreſentation. Light introduces all nature to us, the trees, the flowers, the cryſtal ſtreams, and azure ſky: the fixed parts of nature are eternally entombed beneath the light; and we ſee nothing in fact but a creation of colours; nothing is an object of viſion but light; that which we call body or ſubſtance, that which reflects the various colours of light, lies hid beneath the appearance, is wrapt in impenetrable obſcurity. Matter, at firſt ſight, ſeems to be the only being we have correſpondence with, to meet us every where; but when we examine, it ſhrinks like a phantom behind perception; we know it not; the cloſer we inveſtigate it's nature, the more it glides away from us, and all that we can at length aſcertain, only points it out as a ſhadowy ſhrowd, under which SOVEREIGN POWEE retires from plain view, and acts by regular laws. The eye is the inſtrument by which we perceive the efſfects of light; it's ſtructure, it's appurtenances, the various contrivances for performing all it's internal and external motions, clearly point it out to be the work oſ Divine Wiſdom; and he muſt be very ignorant of what has been diſcovered concerning it, or of a very ſtrange caſt of underſtanding, who can ſeriouſſy doubt, whether or not the rays of light, and the eye, were made for one another with conſummate wiſdom and perſect ſkill in optics. If you were to ſuppoſe an order of beings endued with every human faculty but that of ſight, how incredible would it appear to ſuch beings accuſtomed only to the ſſlow information of touch, that by the addition of an organ conſiſting of a ball and ſocket of an inch diameter, they might be enabled in an inſtant of time without changing their place to view the diſpoſition of a whole army, or the order oſ a battle, the figure of a magni ſicent palace, or all the variety of a landſcape? If a man were by feeling to find out the figure of the peak of Teneriffe, or even of St. Peters church at Rome, it would be the work of a life-time. It would appear ſtill more incredible to ſuch beings as we have ſuppoſed, if they were informed of the diſcoveries that may be made by this little organ in things far beyond the reach of any other ſenſe; that by means of it we can find out our way upon the pathleſs ocean; that we can traverſe the globe, determine it's figure, it's dimenſions, and delineate every region; that we can meaſure the planetary orbs, and count the number of the heavenly hoſt. VWould it not appear ſtill more aſtoniſhing to ſuch beings, if they ſhould be farther informed, that by means of this ſame organ we can perceive the tempers and diſpoſitions, the affections and paſſions of our fellow-creatures, even when they want moſt to conceal them? That by this organ we can often perceive what is ſtrait and crooked in the mind as well as the body; that it partic ipates of every mental emotion, the ſofteſt and moſt tender, as well as the moſt violent and tumultuous; that it exhibits theſe emotions with force, and infuſes into the ſoul of the ſpectator the fire and the agitation of that mind in which they originate? To many myſterious things muſt a blind man give credit. If he will believe the relations of thoſe that ſee, his ſaith muſt exceed that which the poor ſceptic derides as impoſſible, or condemns as abſurd.* It is not, therefore, without reaſon, that the ſaculty of ſecing is looked upon as more noble than the other ſenſes, as having ſomething in it ſuperior to ſenſation, as the ſenſe ſenſe of the underſtanding, the language of intelligence. The evidence of reaſon is called ſeeing, nov fecling, ſmelling, taſting; nay, we expreſs the divine knowledge by ſeeing, as that kind of knowledge which is moſt perfect in ourſelves. Truth is of the nature and eſſence of Gob, incapable of a verbal definition, but may be illuſtrated by the ſimilitude of light. Between the objects of the mind and corporeal things, the objects of outward ſenſe, there may be found in many reſpects a very natural and juſt analogy, as it is, indeed, natural to expect; every cor poreal form being but the image or reſemblance of ſome mental form. Hence you find in ſacred writ, light applied as a name to the Supreme Being: for as the ſun is the fountain of external light to this viſible world, ſo is the Divine Mind the fountain of intelligence or intellectual light. Thus alſo the different kinds of cooD which run throughout the whole external univerſe, may be conſidered as beams emitted forth from the goodneſs of the Divine Being; and though the intellectual ſun, who enlightens the whole intelligent or ſpiritual world, be uniform in his eſſence, like uncoloured light; yct as he beams around on all things, without exception or intermiſſion, his rays take a diverſity of tints from the diverſity of objects on which they fall, or the different lights in which the ſame object is conſidered: or, as a ray of the ſun, that sublime and /significant emblem of TRUTH, paſſing through a priſm, is divided into a beauti fulvariety of ſlades and colours, ſo that ray oſ truth, which is ſnhed down from heaven on the human mind, as it paſſes through difſerent mediums oſ knou ledge, differs in ſtrength and degree, and exhibits an illuſtrious ſpecimen oſ that beauty and varicty in appearance and efſſect which diſtinguiſh all the works of God. The influence of our intellectual ſun never ceaſes, nor will it ever miſs oſ accompliſhing it's divine ends in all ſuch minds as open themſelves to receive the aid of his benign irradiation. . I ſhall not, perhaps, find a more ſuitable opportunity of illuſtrating to you the words of the apoſtle, (and by this illuſtration pointing out to you one of the great ends of natural philoſophy,) that the inviſible things of God are clearly ſeen from the creation of the world, being UNDERSTOOD by the things which are made. The whole natural world, throughout the ſacred oracles, is reſerred to as a figure of the ſpiritual. You will ſind this ſubject placed in a very clear light by the Rev. Dr. Iatham, * in vol. ii. of his  Scale and Chart of Truth, a work to which I have already referred you. In this dark and ſublunary ſtate, wedded to ſenſe, immured in body, and involved in matter, we poſſeſs no faculties by which we can form any immediate conception of God and ſpiritual beings. ſ Between the viſible and inviſible worlds an impaſſable gulph is ſixed, an impenetrable chaſm, through which not a ray of celeſtial light can directly dart. All our information, therefore, of things that are divine muſt be conveyed through an indirect channel. You  Tathams Scale and Chart of Truth, vol. ii. li 1215 vol. i. p. 185. See allo the works of Lord Bacon, Dr. Horne, Biſhop of Norwich, and thoſe of the Rev. William Jones. t Plato has a moſt beautiſul paſſage on this head, ſaying,  That they who contemplate an eclipſe of the ſun, unleſs they view the image of the ſun in water, or ſome ſuch thing, loſe their own eye ſight, by gazing attenti vely upon an object brighter than it can bear. That is, the mind by contemplating too cloſely the ræ ovræ, and endeavouring by it's own internal energy io behold them as they are in themſelves, will be dar2led and ſtupified; but by having recourſe to ſenſible objects, ond reaſoning from an analogy in nature, it may contemp late 45 You know that by analogy in human language we transfer material impreſſions to mental ſubjects. und can thereby communicate and conſider theſe with certainty and preciſion; ſo, by a ſimilar, but higher transfer from things which are human, material, or mental, to thoſe which are divine, human language is converted into an indirect but certain inſtrument of this celeſtial communication. OUR Lonb, in condeſcenſion to the capacity and apprehenſion of mankind, hath graciouſly and abundantly employed this analogy as a medium to render us capable of receiving the myſteries of religion. This divine analogy is founded, like the human, upon a ſimilitude conſiſting in a perfect reſemblance and correſpondent realily between the terreſtrial things and ideas, which are the direct objects of the human intellect, and thoſe celeſtial truths of which it can have no direct conception; and it is expreſſed by transferring the words which ſtand for the terreſtrial things, and the ideas to celeſtial truths, which words are to be taken in their plain and obvious, not figurative ſenſe; ſo that the compariſon is founded on ſomething real as well as ſimilar; from ulich real ſimilarity, reaſon deduces a juſt and true correſpondence. Inſtead of giving men new and ſpiritual ideas of heavenly thinys, diſicrent from thoſe thev have by nature, and inſtcad oſ uſing a ſpiritual language or mode of communication calculated directly to expreſs heavenly truths, (which would be to change their nature at once) this analogy takes men us VOL. II. L they  This is not, ſays Biſhop Butler, an apparent and metaphorical fimulitude  it is the ſubſtituting the idea or conception oſ one thing 10 land for and repreſent another, on account oſ a true reſemòlance and correſpundent realiy in the very nature of the things cumpared. It is deſined by Auiſtotle an cquality or parity of realuning, though the parity oſ reaſoning is rather built on the ſimilitude and anælogy, they are, and only transfers their words and ideas from carthly to heavenly ſubjects, by which divine and wonderful expedient, the inviſible things of God are CLEARLY ſcen, being UNDERSTOOD by tbe ibings that are made. illl By this method oſ divine revelation, ſo neceſſary, ſo real, ſo clear, and certain, the Almighty has, as it were, bowed the heavens, and come down, in wonderful condeſcenſion to the blindneſs and imperſection of human reaſon, ſpeaking to us oſ himſelf in our own ideas and words, with the utmoſt familiarity, as a man ſpeaketlr to bis friend, and cnabling us to ſpeak of him as far as we are concerned, with all reverence and adoration, but with as much eaſe and certainty as of each other. In the explication of his myſteries (ſays Lord Bacon, our divine philoſopher) God vouchſafed to deſcend to the weakneſs of our capacity, ſo expreſſing and unfolding them to us as they may be beſt comprehended by us, inoculating, as it were, his revelations upon the Conception and notions of our rcaſon; and ſo applying his infpirations to open our underſtanding, as the figure of a key is fitted to the wards of a lock. We ought not, however, on this account, to be wanting to ourſelves: for ſeeing God makes uſe of the faculty and functions of reaſon in his divine illuminations, we ought every way to improve the ſame, in order that we may be more capable to receive and entertain ſuch holy myſteries. OURLORD, who is himſelſ the fountain and conductor of rrutb, is repreſented in the ſacred oracles as the sus, the fountain of LIGHT, and as the DAYSPRING FROM ON HIGH, the harbinger of LIGHT; and of theſe apt ſimilitudes familiar to all, even without an explanation, he often availed himſclf, expreſſing ſruth by the ſignificant emblem of LIGuT, and the LIGHT OF LIFE. Hæe ày whom all things were made hath delegated to the ſun the power of enlightening the material ſyſtem, while he hath reſerved to HIνMseLr the office of giving light and know ledge by his eternal TRUTH tO the mind of man. But whether he acts through the inſtrumentality of his creatures, or ore immediately from himſelf, he is uniform and conſiſtent in his operations; ſo that one part of his creation is always illuſtrative of another. The ſun, in performing his daily ſplendid office, beams ſorth light and life throughout our ſyſtem, and proclaims, in language known to all, it's Maker's ſacred glory, whoſe power ſupplies the never-failing fountain with it's endleſs beams, and mackes it a repreſentative of his inviſible glory. Thus as the sux ſheds his light over the material creation to be apprehended by the eye, ſo TRUTH is the light ſhed down from heaven to be apprehended by the intellect, given to illumine every ſubject natural and moral, corporeal and ſpiritual, as far as they are qualified by their different natures to convey it to the human mind, or rather perhaps ſo far as the human mind is qualified to ręceive it from them. PFor the difficulty of receiving truth does not exiſt ſo much in the ſubjects as in ourſelves; and truths which are the ſtrongeſt. may ſometimes ſhine upon our mind with the weakeſt force. In order to inſtruct us, the ſacred ſcripture always places ſome natural object before the eye of the underſtanding; and as the viſible world is throughout a pattern of the inviſible, the figures oſ the ſacred writers built upon the images of nature, are as extenſive as the world itſelf. The world being thus an image or ſhadow of heavenly things, natural philoſophy, when employed in unfolding the works of creation, and applying them to their true end, is a ſchool in which God is the teacher; and all the objects of ſenſe in heaven and carth, and under the earth, are the letters of an univerſal language, in which you and all mankind have a common intereſt. . Words are changeable, language has been confounded, and men in diſferent parts of the world are as unintelligible to one another as barbarians: but the viſible works of creation are not ſubject to any ſuch confuſion, they ſpeak to us the ſame language as they ſpoke to Adam, and their language will laſt as long as the world ſhall remain. Thus, for example, if you take the word Gopb. you have a ſound which gives you no idea; and if you trace it through all the languages oſ the world, you find nothing but arbitrary ſounds with great variety of dialect and accent, all of which ſtill leave you where you began, and reach no farther than the ear. But when it is ſaid, God is a ſun and a ſbeld, then ihi ngs are added to words, and you underſtand the extent of the power and the influence oſ the Being, ſigniſicd by the word God; you conceive him to be the author of light to the underſtanding, the ſountain of life to the ſoul, its fecurity againſt all terror, it's defence againſt all danger. Such is the dilſerence between the lunguage of words and the language of ihiugs. Iſ an image is preſented to the mind, when a ſound is heard by the ear, then ue begin to underſtand, and a ſingle object of our ſight in figurative acceptation will give you a larger and more inſtructive leſſon than ever could be conveyed by all the poſſible combinations of ſounds. In the preceding Lecturcs on fire you have ſcen how every thing ſubſiſts, and is preſerved in the midſt of an cement capable of deſtroying and conſuming all things, and yet by it's ſpontaneous action, it never deſtroys any thing. I have now to treat of another agent; LICHT is a property of fire; by it's operation it makes us paſs in the twinkling of an eye from à ſtate of the thickeſt darkneſs to that of the brighteſt day; it gives us as it were a new exiſtemce, making us go out of ourſelves, and enter into communion and commerce with the moſt diſtant objects. Heat and light are undoubtedly the offſpring of fire; but we are equally unable to draw cthe line of ſeparation, or to trace the bond that unites them. You need not be ſurpriãed at theſe various modiſications of the ſame fluid, when you reflect on what you have already ſeen in this world, where beauty is ſo diverſiſied, where being is ſo multiform, and yet where one and the ſame face of things is ever preſented to your view. As the eye among the organs of body, ſo optiẽs among the branches of natural philoſophy, is the moſt noble, curious, and uſeful; and this whether it is treating of ſimple viſion, oſ that through glaſfes, or oſ the effects oſ mirrors, all ſtill relates to the eye, and you are intimately concerned in all the phenomena of which it treats. If you caſt your eyes on a large plain, and run rapidly over all the objects thereon, in an inſtant their image is exactſy painted at the bottom of your eye; if you look through a teleſcope at a diſtant object, it appears as if it were within a few inches of the eye. Does age weaken the ſight? a convex glaſs reſtores it again; if the eye be ſo formed as not to be capable of viewing diſtant objects, a concave glaſs remedies the defect. Have you occaſion for heat beyond the ſtrength of the furnace? optics will inſtruct you how to obtain it from the ſolar rays. With a priſm in your hand you decompoſe thoſc rays, and ſhew that the rays of light which appear to us uncoloured, conſiſt of ſeveri primitive colours. Amongſt the various inventions of human art, there are none ſo juſtly entitled to your admiration, as thoſe which enlarge the powers of viſiou. And the diſcovery of optical inſtruments may be eſteemed amongſt the moſt noble, as well as amongſt the moſt uſeſul giſts which the sUPREME ARTIST has confcrred on man. For all admirable as the ye came out of the hands of iiM who made it, yet no organ of the animal frame hath nHr permitted to be ſo much aſſiſted by human contrivance, not only for the uſcs and comforts of liſe, but for the advancement of natural ſcience, whether as in microſcopes, by giving ſorm and proportion to the minute parts of bodies (as it were to the atoms of nature) imperceptible beſore; or, by contracting ſpace, as by the teleſcope, and, as by magic art, bringing to view the grander objects of the univerſe, the immenſe diſtances of which had cither diſguiſed their aſpect, or rendered them quite inviſible. . i Yet ſo ſingular are the diſpoſitions of men who term themſelves philoſophers, that you will find them on the one hand denyng the exiſtence of all ſpiritual beinge and ſpiritual agency; and on the other, ſooner than own and acknovu ledge the unity of deſign and wiſdom, that is evident in all parts of creation, they will embrace the greateſt abſurdities, and make fire and light to be mere qualities. That light is, however, the action of a material, real ſubſtance, will become very evident to you by a ſew conſiderations. 1ſt. The motion of light is progreſſive, like all other bodies; and it has been proved by aſtronomers, that it takes about ſeven or eignt minutes in paſſing from the ſun to the earth. This diſcovery was firſt made by Morſ. Romer, who having obſerved, that the eclipſes of the ſaiellites of Jupiter il ll appeared appeared ſooner or later than they ought by theory according as the earth was nearer to, or ſarther from, Jupiter, concluded ſrom thence that the motion of light was not inſtantancous; and by obſerving the different times oſ the appearances oſ theſe eclipſes, according to the different diſtances of the earth from Jupiter, diſcovered the time it took up. This theory was further conſirmed by a notable diſcovery of Dr. Bradley, of an apparent motion of the fixed ſtars, and elegantly accounted ſor by the motion of light. From Dr. Bradley's obſervations it appears, that light is propagated as far as ſrom the ſun to the earth in 8 minutes 12 ſeconds. And it likewiſe appears, that the velocity of light is uniform and the ſame, whether original, as from the ſtars, or refliected, as from the ſatellites of Jupiter. 2. Light may be ſtopped, or reſiſted, in it's paſſage from one place to another by the interpofition of an opake body, as other fluids are ſtopped in their courſes by the oppoſition of any ſolid fubſtance. 3. Like all other bodies in motion, it may be turned out of it's rectilinear courſe, and have the determination of its motion changed; it may be collected into a ſmall, or ſcattered through a large ſpace. .It acts upon the organs of animals, and upon hul other bodies, in a ſimilar manner to other fiuid ſubſtances, ſtriking them with a determined force, communicating to them a certain degree of motion, and ſeparating their component parts. The velocity of light being known, we ſhould be able to eſtimate the magnitude of it's particles, if we were in poſſeſſion of good obſervations of the effect of their momentum. PFor example, it is found rhat a ball ſrom a cannon at it's firſt diſcharge flies uith a velocity of about a mile in S ſeconds, and would therefore arrive at the ſun in 32 years, ſupfonug it to move with unremitted velocity. Now light moves through that ſpace in about 8 minutes, which is two million times faſter. But the forces with which bodies move are as their maſſes multiplied by their velocities: if therefore the particles of light were equal in maſs to the two millionth part of a grain of ſand, we ſhould be no more able to endure their impulſe than that of ſand when ſhot point blank from a cannon. * DEFINITIONS. The cauſe and nature of viſion is properly the ſubject oſ that part of philoſophy which is called by the name of optics. But as light is a princ ipal inſtrument in eſſecting viſion, the word optics is uſed in a more extenſive ſenſe, and every thing in philoſophy is looked upon as a part of optics, which relates to the nature and qualities oſ light. When rhe word oprics is uſed in the ſtricter ſenſe for the theory of viſion, the ſcience oſ optics is divided into two parts; one part is called dio ptrics, and the other catoptrics. The laws of reſraction, and the effects which the refraction of light has in viſion, are the ſubject of dioptrics. The laws of reflexion, and the eſfects which the reflexion oſ light has in viſion, are the ſubject of catoptrics. Theſe diſtinctions will however be of little uſe to us, nor will it be worth our while in theſe Lectures to keep the branches of optics diſtinct from each other. Whatever is ſeen, or beheld by the eye, is by opticians called an ol ject. They They conſider every luminous object as made up of a vaſt number of minute points; and that each of theſe points, by an unknown power, ſends forth rays of Iight in all directions, and is thus the center of a ſphere of light extending indefinitely on all ſides. To render this clearer, conſider this ſmall brilliant object that I place upon the table, and you vwill ſind, that you can ſee it from any part of the room; it is thereſore evident, that rays of light muſt proceed from all parts of it, and extend indeſinitely on all ſides. By a ray of light, is uſually meant, the leaſt particle of light that can either be intercepted alone, whilſt all the reſt are ſuffered to paſs, or that can be let paſs alone, whilſt all the reſt are intercepted. Any parcel of rays diverging from a point, conſidered as ſeparate from the reſt, is called a pencil of rays. By a medium, in the language oſ opticians, is meant any pellucid or tranſparent body, which ſuffers light to paſs through it. Thus water, air, a diamond, and glaſs, are called mediums. One medium is ſaid to be more denſe than another, when it contains more matter in the ſame bulk and ſize: thus glaſs is more denſe than water, water is more denſe than air. A ſmall object, or phyſical point of an object, conſidered as propagating light towards a certain part, is ſometimes called a radiant, or radiating point. . Thoſe rays which proceed from any point at a very great diſtance, may be conſidered as paralle rays; for the greater the diſtance of the point ſrom whence rays flow, the nearer do they approach a parallel direction. . a OF THE GENERAL PRINCPPLES OM WHICH OPTIC DEMONSTRATIONS ARE FOUNDED. . To illuſtrate and explain ſome of the general principles of optics, I ſhall darken this room, and onlv admit the light by a ſmall hole: oppoſite to thehole I ſhall place a white ſcreen. Now if you look at the ſcreen, you will obſerve thereon a pietre oſ all the axterior objects which are oppofite to the hole, with all their natural colours: the colours are ſa ntly depicted; the images of the objects that are ſtationary, as houſes, trees, &c. are fixed and ſtationary in the picture; while the images of thoſe that are in motion, as thoſe oſ horſes, &c. are ſeen to move. You obſerve that the image of every object is inverted; this is occaſioned by the rays of light croſſing each other as they paſs through the hole. The ſun ſhines this moment on the hole, as you may ſee by the luminous ray proceeding from it to the ſcreen. Now if either of you will place your eye in this ray, you will find that your eye, the ſun, and the hole, are in one and the ſame ſtrait line. It is the ſame with every other object which is depicted on the ſcreen. The images of the objects are ſmaller in proportion as the objects are ſurther from the hole. Let us now conſider a few among the many important inferences that may be deduced from the ſoregoing experiment. It muſt be evident to you, that light moves or acts in a ſirait line; for you ſaw that your eye, the image of the object, and the object, were always in a r ght line. This is alſo plain ſrom the ſhadows which opake bodies caſt; for iſ the light did not deſtribe ſtrait lines, there would be no ſhadow: it is equally plain from lights finding no paſſage through bent tubes. As thu rays of light are conſtantly propagated in right lines from luminous bodies, whenever I have occaſion to repreſent a ray of light, I ſhall do it by a ſtrait line reaching ſrom a luminous body to the body illumined; that is, I ſhall ſpeak of the line ſ nich the ray deſcribes, as if it was the ray itſelf. It is maniſeſt alſo that light conſiſts of parts both ſucceſſive and cotemporary, becauſe in the ſame place you may ſtop that which comes one moment, and let paſs that which comes preſently aſter; and at the ſame time you may ſtop it in any one place, and let it paſs in any other. In other words, the light which falls upon an object all at once, at the ſame inſtant, is cotemporary; the light which from time to time continues to fall on an ohject is ſucceſſive, conſiſting of parts following one another. A ſecond inference deducible from our experiment is, Ibat a luminous point may be ſeen from all places to whicb a ſtrait line can be dratn, without meeting wilb an intervening obſtacle. This muſt be evident to you, when you remember that the picture of an object in motion in theſe experiments was viſible as long as it was in a line with the hole and ſcreen. It follows from hence, that a luminous point, by ſome unknown power, ſends fortb rays in all directions, and may be conſidered as tbe center of a ſphere of light extending indefinitely on all ſides. This you may underſtand ſtill better by looking at fig. 1, pl. 13 where you find the point O oſ the dart is viſible to an eye placed in either ofſ the ſituations A, B, C, D, E, 6 lli If you conceive ſome of theſe rays to be intercepted by a plane, then is the luminous point the ſummit of a pyramid, the body of which is ù ſormed by the rays proceeding therefrom; the baſe is the intercepting plane. The image oſ the ſurſace of an object on the ſcreen, is alſo the baſe of a pyramid of light, the ſummit of which is the hole. The rays which form this pyramid croſs at the hole, and there form another pyramid, of which the hole is again the fummit, but the ſurface of the object is the baſe. dAmun object is viſible, becauſe cll it's points are radiant points. Rays of light are inceſſantlv propagated from every phy ſical point of an object, otherwiſe the whole object would not be viſible; and that all at once, and to all poſitions of the eye. For whereſoever a ſpectator is placed with reſpect to a luminous body, every point of that part oſ the ſurface which is turned towards him, is viſible: each point is therefore a radiant point, emitting rays in all directions; and thoſe rays only are ſtopped in their paſſage by an interpoſed object, which would be intercepted upon the ſuppoſition that the rays move in right lines. Another inſerence which you will make, is this, that the particles of light are indeſinitely sſmall ; for the rays which proceed from the points of all the objects oppoſite to the hole, paſs through it, without confounding or embaraſſing each other. Exquiſitely minute they muſt be, when myriads can move all manner of ways without impinging one another: and that this is the caſe, you cannot doubt, ſince different bodies, and diſferent parts of the ſame body, are diſtinctly viſible at the ſame time. How curious muſt be the texture oſ the eve to be ſenſible of theſe ſmall impulſes, and to diſtinguiſh at the ſame time thoſe from different objects! If you make a hole with a pin in a piece oſ paper, and look through it, you ſce all the objects that are before you, be they ever ſo many; now ſince theſe objects, and each point oſ theſc objects become viſible by means of the rays of light coming from thence to the object, you may form ſome idea oſ their extreme minuteneſs. If a common tallow candle be lighted, and ſet by night on a high tower, it may be ſeen all round at the diſtance of half a mile ſrom the tower: whereſore there is no place within a ſphere of a mile diameter in whichi the eye can be placed, where it uill not receire ſome rays from this ſmall flame. Rays of light will paſs without confuſion through a ſmall puncture in a piece of paper, from ſeveral candles in a line parallel to the paper, and form diſtincr images on a ſheet of paſteboard placed behind the paper. Every ray of light carries with it the image of the point from which t was emitted. * If therefore all the rays coming from any point are united in the ſame order in which theproceeded, or were emitted, there will be a perſect repreſentation or image of that object, at the place where they are thus orderly united. Another property in the rays of light is their REFLEXIBILITVY, or diſpoſition of being turned back into the medium from whence they came; and in this they obſerve the ſame mechaitical laws with other bodics in their reflexions, that is, the angle oſ reſlexion is alays equal to the angle of incidence. The truth of this polition may be confirmed by many experiments; one or tuo will be ſuſficient. Let us return to our dark room, and I ſnall, by means of a mirror without, let a beam oſ ſolar light paſs through the hole upon this part of the floor where the beam falls I put a looking glaſs; I now fill the room with duſt to render the beam of light more viſible, and you ſee that it is reflected buck into the air; and that the inclination of the reflected ſlected beam is exactly the ſame as that oſ the incident beam. This law may be confirmed by another eaſy experiment, which I will ſhew you in the next room. Here is a graduated ſemicircle, at the center of which is a ſmall piece of looking-glaſs. I place a ſmall object on the graduated edge of the ſemicircle, and on the oppoſite quadrant thereof, and exactly at the ſame angle, I place the ſight. Nov if either of you look ehrough the ſight, you vill ſee the object; but if you remove the ſightpiece a little higher or lower, you will not perceive the object. OF REFRACTION. There is another property of light, which is it's refrangibility, or diſpoſition to be refracted, or turned out oſ it's ſtrait courſe, in paſſing obliquely out of one medium into another of different denſity. This refraction is greater or leſs, that is, the rays are more or leſs bent and turned aſide from their path, as the medium through which they paſs is more or leſs denſe. Thus, for inſtance, the rays are more reſracted i paſſing from air into glaſs, than from air into water; and glaſs is you know much more denſe than water; the denſer the medium, the more the rays are bent, and approach a erpendicular let fall upon it's ſurface. I would b. underſtood always to ſpeak of the rays which ſfall obliquely upon theſe mediums; for thoſe rays which fall perpendicularly do not ſuffer any deviation, the refraction only taking place when tbe rays fall obliquely, and is ſo much greater as their incidence is more oblique, and the medium more denſe. Aſter having taken the new direction, the ray again proceeds invariably in a ſtrait line, till it meets with a different medium, when it is again turned out of it's courſe. Take an empty baſon, and at the diameter of the bottom fix marks at a ſmall diſtance from each other; then take it into the dark room, and let in a ray of light; and where this falls upon the floor, place your baſon, ſo that it's marked diameter may point towards the window, and ſo that the beam may fall on the mark moſt diſtant from the window. This done, fill the baſon with water, and you will obſerve that the beam which before fell upon the moſt diſtant mark, will now by the refractive power of the water be turned out of it's ſtrait courſe, and will ſall two or three, or more marks nearer the center of the baſon. Macke the water in the baſon muddy, but not ſo much ſo as to deſtroy it's tranſparency, which you may eaſily do, by dropping therein a few drops of milk, or diſſolving in it ſome grains of ſaccharum ſaturni; then fill the room with duſt, and the beam oſ. light will be very viſible, both in it's paſſage through the air and the water, and you will obſerve very diſtinctly three beams, that of incidence, which in coming through the hole, falls obliquely on the water; that of reflexion from the ſurface of the water, making the angle of reflexion equal to that of incidence; and that of refraction, which from the ſurface where it was bent, moves on in a ſtrait line to the bottom of the baſon. All things remaining the ſame, place a ſmall piece of looking-glaſs at the bottom of the baſon, where the refracted beam falls, and it will thereby be reflected back again through the water, and in paſſing out of the water into the air will be again refracted or turned out of it's courſe. Another, though very common experiment, will give you aclear idea of the power of refraction; place a piece of money at the bottom of this baſon, and walk back therefrom till you cannot ſee the piece oſf money; Iet ſome water be poured into the baſon; and as before you could not ſee the piecc of money there it was, you will now ſee it œwhere it is not. It is not your eye that has changed place but the ray of light has taken a new direction in paſſing from the water into the eyc, and ſtrikes your eye as if it came from the piece oſ money. This experiment ſeldom fails to ſurpriſe thoſe, who are unacquainted with the properties oſ light; as they do not comprehend how the filling the veſſel with water can make them ſee an ohject placed at the bottom, and which was not viſible to them before, being concealed by the edge of the veſſel. The advantages we derive from the refraction of light are ineſtimable: without this property we ſhould have figured glaſſes in vain, and teleſcopes and microſcopes would not have exiſted. The reſraction of light at the ſurfaces oſ tranſparent bodies was taken notice of by the ancients. Ariſlotle has a problem concerning the apparent curvity of an oar in water. And Archimedes is ſaid to have written on the appearance of a ring or circle under water. Albazen the Arabian, and Vitellio, thought that the angles of incidence and refraction were in a given ratio; but the proportion they laid down being found erroneous in large angles, the ſubject was examined more ſtrictly by the moderns. Kepler among the reſt made ſeveral experiments concerning it, and though he miſſed his aim, his attempts and conjecturcs were uſeſul to others. Aſter the invention of the teleſcope, this ſubject being thought more valuable than before, was farther purſucd; and Sunuellius found out the truth: but Deſcartes was the firſt who publiſhed, that the ſines of incidence and refraction (and not their angles) are in a given ratio. In explaining this ſubject, as well as in other parts of optics, I muſt have recourſe to diagrams, as the theory will require all your attention; bui you will not, I hope, permit the thorns and briars which interrupt the path of ſcience, to prevent your proceeding therein; for whatever is good can only be obtained by labour; and ſcience, like virtue, diſdains the ſlothful and the negligent. Let BC, pl. 1, ſig. a, repreſent the ſurface oſ water, or any other tranſparent medium denſer than air. Let A be the point of incidence, in which any ray coming through the air from F, falls upon the ſurface of the water, where it is refracted from it's ſtrait courſe AK in the line AG. About A as a center with the radius AF deſcribe the circle BFCKE; at the point of incidence A, erect a perpendicular AD, and produce it downward to E; from F upon the line AD, let fall the perpendicular F H, and from G upon AB, let fall the perpendicular G I. The angle F AD, which the incident ray F A makes with the perpendicular DA, is the angle of incidence. The line F H is the ſine of the angle of incidence F AD. The angle GAE, which the refracted ray G A makes with the perpendicular ABE, is the angle of refraction. The line GI is the ſine of the angle of refraction. The angle KAG contained between the line of direction of an incident ray, and the direction of the ſame ray after it is refracted, is the angle of deviation. Theſe things being underſtood, I may now mention to you the laws of refraction, which have by repeated experiments been found to be general and wichout any exception. The angles of refraction and incidence lie in one and the ſame plane, that is, in the plane drawn through the incident ray, and the perpendicular at the point of incidence. 2. The rays of light are always refracted when they paſs OBLIQUELY from one medium into another, whoſe denſity is different from tbat of the firſt. 3. A ray of light falling obliquely upon the ſurface of a denſer medium is refracted towards the perpendicular, that is, ſo that the angle of refraction be Ieſs than the angle of incidence: on the contrary, ihe refraction out of a denſer medium into a rarer, as out of glaſs into air or water, is made from the perpendicular, ſo that the angle of refraction be greater than the angle of incidence. 4. When a ray of light is refracted out of air into a given medium, or out of a given medium into air, the ſine of the angle of incidence is to the ſine of the augle of tbe refraction in a given ratio; in other words, there is a certain and immutable law or rule by which refraction is always performed; and that is this: whatever inclination a ray oſ light has to the ſurface of any medium before it enters, the degree of refraction will always be ſuch, that the proportion betueen the ſine oſ the angle of it's incidence, and that of the angle of it's refraction, vill always be the ſame in that medium. Hence if that proportion be known in any one inclination of the incident ray, it is known in all inclinations, and thereby the refraction in all caſes of incidence on the ſame refracting ray may be determined. . When a ray of light is refracted out of air into glaſs, the ſine of incidence is to the ſine oſ refraction as 31 is to 20, or as 3 to a nearly; or out of air into water, as 4 to 3. Hence the ſine of incidence is to the ſine of refraction, when a ray paſſes out of water into glaſs, as à to 53, or as 93 to O. 5. A ray of light carnot paſs out of a denſer medium into a rarer, if the angle of incidence exceeds a certain limit; * that is, when the ſine of incidence has a greater proportion to radius, than it has to the ſine of refraction. A ray oſ light will not paſs out of glaſs into uir, if the angle of incidence exceeds 40 11, the ſine of which is àè parts of the radius; or out of glaſs into water, if the angle of incidence exceeds about 590 20. Refraction will be changed into reflection. In general, the denſeſt mediums reſiſt the action of light leſs than thoſe that are more rare, the angle of refraction being ſmaller than that of incidence: and on the other hand, the rareſt mediums ſeem to reſiſt it leſs: and it has been laid down as a law, that all bodies have their refractive powers proportional to their denſities, excepting ſo far as they partake more or leſs of ſulphureous oily partic les. Mr. Briſſon has ſhewn, in the memoirs of the academy of ſciences for 1777, that the refractive power of ĩnflammable bodies compared together does not follow the ratio of their denſities. 6. All refraction is reciprocal. If a ray of light is refracted in paſſing out of one medium into another; then, if that ray was to return back again, it would be refracted juſt as much the contrary way: or if the refracted ray become the incident ray, then the incident ray will become the refracted one. When the angle of incidence is increaſed, the correſponding angle of refraction will alſo be increaſed. If two angles of incidence be equal to each other, the angles of refraction will be alſo equal. In the ſame manner, if the one be diminiſhed, the other alſo will be diminiſhed; ſo that iſ M 2 one * Theſe laws, &c. are demonſtrated upon the principle, that light is an homogeneal ſubſtance; and though light will appear to be compounded ofſ ſeveral rays, yet the principles of refiaction one of theſe angles becomes infinitely ſmall, the other becomes ſo alſo. The direction of a ray is not changed, if it moves 1brough a medium terminated by two ſurfaces parallei to each other; for as much as it is turned towards any ſide at it's entrance, ſo much is it exactly turned the other way as it goes out of the ſaid medium. Vutile a ray moves in the ſame uniform medium, it does not change it's direction. OF Tùs FORCE AND INTENSITY OF LIGHT. In a ſree medium the force and intenſity of light propagated in parallel rays is always the ſumue. For in ſuch a medium there is nothing to impede it's progreſs, hinder it's action, retard it's velocity, or change it's direction. In a free medium the force and intenſity of the light, which is propagated by rays proceeding from the ſume point, are in an invexſe ratio of the ſquares oſ the diſtances from this point. This is manifeſt from the principles of geometry, and I ſhall ſoon render it evident to you by experiment. It ſcarce, however, wants any experimental proof; for light radiating from a center, it's intenſitv muſt decreaſe, as ull rays do that proceed from a center; i. e. muſt neceſſarily become thinner and thinner, continually ſpreading themſelves, as they paſs along, into a larger ſpace, and that in proportion to the ſquares of their diſtances from the body; that is, at the diſtance of two ſpaces, they are four times thinner, or leſs intenſe, than they are at one, and ſo on, becauſe they ſpread themſelves in a twofold manner, upwards and downwards, and ſide ways. If the light which flows from a point, paſſes through a ſquare hole, as b c dee, ſig. 3, pl. 1, be received upon a plane BC D E placed parallel to the plane oſ the hole; and the diſtance A B be double of Ab; then the length and breadth oſ the ſhadow B D B D will each be double the length and breadth oſ the plane b d, and treble when AB is treble of Ab, and ſo on; as you may eaſily prove by the light oſ a candle placed at A. Hence luminous bodies, or thoſe that ſhine with their own light, ure vaſtly brighter than opake bodies illuminated by them; for opake bodies diſperſe the light ſalling upon them in all manner of ways: whence ſuppoſing all the light to be reflected, the quantity received by the eye from the opake body, compared with that received from the luminous body, is only as the viſible illuminated ſurface of the opike body to the ſurface of an hemiſphere, whoſc radius is the diſtance of the opake body from the eye; ſuppoſing the breadth of the pupil to be the ſame in both caſes, and that the ſum of the diſtances of the opake body from the eve, and from the luminous body, differs inſenſibly from the direct diſtance of the luminous body from the eye. Hence the light of the full moon at a medium is about 300,000 times fainter, or rarer, than the ſun's light, when at the ſame height above the horizon, all other circumſtances being the ſame, as will appear by comparing the moon's apparent diſk to the ſurface of a hemiſphere. Whence it is eaſy to conceive, that ſince we can bear the ſun's heat, we cannot be ſenſible of any from the moon.  Though accurate methods may be uſed for inveſtigating the intenſity of the moonss light, they are too abſtruſe for our Lectures. But the following conſideration is level to every capacity: when the moon is viſible in the day-time, it's light is ſo nearly equal to that of the lighter thin clouds, that it is with diſſiculty diſtinguiſhed amongſt them. It's light continues the ſume during the night; but the abſence of the ſun permitting the aperture of the pupil of the eye to dilate itſelf, it becomes more conſpicuous. ee It follows therefore, that if every part oſ the ſky were equally luminous with the moon's diſk, the light would be the ſame as if in the day-time it were covered with the above-mentioned thin cloud. This day-light is conſequently in proportion to that of the moon, as the whole ſurface of the viſible hemiſphere is to the ſurface of the moon, that is, nearly as 90,000 to 1.* We do not know any medium that is free, or perfecily tranſparent; even the air, the moſt rare and tranſparent we are acquainted with, is full of opake particles that impede the light; this is manifeſt from the phenomenon of a beam of light let in through a ſmall hole in a room, which beam is viſible like a luminous cone from every part of the room. This ſhews, that the whole light does not go forward in it's rectilinear courſe, but that at every ponit of the medium through which it paſſeth, ſome part of it is reflected every way; for the viſibility of the luminous cone is cauſed by this reflection. The greater faintneſs of the ſun and the moon, when near the horizon, than when elevated higher up, ſhewus alſo that their light is more obſtructed, the tract of air and vapours being longer in one caſe than the other. The loſs of light in paſſing through glaſs is ſtill greater. lhe ſurface alſo of bodies both tranſparent and opake, being for the moſt part uneven, it neceilarily follows, that abundance oſ light is diſſipated even by bodies the moſt tranſparent, ſome being reflected, ſome refracted towards difforent parts by their uneven ſurſaces, whilſt other parts are refracted and reflected with ſome uniformity. This accounts for a perſon ſecing ſ/hrough water, and and his image being reflected by it at the ſame time; and ſhews why, in the duſk, the furniture in a room may be ſeen by the reflection oſf a window glaſs, whilſt objects that are without are ſeen through it. The quantity of light contained in any pencil is continually diminiſhed, the greater the diſtance from the radiant; and this diminution is greater or leſs, according to the greater or leſs degree of opacity in the medium through which it paſſes. This makes it impoſſible to aſſign exactly the different proportions of the denſity of light, at difſerent diſtances from the radiant; but in all caſes, the decreaſe oſ the denſity of light is greater than the ſquares of the ſaid diſtances. And this is the reaſon why objects appear leſs bright, the ſarther they are from the ſpectator. If none of the rays were ſtopt in their paſſage, the degree of brighuneſs of the picture of an object upon the retina, would be the ſame at all diſtances between the eye and the object, ſuppoſing the aperture of the pupil of the eye to remain the ſame. For in that caſe the magnitude of the picture upon the retina, and the denſity of light, would increaſe or decreaſe together in the ſame proportion, viz. reciprocally as the ſquare of the diſtances of the eye ſrom the object; and therefore the denſity of the light upon the retina would be invariable at all diſtances. For evumple; when the eye approaches as near again to the object, the picture upon. the retina becomes quadruple; and the quantity of light received from the object through the ſame aperture oſ the pupil at half the diſtance is alfo quadruple; and this being equally ſpread over four times the ſurface of the rerina, the light is juſt as denſe as before, when the object was at tuice the diſtance. Luminous bodies ſhining in the dark, as a lamp or toreb, &c. emit to very great diſtances much more light than in that caſe is necelſlary for viſion: and though their light ſuffers a contirual diminution by the heterogeneity of the medium, the farther it goes; yet there being ſtill more left than is neceſſary for viſion, their ſplendor is not ſenſibly increaſed or diminiſhed, by leſſening or increaſing their diſtances. Light is not only diverted out of it's courſe by reflection from the bodies it meets with, but a great part of it is alſo frequently ſuffocated, or as it were deſtroyed by them; for it is manifeſt, that black or dark bodies reflect much leſs light than others of lighter colours; and it is probable that no bodies reflect all they receive. The power of the eye to diſcern objects without inconvenience by different quantities of light is very extenſive; for not only objects of different colours placed in the ſame light are ſeen with equal caſe, but even objects ſo ſmall as the letters of a book may be diſtinguiſhed and read by a clear moon-light. Now admitting the ſurface of the eye's pupil to be ten times greater in a weak than in a ſtrong light, yet the proportion of the weakeſt light to the ſtrongeſt, by which the eye can conveniently ſce objects, perhaps does not exceed that of I to 10,000. How exquiſite are our faculties! Experience ſheus, that objects appear ſo much more obſcure as they are more diſtant, and at laſt ceaſe to be viſible: this obſcurity ariſes from the paſſage of the rays oſ light through the air, a medium denſe and foul enough to obſtruct them in a very great degree, and diſſipate a prodigious quantity in the interval between the eye and the object. The experiments and calculation of M. Bouguer ſhew, that rooth part of the light is loſt at 189 fathoms of horizontal diſtance; that 7469 fathoms, or about 31 leagues, diſſipates one third of the light; and that they ceaſe at laſt to be viſible, becauſe the images by their diminution in ſize and light ure incapable of making a ſufficient impreſſion on the eye. By a calculation founded on experiment, M. Bouguer has ſhewn, that of 10,000 rays, that proceeding from a ſtar would reach our eye, iſ it were not for their paſſing through the atmoſphere, there reach it no more than arec ſet down in the following table: Degrees oſ appuren Altitude. Degrees l Nuimber of auparent of Altitude. Number ſſ Degrees Rays. 5 8 47 9 192 IO 454 II 802 12 1201 IS 1616 20O 2031] Mr. Bouguer has alſo ſhewn by experiment, I. That the light of the ſun is about 300,000 times ſtronger than the light of the full moon, when at it's mean diſtance from the earth. 2. That the light of the ſun is not ſenſible when it is diminiſhed 1ooo, ooo, ooo, ooo times, and of courſe that a body is truly opake when it permits only 1000,000,000, 0050 part of the ſun's light to paſs through it. OF IMAGES AND Focr. On account of the extreme minuteneſs of the atoms of light it is clear, that a ſingle ray, or even a ſmall number oſ rays, cannot make a ſenſible impreſſion on the organ of ſight, of which the fibres are very coarſe when compared to the rays of light. A great number of rays oſ light proceeding from the ſame point or portion of the ſurface of the body are neceſſary to render this portion viſible. But as the rays of light proceeding from the ſame point are wider from each other the ſarther they extend, it has been neceſſary for particular purpoſes either to bring them near and unite them together in a point, or to ſeparate them from each other. We are able by the aſſiſtance of glaſſes to unite, in one ſenſible point, a great number of rays proceeding from the ſame point of an object; the rays thus united in a point form an image of that point of the object from which they proceed; this image is brighter in proportion as there are more rays united, and more diſtinct in proportion as the order in which they proceed, is better preſerved in their union. On placing a poliſhed and white plane at the place of their union, you will ſee this image painted in all it's proper colours, if no adventitious light is permitted to diſturb or render it confuſed. he point of union of the rays of light formed by means of a glaſs lens, or a mirror, is called the focus of this glaſs or imirror. If this union is real, the focus is called a real focus, or ſimply focus: it is the place where the image of the object is formed, and proceeds to form another image in the eye, as if it were the real object. If this point of union is nothing more than a point, to which the rays in the new direction which has been given to them tend, but are not actually united, this point is called an imaginary focus. It is alſo the place where the object appears really to be, when ſeveral of the rays which have been diſperſed, enter in ſuſficient quantity into the eye to form a ſenſible image of the object. For an object always appears to be in that place from whence it's light ſeems to come to our eye. Since every ray carries with it the image al the object from whence it proceeds, it follows, that if the rays, after baving croſſed each other, and having formed an image at their interſection, are again united after eitber reſlection or refraction, they will form a netw image; and ſo on for ever, as long as their order is not confounded. We may thus form images of the ſame object, as oſten as we can unite the proceeding rays without confounding them. It follows, that ſo long as the progreſs only of the rays of light are attended to, the image may be conſidered as the object, and tbe object as the image ; and even a ſecond image, as if tbe fſirſt had been the original object, &c. The rays of light may be differently diſpoſed relatively to each other, and may be conſidered as parallel, diverging, or converging. The rays are parallel when they always keep at the ſame diſtance from each other. Thoſe rays which, in proceeding from a point, continually recede from cach other, are called divergiug rays. Thoſe rays are named converging, which, proceeding from various parts, approach nearer to cach other in their progreſs, having a tendency to unite in one point. When two mediums touch each other, their ſurfaces muſt be either plane, or convex, or concave; and the rays which acting together paſs through theſe mediums, may be conſidered either as parallel, converging, or diverging. We will examine together the effects ariſing ſrom theſe diſfferent circumſtances. In ſpeaKking of convex or concave ſurfeces, I ſhall only conſider thoſe that are ſpherically ſuch. OF REFRACTION AT APLAXNE SURFACE. Caſe 1. IVben incident parallel rays paſs obliquely from a rare into a denſe medium terminated by a plane ſurface. To perform the experiments for this and many other parts of optics, I uſe that part oſ the ſolar microſcope that carries the mirror, fixing it, as in the preſent inſtanc, to a window ſhutter; on darkening then n throw the ſolar ravs into the room, aa t'rovh the tube belonging to the n. 1c,  can r⸗ 1er ther paral lcl, converg ni, or divergent, according to the lens I adapt hercto. The lens now in the tube makes the pencil procee ling thereſrom cylindrical; this pencl, by turning the mirror, falls obliquely on the ſides of this box, (ſig. S, pl. 1,) whoſc ſides are oſ glaſs; each end has a clre lir aperture ſor occaſionally receiving a watch glaſs, whi h may be placed either with the convex or concave ſide ontwards; the box is made water-tight, and is furniſhed with a cock for more eaſily emptying it of water. The ray of light (at A, ſig. 6, pl. 1,) entering the box filled with uwater, is refracted to B, and forms there upon this carò, placed againſt the ſide of the box, a luminous circle, exactly the ſume ſize as that which entered the box (at A): on removing the card, and letting the ray of light proceed in the air, you ſee that it goes on in a direction exactly arallel to the incident ray, being of the ſame ſize through it's whole length. The two pencils of light EA, EA, after being by refraction bent nearer the perpendiculars PP. P p, move on parallel to each other; and on being again refracted, and ſeparating from the perpendiculars s p, sp, you vill find by meaſuring the diſtance between them that they ſtill retain their paralleliſm. From hence it follows, that incident parallel rays paſſing obliquely from air into a maſs of water terminated by a plane ſurface, preſerve their paralleliſm in entering and going out of the water. The ſity, but have only a moderate thickneſs, as in our preſent experiment. This may be further illuſtrated by a diagram, ſig. 4, pl. 1. Let ABCD be a ſolid piece of glaſs with two parallel ſurfaces A B. CD, and let the incident ray EF be refracted into F G, then will F G be refracted by the ſecond ſurface into G H parallel to EF, or in the ſame direction as EF, becauſe the angle at F is equal to the angle of incidence at G; and therefore the angle of incidence at F will be equal to the angle of refraction at G. Caſe 2. ben converging incident rays paſs from a rare into a denſe mediun, and from this again into the ſame rare medium. For this experiment, I put into the tube a lens, ſomewhat more convex than that we uſed before; ſo that the pencil of light that iſſues from the tube is now in the form of a long cone, whoſe baſe is the lens. I fill the box with water, and preſent it towards the light, ſo that the ſide AB, ſig. 7, plate 1, may be perpendicular to the axis of the cone, and in ſuch manner that the point or extremity ofſ the cone may reach the further ſide B C of the box. I empty the box of it's water, and the cone of light becomes ſenſibly ſhorter, terminating as at E. Ly bringing the box nearer the window, ſo that the point of the cone may pafs beyond thę further fide, the cone is no longer of a regular ſhape, but as it appears at FG, and the point is removed ſomewhat further diſtant. This experiment ſhews, that the rays of light do not converge ſo ſoon when they paſs from a rare medium into one more denſe; and that, on t contrary, they converge ſooner than they uoul) otherwiſe do, when they paſs from a denſe into a rare medium. In other words, when converging come leſs convergent; but their convergence is increaſed in paſſing from a denſe into a rare medium. Thus, ſig. i8, pl. 1, the two converging incident rays a d, be, which would meet at e, are bent towards the perpendicular by the refracting ſurface IH, and thereſore proceed to E. In the ſame manner the converging rays l g, fg, ſalling upon I H, are refracted to h, b, inſtead of going on and mecting at I: but on the contrary in procceding ſrom the refracting ſurface K L, the rays g h, g h, are refracted from the perpendicular, and therefore meet ſooner as at &, than they would otherwiſe have done: the rays are therefore twice bent, but in contrary directions, once at h, h, once at g, g. Caſe 3. IVben incident diverging rays enter into a denſe or rare medium. Every thing being diſpoſed as in the laſt experiment, I preſent the ſide of the box A D, ſig. 8, pl. 1, when empty to the cone of light, ſo that it may coincide with the point of the cone G, which is where they begin to diverge, and will proceed on at B C, and form another cone directly oppoſed to the other, falling upon a white ſcreen, placed at about four inches from the further ſide of the box. I meaſure this cone, and then ſill the box with water; the cone then becomes of an irregular ſhape; the baſe on the ſcreen is ſomewhat larger than it was before, but it is not ſo large at B C as it was before. From hence ue infer, that diverging rays become leſs diverging in paſſing from a rare into a denſe medium; and, on the contrary, that their divergence is increaſed by paſſing from a denſe into a rare medium. Let us conſider the diagram, ſir. 18, pl. 1, Kh, Kh, diverging rays meeting the refracting ſurface L K, do not proceed directly to G G, bur are refracted, and approach the perpendicular, and go towards g and g, and are thus leſs divergent. On the contrary, if they proceed from the denſe medium, they are refracted, and go towards I and f, which render them more diverging, being twice bent at h and g, and thus forming an irregular cone. Hence the image of a ſmall object placed under water, is one fourth nearer to the ſurface than the object. And hence the bottom oſ a pond of water is ſ deeper than it appears to a ſpectator above. An object at E, ſig. 18, pl. 1, would appear at e. This may ſerve as a uſeful caution to thoſe among you, who are not ſwimmers, and prevent your plunging unwarily out of your depths. f you immerſe a ſtiek perpendicularly in water, until the immerſed part appears of an equal length with the part above; then meaſure the parts, and they will be found to be to one another about as 4 to 3. Hence alſo a fiſh appears higher than it really is, and the markſman, in ſhooting at it, muſt make an allowance for this falſe appearance, or he will miſs his object. Iſ all the parts of an object, ſeen at ſome depth in the water, were equally diſplaced or altered, the image thereof would be exactly ſimilar to the object it repreſents; for the figure depends on the reſpective poſition of the parts, which is not changed by a motion common to the whole. But this is not the caſe, if the object under water be of any conſiderable ſize; for thoſe rays which come from the extremities that are moſt diſtant from the eye, fall more obliquely on the ſurface of the air, and are more refracted, and approach too near the refracting ſurface to preſerve a total conformity of the image with it's object. Thus an eye at Æ, fig. 18, pl. 1, viewing at the bottom of the water a ſtrait line, g c dcg, not only ſees the whole line nearer to the eye than it really is but the extremities g ęg appear nearer than the other parts d c; thus it appears curved with the part towards the eye. Thus a ſtrait leaden pipe appears at the bottom of the water to be curved and the bottom ofſ a flat baſon deeper in the middle than at the fides. Very thick denſe mediums make objects apfear larger than they really are; thus a fiſh appears arger in the water than when taken out, as do plants, ſtones, &. To comprehend this, ſuppoſe for a moment, that g, g, ſig. 18, pl. 1, are the extremities of an object ſeen at the bottom of the water, by the rays g b, gh. An eye placed in K judges of the ſize of the object by the angle G G, larger than that of g K g; and the ſame happens with reſpect to everv part of the object viewed through a denſer medium than air. Hence it is, that objects in a different medium from that where the ſpectator is, generally appear ſomewhat diſtorted. OF REFRACTION AT A CONVEX SURFACE. 1. When parallel ravs poſs out of a rarer into a denſer medium, haſe ſurface is convex. Before we procecd to make any experiments, or reaſon upon them, ſ muſt obſerve to you, that lines drawn from the center of a ſpherical ſurface are aluays conſidered, by mathematicians, as perpeudiculars to that ſurface, and the angles they make with the angles of incidence are the angles of inclination. So that as light paſſing into a denſer medium, is ſo refracted as to approach the perpendicular, or line drawn from the center of the ſpherical ſurſace to the point of incidence; ſo in going from a denſe into a rare medium, the rays ſeparate from the ſame ſurface. I place the glaſs box ſo that the pencil o light falls directly on the convex glaſs at the end and you ſee that as ſoon as I pour water into the box, the rays converge, and meet in a point: ſo that parallel rays, in this caſe, are rendered convergent; a circumſtance that naturally ariſes from the laws of refraction, ſee fig. 9, pl. 15 for the parallel rays hi, fg, fig. 19, pl. 1, ſalling obliquely on the convex refracting ſurface, g, E, i, are bent towards the perpendiculars ic, or ge, (thoſe lines being the perpendiculars to the points of the convex ſurſace, on which the two given rays fall), and tend to unite at the axis AB. You will alſo take notice, that thoſe rays which are furtheſt ſrom the axis unite at points neareſt the refracting ſurſace; thus the ray hi falls upon the axis at Æ; but the ray d e does not mect it, till it arrives at D; hence all thoſe which are not too diſtant from the axis, may be conſidered as uniting in one point. 2. When converging rays, paſſing out of a rare medium, fall upon the ſurface of a denſer medium with a convex ſurface. I bring the box as beſore with the convex glaſs towards the ray of light; but in ſuch manner, that the converging point of the pencil ſhall fall exactly on the center A, (ſig. 1, ꝑl. 1,) of convexity. I pour water into the box, and you find that there is no change in the ſituation of this point, becauſe there is no obliquity of incidence. Let us now try the effect with two other cones of light; one terminating at 6, ſig. I1, pl. 1, nearer the convex ſurface than it's center the other being beyond the center of convexity at c, ſig. 12, pl. 1: mark exactly the place where the cone terminates in each of theſe caſes, when there is no water in the box, and then fill it with water, and obſerve the difference in each caſe. You will find the ſirſt cone, ſig. 11, (where the rays tended to unite at b, before they reached the center oſ convexity) lengthened, and the point thereof terminating at a greater diſtance B; but the cone, ſig. 12, (where the rays tend to unite at a point c, beyond the center of the convex ſurface) is ſhortened, terminating at C. Theſe experiments having made you maſters of the ſact, I ſhall now conſider the three caſes in a diagram. It is evident, that if converging rays fall upon a convex ſurface, they either tend to unite at the center of the convexity; or adly, their point of union vill be nearer the refracting ſurface than that center; or 3dly, it will be beyond that center. In the firſt caſe, the rays do not deviate: thus the rays, ef, d h, ſig. 20, pl. 1, converge at c, juſt as they would have done without the interpoſition of the refracting ſubſtance, becauſe they do not poſſeſs the property neceſſary for refraction, namely, obliquity of incidence. For the rays eſ, d b, tending to c the center of the ſurface, may be conſidered as radii prolonged, and conſequently as perpendicular to the convex ſurface. In the ſecond caſe, where the rays tend to unite nearer the ſurface than the center of convexity, they become leſs converging; for the ray, i h, fig. 20, pl. 1, which tends to k, is bent by the refracting ſurface, nearer the perpendicular d c, and is thus removed further from the ſurface, and joins the axis at o. In the third caſe, where the rays tend to unite beyond the center oſf convexity, they become more converging: thus the ray, gb, ſig. 20, pl. 1, tending to l, further from the convex ſurface b è ſ, than c, by approaching the perpendicular dc, is brought nearer the center, and joins the axis at ꝓ. where it would be met by another ray, falling quity, but from the other ſide of the axis. This is the more common of the three caſes. 3. When diverging rays, paſſing out of a rare medium, fall upon a denſe one with a convex ſurface. To ſhew what happens with theſe rays, we have only, as before, to place the box ſo that the diverging rays may fall upon the convex ſurface, and to receive the light upon a plane ſurface in the box, and to mark the ſize of the luminous circle formed thereon, before we pour any water into the box. This being done, I ſhall now fill our box with water, and you vill perceive, that the luminous circle is conſiderably ſmaller than it was before, ſig. 13, pl. 1. If you remove the box further from the point, from which the diverging rays proceed, the baſe of the luminous cone will ſtill grow ſmaller, and at laſt become cylindrical; and if you go on removing it ſtill further, they will converge in a point. From theſe experiments we draw the following concluſion, That diverging rays, in paſſing from a rare medium into a denſer with a convex ſurface, become leſs divergent, which may be carried ſo far, that they may become parallel, and even convergent. The diverging rays a m, a l, fig. a1, pl. 1, meeting with the refracting ſurface m s l, do not proceed in ſtrait lines to fand e, but are refracted towards the perpendiculars e C, c C, which gives them the directions mg, l b, much leſs divergent. If the rays that fall on the refracting ſurface, as d m, il, are leſs diverging than the preceding, they will be refracted ſo as to converge at B. Let us now ſuppoſe ibe rays of light paſſing from a denſer medium into a rare one, the denſe medium being terminated by a convex ſurface on tbe ſide of the rare medium. Parallel rays are thereby made to converge: thus the parallel rays d e, g i, ſig. 1a, pl. 2, falling on the refracting ſurſface, e i, inſtead of proceeding to ſbh, are bent further from the perpendiculars a C, b C, ſo as to converge at &. Converging rays become more converging: thus the rays l e, ni, which would, without refraction, go on towards m and o, are ſo refracted as to unite at p. If the rays are diverging, the point from which they diverge is, 1ſt, either c, the center oſ convexity e, D, i; or adly, a point r, betu een the center and the convex ſurface; or 3dly, a point 9 beyond that center. In the firſt caſe, the rays C a, C&ò, are not refracted, becauſe being radii they fall perpendicular to the convex ſurface. In the ſecond caſe, where the rays r e, r i proceed from r, they do not go on toward s andſ?, but are refracted further from the perpendiculars a C, b C, and go on towards x and, diverging more than before. In the third caſe, the diverging rays q e, q, become leſs diverging, and inſtead of proceeding towards æ and z, they get cloſer together towards g and h, being refracted further from the perpendiculars a C, bC, and may be rendered parallel, or even convergent, according to the greater or leſs degree of divergence, when they arrive at the ſurface e D i. OF REFRACTION AT A CONCAVE SURFACE. 1. When parallel rays of light paſs from a rare medium into a denſe one, with a concave ſurface. One end of the box, ſig. s, pl. 1, is furniſhed with a glaſs with the concave ſurface outwards; this is now to be preſented towards the cones of light. In the preſent inſtance, let parallel rays fall on the concave ſurface. Having obſerved the ſize of the luminous circle formed by them within the box, fill the box with water, and you vill find that the pencil of light is enlarged, and the luminous circle is much increaſed. See fig. 14, pl. 1. That parallel rays neceſſarily in this inſtance become diverging ones, may be alſo rendered clear by a diagram. For the parallel rays a b and d e, fig. 1, pl. 2, falling upon the concave refracting ſurface e, b, b, are by refraction made to approach the perpendicular sC, g C, which renders them diverging. 2. When converging rays paſs from a rare medium into a denſe one, terminated with a concave ſurface. We proceed as in the foregoing experiment, obſerving where the converging rays terminate, before and aſter water is poured into the box, and that with different degrees of convergency. You ſee, however great the convergency of the rays may be, that as ſoon as the water is put into the box, the cone is ſenſibly lengthened, ſig. 15, l. 1. Vith a leſs degree of convergence they are ſenſibly ſeparated from each other; ſo that by altering the degree oſ convergency we render them either parallel or diverging. To view this in a diagram, you may conſider the rays a b, d e, ſig. 3, pl. 2, tending to converge at O; theſe are by refraction made to approach the perpendiculars ꝓC and g C, and thus do not unite till they come to i. 3. &hen diverging rays paſs from a rare medium into a denſe one, terminated by a concave ſurfuce. Every thing being diſpoſed as in the laſt experiment, remove the box ſo that the point where the rays meet, or croſs, and begin to diverge, may fall upon the center of the concave glaſs; receive the baſe oſ this cone on a plane placed at about ſeven or eight inches from the glaſs, meaſure the diameter, and fill the box with water. Repeat the experiment with the concave glaſs nearer C, ſig. 16, pl. 1, and afterwards further from it. In the ſirſt caſe, the ſize of the circle is not enlarged, nor the cone of light altered. In the ſecond, the baſe of the cone is ſmaller in the water than it was in the air. In the third, it is ſomewhat enlarged. See ſig. 16 and 17, pl. 1. In the ſirſt caſe, the rays undergo no alteration, becauſe they have no obliquity of incidence, for Cò and Ce, ſig. q, 7l.2, are radii of the concavity, and continue their rout to f and g, as they would have done without the interpoſition of a refracting medium. In the ſecond, they become leſs divergent, for the two diverging rays l b and ke, inſtead oſ going to d and b, proceed to a and e, the refraction making them approach the perpendiculars fC, C In the third caſe, which is the moſt general, the rays become more diverging; for lb and le, which tend rtowards m and n, are turned out oſ their way towards i and o, by approaching the perpendiculars ſC and gC, and thereby become more diverging than they were before. Let us now ſuppoſe that the rays of light paſs from a denſe medium into a rare one, and that the denſe medium is terminated on the emergent ſide by a concave ſurface. The parallel rays become divergent, for the parallel rays d e, g i, ig. 22, pl. 1, in emerging from the concave ſurface e Di, do not continue their rout in ſtrait lines towards ſ and h, but are carried towards m and p, by ſeparating from the perpendiculars C a, C8, which renders them divergent. Iſ the rays are converging, they may be divided into three caſes. 1. When the point of convergency tends preciſely to the center C, of the concavity e Di; in this the rays a e, b i, do not ſuffer any refraction; becauſe being the continuation of the radii C e, Ci, of the concavity e Di, there is no point of oblique incidence. 2. When the rays q e, r i, tend to converge to the point n, nearer the concave ſurface e Di than its center C, by ſeparating from the perpendiculars Ce, Ci, they unite at o, and are thus rendered more converging. 3. When they tend to a point l, which is further from the concave ſurface than the center of curvature, they are rendered leſs convergent. For the rays ſe, ti, which tend naturally to converge to the point l, by ſeparating from the perpendiculars Ce, Cc, unite in k, further off than they would have done without refraction, if they were only a little converging: on arriving at the concave ſurface e Di, the refraction may render them parallel or diverging. The diverging rays E e, Ei, diverging from the point E, which without the change from the medium would go on towards u and x, but by the refraction ſeparating from the perpendiculars Ce Ci, they are turned towards ) and x2, diverging more than beſore. OF GLASS LENSES. By a lens opticians mean a tranſparent body of a different denſity from the ſurrounding medium, and terminated by two ſurfaces, either both ſpherical, or one plane and the other ſpherical. And as the lenſes for optical uſes are generally made of glaſs, it is uſual to call them glaſſes, with the addition of the uſe they are intended for; as a magniN4 fving glaſs, a ſpectacle glaſs, an object or eye glaſs of a teleſe ope, &e. Glaſs was probably the invention of ſome manuſacturer, having nothing clſe in view but raiſing a fortune by his new manuſacture: but from hence we are ſupplied with teleſcopes, microſcopes, and priſms, uhich let us into ſecrets of nature unſuſpected before, open to us the immeaſurable grandeur of the univerſe, and bring us acquainted with animals to whom a ſpoonful of vinegar ſerves for a habitable world; thereby raiſing our idea of the Author of nature, by diſplaying the magnificence and wonders of his works. From hence likewiſe has proceeded gradually a more exact knowledge oſ the laws of attraction, the velocity of light, the exiſtence of ether, and the extreme rarity of bodies. Thus the unlearned are often made to lend a helping hand to the contemplative in the proſecution of his ſcience; and the man of this world inſtrumental in opening a larger field to our theology. Inventions are oſten termed accidental, and ſo indeed they are with reſpect to us; but accidents ariſe from certain cauſes which produce them, when it is proper they ſhould be manifeſted, and are therefore to be referred to the diſpoſer ofſ all events. A lens having one ſide plane and the other convex, is called a plano-convex; where one ſide is plane and the other concave, it is a plano-concave. A lens terminated by two convex ſides, is called a double convex; a double concave, if terminated by tuo concave ſides. A lens having one ſide concave, the other convex, is called a concavo-convex lens. Sce ſig. 9, pl. 2. From theſe deſinitions vou will readily conceive, that there may be an inſinite variety in the degrees of convexity and concavity; for a convex ſurtace may be conſidered as forming part of a ſphere; and as the radius or diameter of this ſphere is greater or lesſs, the convexity vill be different. Hence when I ſay that the radius oſ the convex ſurface oſ a glaſs is three inches, I mean that it is the portion oſ a ſphere whoſe radius is three inches. lo render this ſubject clrarer, here are a variety of lenſes of different convexities; from theſe you ſee, that the ſmaller the radius is, the more the ſurface is curved, or the greater is it's deviation from a ſtrait line. On the contrary, the longer the radius the more it approaches to a plane; ſo that a plane ſurface may be conſidered as a convex ſurface oſ an infinite radius. To explain the effect produced in the appearance of objects, by convex and concave lenſes, we muſt diſtinguiſh two caſes: 1. Where the object is at a conſiderable diſtance from the lens. 2. Where the object is near the lens. Before, however, I enter upon this explanation, it will be neceſſary to define what is meant by the axis of a lens. A ſtrait line drawn perpendicular to both the ſides of any lens is called the axis thereof;* the axis therefore paſſes through the center of the ſpherical ſides; and as we repreſent the two ſurfaces by arches of a circle, you have only to draw a line through their reſpective centers, and it will repreſent the axis of the lens. Thus the center of the arch AE B, ſig. 23, pl. 2, is at C, that of AF B at D, and the line CD is the axis of this lens; it is eaſy to ſee that the axis paſſes through the middle, and that no lens excepting a ſphere can have more thanone axis, becauſe no other line can paſs through the two centers C, D; and therefore all pencils are conſidered as oblique, excepting thoſe whoſe foci are in the axis of the lens. As * If one of the ſurſaces be plane, the axis of the lens falls erpendicular upon the plane ſurtace, and procecds through the As the axis is perpendicular to the two ſurfaces, it is plain ſrom the nature of refraction, that a ray of light paſſing in this direction is not refracted, but goes on in the ſame direction in which it entered. No ray that paſſes through the center o, ſig. 23, pl. 1, oſ a lens is refracted; for the two tangents at E and F are parallel, and the effect is therefore the ſame as if the ray paſſed through a piece oſ glaſs whoſe ſides are parallel. I ſhall now proceed to conſider the nature of double convex lenſes. It is the property of theſe to make parallel rays converge to a focus; to increaſe the convergence of converging rays; to diminiſh the divergence of diverging rays, and that ſo much under certain circumſtances as to render them parallel or convergent. Let us conſider A B, hig. 24, pl. 1, as a convex lens, whoſe axis is the line OE FP; and let us ſuppoſe that on this axis, and at a great diſtance ſrom the glaſs there is a luminous point or object O diffuſing it's rays in all directions; ſome of theſe, as OM, OBL, and ON, vill fall upon the glaſs, the middle one O E will not be refracted, but paſs on in the direction EF P. The two other rays uill be reſracted and bent both at entering and going out, ſo as to meet at J ſomewhere on the axis, und then go on in the direction J Q and JR: the other rays between M and N, vill be ſo refracted as to unite on the axis at the ſame point J. Thus the rays OM and ON, and thoſe between them, which without the interpoſition of the glaſs vwould have followed rheir reſpective rectilinear directions, are ſo bent thereby as to follow other directions, and proceed as if they came from the point J; and an eye placed at P would be affected in the ſame manner as if the luminous point was at]; the glaſs AB forming an  object at J, exactly repreſenting the object at O. Thus a conſiderable change is produced by the lens; a diſtant object, as O, is as it were tranſplanted and brought ſuddenly to J. Let us now conſider the eſfect produced on the rays of light, when the object is very diſtant from the lens. In ſig. 13, pl. 2, MN repreſents a convex lens, OAB T S the axis of the lens, OP a diſtant object ſituated on the axis; every point of this object diffuſes rays in all directions; of theſe we are only concerned with thoſe that fall upon the lens; and to render the ſubject clearer, I ſhall only conſider three rays OA, OM, ON, proceeding from the point O; of theſe the firſt O A paſſing through the middle of the lens, it's direction is not altered, but continues aſter it has paſſed through to go on in the line B TS, the axis of the glaſs. But the other two, OM, ON, are ſo refracted both at entéring and quitting the lens, that they unite at T on the axis, from whence they again proceed in the directions M TO, NIR , ſo that if an eye were to meet with them, they would produce the ſame effect thereon as if the object O had been ſituated at T. To diſtinguiſh, however, the true point O from the point I, the firſt is called the ol ject, the other the imuage of that object, which image in it's turn becomes alſo an object. When the object is at a conſiderable diſtance, the point T is conſidered as the focus of the glaſs. The following remarks on this point are neceſſary to be conſidered with attention. 1. When the point O, or the object, is at an infinite diſtance, the rays OM, OA, ON, may be conſidered as parallel to each other, and to the axis of the lens. 2. The focal point T, is a point behind the glaſs, where parallel rays falling upon that glaſi are united by the refractive pouer oſ the lens. 3. The ſocus of a lens, and the place where the image oſ an object ſituated in the axis of the lens, but at an inſinite diſtance from the lens, is repreſented, are the ſame thing. 4. The diſtance of the point T ſrom the lens is termed the ſocal diſlance. S. Every contex lens has a particular focus; in ſome it is greater, in others leſs, which is eaſily ſound by expoſing the gluſs to the ſun, and obſerving where the ravs unite. 6. Thoſe lenſcs which are ſormed by the arcs of ſmall circles, have their foci very cloſc to them, and the ſocal point is further oſſ in proportion as the ſurface or ĩdes oſ the lens is ſormed by arcs of a longer radius. 7. In order to ſorm a proper idea of the optical eſſect of any lens, it is neceſſary to know it's focal diſtance. 8. When parallel rays AB, CD, pl. 3, fig. 4 ſall upon a plano-convex iuns De R, and paſs through it, they uill be ſo refracted, as to unite at a point F behind it; this point is called the principal focus, and it's diſtance Fe from the middle of the glaſs it's ſocal diſtance, which is equal to tœice ibe radius, or the diameter oſ the ſphere's cCOnV exity . 9. ùhen parallel rays AB, CD, ſig. 5, pl. 3, ſall upon a glaſs De B equally convex on both ſides, and paſs through it, they will be ſo refracted as to unite in a point or nriucipal ſecus F, whoſe diſtance is equal to the radius or ſemidiumeter oſ the ſphere of the glaſe's convexity. The rars all croſs the middle ray de in the ſocus I, and then diverge from it to the contrary ſides, in tr ſame numner as they converged in coming thereto. Sec ſio.4 and s, pl. 3. Il another double convex lens hg, ſig. 5, pl. 3 be placcd in the ra;s at the ſame diſtance ſrom the ſfocus, ſocus, they will be ſo refracted thereby as to proceed from it in a parallcl direction, as at b h, ge, going on in the ſame manner as when they fell upon the firſt glaſs; but on contrary ſides of the middie ray De F ff, for the ray ABF vwill go on in the direction F hb, and the ray CDPF in the direction Fg e, and ſo of the reſt. To render the progreſs of the rays from an object through a lens, to the image behind, more evident, I have conſtructed a model in uſich the rays are repreſented by ſilk ſtrings; that it may be more clear, the rays iſſue on ſrom three points, and only three rays from each oſ theſe points. In ſig. 9. pl. 4, we have a figure of this model. ABC is the object placed ſomewhat beyond the focus of the convex lens de f. ſThe ravs Ad, Ae, Aſ, flowing from the point à, are reſracted into the directions d a, e a, ſ'a, mecting in the point a. The rays B d, Be, B, procedding from B, paſs through the glaſs, and are ſo refracted as to unite at b. In the ſame manner thoſe that flow from the point c, are conveyed and meet at c; at cachof the points a, b, c, an image is ſormed of the reſpective points A, B, C. Ihe ſame takes place with all the other intermediate points, by which means a perſect image of the object is formed. I hase already obſerved to you, that an object at an inſinite diſtance has it's image formed at the focus of a convex lens, provided the object be ſituated on the axis of the lens. Iſhull now proceed to conſider nearer objects, but ſtill ſituated in the axis; and you vill find the nearer the object approaches the glaſs, the further the image is removed therefrom. Thus let us ſuppoſe that F, ſig. 11, pl. a, be the focus of the lens MM, or place where the image of a diſtant object is repreſented. Iſ the object be brought ſucceſſively to , Q, and R, the image will be ſucceſſively removed further from the glaſs to p, q, and r; the diſtance b r, &c. of the image always correſponding to that of the object AP, &. Mathematicians have rules for calculating theſe diſtances, which would lead us too far into the intricacies oſ the ſcience; it will be therefore ſufſicient to obſerve in general, that the more we diminiſh the diſtance of an object from the lens, the more that of the image is increaſed, which will be rendered plainer by an example, ſuppoſe of a lens of ſix inch focus; that is, if the object is at an inſinite diſtance, the focus will be preciſely at ſix inches; but when the object approaches the lens, the diſtance of the image will increaſe, as in the following table: Diſtance of the object.  Diſtance of the image. Infinite] 6 inches 42 7 24] 8 18l 9 15] 1o 12 12 1o 15 9] 18 8 ll 24 7 ll42 6 l Infinite. Although theſe numbers only agree with a lens of 6 inches fou vmι we may deduce the following conſeque i a* them: I. If the object be at an infinite diſtance, the image will be at the focus. 2. If the object be at double the diſtance ofſ the focus from the glaſs, the image will alſo be at double the diſtance of the focus from the glaſs; thus in the foregoing example, when the object was at twice 6 or 12, the image was alſo at 12 inches. 3. When the object is at the ſame diſtance AND PROPERTIES OF LIGHT. 191 from the glaſs as the ſocus, the image is removed to an inſinite diſtance on the oppoſite ſide. 4. In general the diſtance of the object and the image correſpond reciprocally to each other; ſo that if the object be placed where the image was ſituated, the image will be found where the object was before placed. 5. If the lens AB collect in ], fig. aa, pl. 1, the rays which emane from the point O, it will alſo collect the rays from the point J, and conſequently the rays may be returned back in the direction in which they proceeded. This article is of conſiderable importance towards a thorough knowledge of the nature oſ lenſes; thus for example, when I know that a lens has repreſented, at eight inches from it, the image of an object which is at 24 inches on the oppoſite ſide, I may conclude, that if the object be at eight inches, the image will be at 24. When the object is ſituated at the focal diſtance from the glaſs, the image is ſuddenly removed to an infſinite diſtance thereſrom. You inquire of me, what then becomes of the image, when the object is within the focal diſtance? can it be removed to a diſtance greater than inſinite? this is impoſſible. The queſtion, though not eaſily reſolvable by metaphyſics, does not emburraſs a mathematician; for he proves that the image in this caſe paſſes to the other ſide of the glaſs, and is found of the ſame ſide with the object. In every repreſentation formed by lenſes, there are two circumſtances to attend to, one concerning the place where the image is formed, the other the ſixe of the image. Having explained the firſt, I now proceed to conſider the ſecond. Let OP, ſig. 14, pl. 2, be an object ſituated on the axis of the convex lens MN,; find firſt the point I, where the rays proceeding from O, meet the axis; this done, we have to ſind where the other point P will To do this, conſider the rays PM, PA, PN which proceeding from P fall on the lens, and you ſee that the direction of the ray PA is not altered, becauſe it falls upon the middle of the glaſs, but continuas to proceed in the line AKS; it will therefore be ſomewhere in this line, as at , that the rays PM, PN, vill meet, and K will be the image ofſ the other end of the object, the point being determined by the place where a perpendicular to] O, from J, meets the line PS, and IK will be the image of the object. It is evident from this, that the image is inverted; ſo that if QR was horirontal, and the object OP a man, in the image the feet would be upwards and the head downwards. It is alſo clear, I. That the image is always ſmall in proportion as it is nearer the lens, and larger the further it is removed therefrom. Thus OP, ſig. 15, pl. 2 being the object, and MM the lens, the image will be ſmaller if formed at O, than if it were formed at R, S, or T; that is, the image is larger the further it is from the lens. 2. There is a caſe where the image is preciſely at the ſame diſtance from the lens as the object, which is when the object is placed at twice the focal diſtance ſrom the lens. 3. When the image is twice as far from the glaſs as the object, it becomes double the ſize of the object, and in general the image is ſo many times larger than the object, as it exceeds it in diſtance from the lens: now the nearer the object is to the glaſs, the more the image is removed from it, and is conſcquently ſo much larger. 4. On the contrary, ſo much as the image is nearer to the glaſs than the object, it is ſo many times ſmaller than the object. Iſ then the diſtance of the image from the glaſs was 1000 times leſs than that oſ the object, it would alſo be 1000 times ſmaller. OF BURNING-GLASSES. The ſun, as we all experience, is the cauſe oſ heat at the ſurſace of the carth; it's eſfects are moſt violent in thoſe regions where its rays fall with the lcaſt obliquity, for they arrive there with greater force, and in a greater quantitu. Winds meet and deſtroy each other's forces, but the rays oſ the ſun travel onward without impeding each other in their progreſs. All ſubſtances feel the influences of the ſolar rays, not only in proportion as they ſtrike againſt them more or leſs directly, but according alſo as they are fitted for their reception. For the rays, though they continue ever to operate, are reſtrained from acting too ſiercely, by the nature and diſpoſition of the bodies on which they fall, and their own equable difſuſion. To give the rays greater power, they muſt be collected by art; and when their action is concentrated, they conſume or change all bodies with inexpreſſible force. One of the firſt uſes to which convex lenſes were applied, was that oſ collecting the rays of the ſun, in order to ſet wood or other combuſtible matter on fire. The ſun is ſo far off, that we may conſider every point upon it's ſurface as at an inſinite diſtance, and may therefore ſuppoſe the rays emitted from each point to be parallel to each other; conſequently all the rays ſrom the ſun that fall upon a convex lens, will by paſſing through the glaſs be made to converge, and unite in a ſocus behind it. The eſſect of the rays of the ſun, when they are thus collected, is the reaſon why the point where they are collected is called the focus: and the name, aſter it had for this reaſon been given ro this point, has been made uſe of as a general one to ſtand for any point, where converging rays meet, or to which they tend. Lvery lenms, whether convex, or plano-convex, will collect by refraction the rays of the ſun diſperſed over it's ſurface into a point, and thus become a burning lens. To underſtand this, let MN, lig. 15, pl. a, repreſent a convex lens, receiving on it's ſurface the rays R, R, R, of the ſun; theſe are refracted by the lens into a ſmall luminous circle, which is the image of the ſun. As all the rays which fall upon the lens are united in it's focus, their efſect ought to be ſo much more, as the ſurface of the lens exceeds that of the focus. Thus if a Iens four inches broad collect the ſun's rays into a focus at the diſtance of one foot or tuelve inches, the image will not be more than 1-10th of an inch broad. The ſurface of this little circle is 1600 times leſs than the ſurface of the lens, and conſequently the ſun's light muſt be ſo many times denſer within that circle; it is not therefore ſurpriing that it burns with a degree of ardour and violenee exceeding any culinary fire. That the ancients made uſe of burning-glaſſes, is evident from a paſſage in a play of Ariſtophanes, called the Clouds, where Strepſiades tells Socrates, that he had found out an excellent method to defeat his creditors, if they ſhould bring an action againſt him. Eis contrivance was, that he would get ſrom the jewcllers a certain tranſparent ſtone, that was uſed for kindling fire, and then ſtanding at a diſtance, he would hold it to the ſun, and melt down the wax on which the action was vwritten. The moſt conſiderable of theſe glaſſes are thoſc that were made by M. Iſchirnhauſen and Mr. Parker. Tho I have already mentioned * both to you, it may be worth while to enter into ſomewhat a larger detail of their eſſects. The diameter of that of M. Tſchirnhauſen was three feet, the focus was formed at twelve feet, and it's diameter 1ʒ inch and weighed 160 pounds. To render the focus more vivid, it was collected a ſecond time, by a lens placed parallel to the ſirſt, and ſo ſituated, that the diameter of the cone of rays, formed by the firſt lens, was exactly equal to the diameter of the ſecond lens; ſo that it received all the rays, and the focus was contracted to eight lines, and it's force was increaſe proportionably. The lens made by Mr. Parker, of Fleet-ſtreet, was formed of flint glaſs, is three feet in diameter, and when ſixed in it's frame, expoſes a clear ſurface of a feet 8 4inches in diameter, weighs 212 pounds, focal length 6 feet 8 inches, diameter of the focus 1 inch. A ſſecond lens was uſed, which reduced the focus to half an inch. I ſhall now recite ſome of the principal effects of that made by M. ITſchirnhauſen, having already noticed thoſe of Mr. Parker's. I. Every kind of wood catched fire in an inſtant, whether hard or green, or ſoaked in water. 2. Thin iron plates grew red-hot in a moment, and then melted. 3. ITiles, ſlates, and all manner of earth, grew red in a moment, and vitrified. 4. Sulphur, pitch, and all reſinous bodies, melted under water. 5. Fir wood expoſed to the focus under water, did not ſeem changed; but when broken, the inſide was found burnt to a coal. 6. If a cavity was made in a piece of charcoal, and the ſubſtances to be acted upon were put in it, the effect of the lens was much increaſed. 7. Any metal w hatſoever thus incloſed in the O 2 cavity cavity of a piece of charcoal, meſted in a moment, the fire ſparkling like that of a forge. 8. The aſhes oſ wood, paper, linen, and all vegetable ſubſtances, were turned, in a moment, into a tranſparent glaſs. 9. The ſubſtances moſt difficult to be wrought on were thoſe of a white colour. 10. All metals vitrified on a china plate, when the china plate was ſo thick as not to melt, and the heat was gradually communicated. 11. When copper was thus melted, and thrown quickly into cold water, it produced ſo violent a ſhock, as broke the ſtrongeſt carthen veſſels, and the copper was entirely diſſipated. The experiments with a burning-glaſs, among other things, prove that fire is regularly diffuſed through all ſpace, and perfect therein; and that when properly directed and put in action, it burns with a vehemence ſuperior to any culinary fire. The fire was in the expanſe before the glaſs was applied; and the ſurface by which it was collected and directed, only put that fire into action, which already exiſted. Mr. Parker obſcrved a violent rotatory motion in the ram at the focus, which rotatory motion became viſible on a ſmall maſs of gold when melted; ſor it inſtantly aſumed a motion round it's axis, and that invariably the sume way as the earth moves round it's axis. The velocity of this motion uwas accelerated, if at any time the ſun ſhone uith greater brightneſs than before. Thengh the heat of the ſocus was ſo intenſe as to ſſux gold in a ſew ſeconds, yet there was no heat * Vhen plates of copper are caſt at a ſoundry, aſter the mouldũs have been well heated and dried, they wrap them round with blunkets to prevent the acceſs oſf any moiſture, which woula not only diſlipate the metal, but blow up the works, and heat at a ſmall diſtance therefrom; and the fingei might be placed in the cone of rays, within an inch of the focus, without receiving any hurt. Mr. Parker had the curioſity to try what the ſenſation of burning at the focus was, and having put his finger there for that purpoſe, he ſays, it neither ſeemed like the burning of a fire, nor a candle, but the ſenſation was that of a ſlbarp cut with a lancet. You may, by means of the focal rays from this glaſs, char or burn a piece of wood to a coal in a decanter of water, and yet the ſides of the decanter, through which the rays paſs ſo very near the focus, will not be cracked, nor any ways affected; nor will the water be in the leaſt degree warmed. The wood was aftervards taken out, and the rays thrown on the water; but no continuance of collected rays in this way, would either heat the water, or crack the glaſs; but if a piece of metal be put into the water, it ſoon becomes too hot to be touched, and communicating it's heat to the water, makes it not only warm, but ſometimes cauſes it to boil. Though the water alone is not affected; yet when a little ink was poured into it, the water began to boil in a very little time. OPF THE SCIOPTRIC BALL, OR CAMERA OBSCURA. By camera obſcura, opticians mean any darkened room, out of which all the light is excluded, but what comes through a lens upon a white ſcreen properly placed, on which the objects ſeen without are depicted. It is in general made in two different ways: one is, a large room or chamber, made as dark as poſſible, with the ſcioptric ball fixed in the windowſhutter: the other is ſmall, and made in various ways, as that of a box, a book, &c. for the conveniency of carrying it from place to place; whence it is called the portable camera obſcura, and is uſeſul to a young artiſt in taking the optical view of any propoſed proſpect. It is by means of conv ex lenſes that we obtain all the advantages that arc derived from the camera obſcura, which exhibits, in a moſt pleaſing manner, all the objects ſeen without in their natural proportions, colours, and motions, as vivid and beautiful as life; which I ſhall few you as ſoon as I have explained the nature oſ the inſtrument. Let W, X, Y, 2,, ſig. 6, pl. a, repreſent a darkened room or box. well cloſed on all ſides, ſo as to admit no light but what comes through the lens o, whoſe focus is ſuch that the image of the objects from without fall exactly on the wall. In the diagram, to prevent confuſion from too many lines, only three pencils are drawn, one from each of the extremes P, R, the other from the niddle Q, of the object P QR,; and in theſe pencils there are only drawn the atis, and the tuo extreme rays. But the rays that flow from any point (as P, for inſtunce) upon the lens are innumerable, the uhole conical ſpace b Pd being ſilled with them. Theſe are all collected and united at the ſocus p, and there received upon the white paper, and are reſlected by it in all manner of directions; ſo that to a ſpectator in the room, p is now, as it were, a real object, exactly ſimilar to the phyſical point P, in proportion to it, as Op to OP, and p is oſ the ſume colour vith P, becauſe the rays flowing upon the lens frum P are united at p ciſtinct and ſcparate from the rays coming from other parts oſ the object. Every other phyſical point of the object ſends forth forth it's cone of rays, which are united by the lens, orderly at p, q. 1. and being there reflected by the ſcreen, the image of the whole object is diſtinct and viſible, like a picture drawn upon canvas; but much more lively and diſtinct than the beſt finiſhed draw ings of the greateſt artiſi. If the objects are very remote in proportion to the focal length of the lens, we ſhall have the pictures of thoſe that are in the ſame neinghbourhood, pretty diſtinct at the ſame time, though they are at the ſame diſtances from the lens; becauſe in that caſe, the focal diſtances of the refracted rays differ only inſenſibly. There will be as many foci upon the paper as there are radiant points in the object, from which the rays proceed; and theſe foci will be diſpoſed in the ſame manner, in reſpect of one another, as the radiants. Thoſe foci will be the moſt bright in which the moſt rays are united, and thoſe will be the leaſt bright in which the feweſt rays are united. Now the moſt rays will be united in thoſe foci, which correſpond to the radiants, from which the moſt light proceeds; and the feueſt will be collected in thoſe focal points, that correſpond to radiants from which the lIcaſt light procecds. Therefore the light and ſhade upon the paper will be anſwerable to the light and ſhade upon the ſurface oſ the object. When the rays from theſe foci are reflected by the paper, and enter the eye of a ſpectator, who looks at the paper, he will there ſee the picture, or likeneſs of that object; for the figure made up of theſe foci, will be like the figure of the object, becauſe the focal points are diſpoſed in the ſame manner, with reſpect to one another, that the radiants in the objects are. The light and ſhade upon the paper are every where anſwerable to the light and ſhade upon the ſurface oſ the object. And the colouring oſ cach particular part through the whole ſigure upon the paper, is the ſame with the colouring of the correſpondent part in the object. . If the ſcreen be moved nearer the lens, as to x, or farther ſrom it, as toy, the picture will be conſuſed, becauſe the rays proceeding from the next adjacent objects begin to interſere and mix together, as the rays from a will be mixed with thoſe from P. The diſtinctneſs of the picture, we have obſerved, is entircly owing to the ſeparation of the rays belonging to every point of the object upon their reception on the ſcreen. Iſf the ſcreen be removed farther and farther ſrom the focus, the picture will become more and more indiſtinct, and at length totally vaniſh, no one part being diſtinguiſhable ſrom the reſt; for all the rays, that procecd from the ſeveral points, muſt go to as many correſpondent points to make a complete image oſ the object. The brighineſs of the picture, &vben it's diſtance from the lens is given, is in proportion to the area oſ the lenuns. ſhe diſtinctneſs oſ the picture is not the ſame thing as its brightneſs; nor is the confuſion of parts the ſume thing as it's obſcurity. The pic ure may be diſtinct in all it's parts; the rays which come from one and the ſame point of the object, muy be exaclly collected into one and the ſame point on the paper; and yet, if but few rays ſhould paſs through the lens, the picture will be diſtinct, tuough faintl' enlightened. Or, though the picture he contuſed, cither by the ſcreen being placed at an improper diſtance from the lens, or ſrom any other cauſe, yct if many rays paſſ through the lens, the picture will be a bright one, notuithſtanding it's conſuſion. . Hence jou ſee that the brightneſs of the picture in every part depends on the rays that come to that part, and that the picture will be bright or faint, in proportion as it is formed by more or fewer rays. Now the quantity of light, or number of rays that paſs from any given object into the room, is greater or ſmaller in proportion as the hole through which they paſs is greater or leſs, or as the area of the lens is greater or ſmaller. The foot oſ the croſs will be at r, and the top at p, for every object muſt be repreſented at the place where a line falls, dravn from the object through the middle of the lens; and conſequently what is at the top will be repreſented at the bottom; objects to the right will be the left in the picture. Why the image is inverted, is evident from a bare inſpection oſ the figure; and it is alſo evident, that this inverſion is not owing abſolutely to the lens; for if that be removed, and the light be admitted through a ſmall hole in the ſhutter, as you ſaw at the beginning of this Lecture, we ſhall have an inverted picture on the ſcreen, though very imperfect when compared to that formed with the lens: the ſeveral pencils in both caſes croſs each other; but without the lens, the picture is very faint and confuſed; it is faint for want of ſuſficient light, ſo many rays from each point not being col llected together; it is confuſed becauſe the rays that procecd from the adjacent objects interfere and mingle together. Let us now proceed to try the ſcioptrie ball, or ox's eye. To uſe this, the windows of the room muſt be made to ſhut very cloſe, and if there be any crevices they ſhould be ſtopped, as we have done here, by nailing ſlips of cloth cloſe over them; the ſaſh is thrown up, and we have cut a hole in the ſhutter ſufficient to let the ball move ſreely therein: to this we ſhall ſcrew our inſtrument, which conſiſts of three parts, a frame, a ball, and a lens. The flat ſide of the ſrame is to be placed cloſe to the window ſhutter; the frame conſiſts of two parts, the flat board with a hole in it, and a ſcrew, to which a ring may be ſcrewed, by which the ball is confined; it moves with more or leſs eaſe, as this ring is ſcrewed more or leſs tightly: the ball has a large cylindrical hole at each end, which is cut to a female ſcrew for receiving a lens fitted in a cell. By the motion of the ball, the axis of the lens may be turned different ways; and the ſphericity of the frame and ball prevents any light being tranſmitted between them. There are uſually two lenſes of different focal lengths; by uſing both together you obtain a third, having a ſhorter focus than either of the others. There is a paper ſcreen, and a half poliſhed glaſs, with proper ſupports, ſo that I may place either of them exactly in the ſocus, by moving them to and fro till the picture is diſtinct. Tiis inſtrument may be conſidered as a kind of artificial eye; the frame may repreſent a fruſtrum of the orbit of the eye, and the wooden ball which is moveable every way therein the globe of the eye, moveable every way in it's orbit; the hole in the ball repreſents the pupil of the eye, the convex lens correſponds to the cryſtalline humour, and the ſcreen to the retina; all which you will better comprehend when we come to explain the nature of viſion. I fix the ſcioptric ball in it's place, and darken the room, and ſet the ſcreen at a proper diſtance ſrom the lens. You ſce what a beautiful and lively picture oſ all the objects before the window is exhibited on the ſcreen. It may with propriety be termed nature's art of painting. You have perſpective here in perfection, or a juſt diminution oſ objects in proportion to the diſtances, the images being all in proportion to the reſpective apparent magnitudes oſ the objects ſcen by an eye at the hole in the wincow. Ihe colouring here is juſt and natural, the lights and ſhades perfectly juſt, and the motions of all objects are perfectly expreſſed; the leaves quiver, the boughs wave, the birds fly, &c. as in nature, though much quicker, and in a leſſer ſcene. From the camera obſcura, the painter may learn his imperfections; h- may ſce uhat he ſhould do, and know what he cannot perform. OBSERVATIONS ON THE SCIOPTRIC BaALI. Allother circumſtances beingthe ſame, the pictures of objects that are near, as within s, 10, or 26 yards, are more vivid than thoſe that are more remote. Univerſally, the pictures will be more diſtinct and pleaſant, when the objects are at ſuch moderate diſtances, in proportion to the focal length of the lens, as to exhibit ſmall parts, as rhe fcatures of a perſons face, the tiles of a houſe, &c. If the light without is favourable, and the ſpectator has been ſome time in the dark, it is ſurpriſing how diſtinct and bold objects will appear, that are diminiſhed at leaſt 20 or g0 times; and a perſon may be known, when his features are no bigger than in that proportion. The lights and tints are then exquiſitely delicate and perſcctly juſt, and the relievos of objects ſurprizingly bold. Addiſtant proſpect appears perfect enough, but does not form ſo entertaining a picture. All light ſhould be excluded from it but what comes through the lens; for in proportion as the field about is darker, the objects will appear brighter, as the ſtars do in a dark night. The ſpectator himſelf ſhould alſo be in the dark, at leaſt while he looks at the picture; for by this means the pupils of his eyes enlarge; and as they enlarge, the apparent brightneſs of the picture will increaſe; and being free from extraneous light, the impreſſions on the retina will be more vivid and ſenſible. wiſe the pictures will be dull, obſcure, and no wars agreeablè. You muſt thereſore never exhibit but in a clear day, and it will anſwer beſt when the ſun ſhines upon the objects; that is, if the proſpect be weſtern, the appearanc e uill be beſt in the morning; if eaſtern, in the afternoon; if northern, about noon. A ſouthern aſpect is the worſt oſ any for the camera obſcura. A proper aperture ſhould be given to the lens: if the aperture be too ſmall, the picture will be dark and obſcure, and upon that account indiſtinct and unpleaſant. Iſ the aperture be too large, the picture will be indiſtinct, on account of the aberration of the extreme rays, of which we ihall ſpeak hereafter; and alſo becauſe the picture will be too much enlightened by the adventitious light which enters the room, by which it is much obſcured and injured. The apertures will admit of ſome latitude, and may be more or leſs contracted, as the objects are more or leſs illuminated, or as they are nearer or farther from the lens. Mr. Harris ſays, that in a clear day, and the ſun ſhining obliquely upon the objecs, a lens of 18 incnes focus does beſt with an aperture from 1 to 11 inch, according as the weather varies; when the weather was overcaſt, an aperture of 13 inch acted beſt; when the ſun ſhone, a lens of 30 inches focus bore an aperture of 11, and would not bear more than 13 inch. After every attempt to improve the picture, the apparent brightneſs will decreaſe nearly as the ſquare of the focal length of the lens is increaſed. For this apparent brightneſs will be nearly as the denſity of the light in the picture, divided by the denſity of the adventitious light in the room. And whatever is the focal length of the lens, the denſity of the adventitious light will be nearly as the ſquare oſ the linear aperture of she lens; and to preſerve the ſame denſity, the aperture muſt be as the focal length oſ the lens. In ſome caſes the breadth of the picture may be about  of it's diſtance from the lens, and even more if the paper be made a little concave; that is, the picture may take in a field of near 40 degrees; but in moſt caſes, when the field is ſo large, the picture will be more diſtinct in the middie than towards the extremes, and therefore you ſhould ſeldom exceed an angle oſf atout 20 or 30 degrees. A glaſs. having both it's ſides ground flat, nearly parallel, and poliſl cd on one ſide, will exhibit the imaσges of objects vaſtly more vivid and diſtinct, than hy reſlection from paper, &c. The rays are not ſo niuch diſſipated in this caſe, as they are by refiection from the opake ſurface; you are alſo leſs oſfenaded by extrancous light, as none is admitted but u hat falls upon the glaſs, and paſſes through it, and you may therefore have a good picture by a much deeper or ſhallower lens than you have on the paper. The inverted poſition of the images in a camera obſcura * is an imperſfection; an inverted picture does not look near ſo pleaſant as one that is erect, and a perſon cannot be known near ſo readily in an inverted picture, as aſter the ſame picture is ſet in'it's proper poſition. But if you take a looking-glaſs, and hold it before you with the face towards the picture, and inclining downwards, the images will be erect in the glaſs, and appear with grecater luſtre than in the ſcreen; or you may place a ſmall mirror before or behind the lens, to inflect the rays beſore they come to the picture. OFPF THE MAGIC LANTIORN. The magic lanthorn has been generally applied to magnify ſmall pictures in a dark room for the amuſement oſ children: we ſhall ſhew you that it may be applied to more important purpoſes, by uſing it to explain the general principles of opties, aſtronomy, botany, &c. The conſtruction and theory oſ this inſtrument is very eaſy; it conſiſts of a tin lanthorn with a tube fixed to the ſront; this tube conſiſts of tuo joints, one of which ſlides into the other; by drawing the outermoſt ſoint out, or puſhir7 it in, the tube may be made ſhorter or longer. At the end oſ this moveable tube a convex lens is fitted; the picture which is painted with tranſparent colours on glaſs, is placed in a groove made in the immoveable part of the tube, ſo that as the tube is lengthened or ſhortened, the lens will be either at a greater or leſs diſtance from the picture. In the inmoſt of the tubes, and as cloſe to the ſide of the lanthorn as poſſible, is placed a thick comex lens, in order to caſt a ſtrong light ſrom the lamp upon the object. To be more particular; in the inſide of the lanthorn, ſig. 2, pl. 3, is a lamp L, uhoſe light paſſes through the plano-convex lens NKL, and ſtrongly illuminates the object OR, which is a tranſparent painting on glaſs, inverted and moveable before the lens KL, by means of a ſſiding ſrame in which the glaſs is fixed. The illumination is oſten increaſed by means of a concave mirror placed at the back of the lanthorn. Iſ, when the object is properly illuminated, the lens S The moved a little ſurther ſrom the object OR than it's focal diſtance, it will form a repreſentation at a great diſtance on the oppoſite wall; and the image VW vill be as much larger thun the object QR, as the diſtance Z O is greater than Z G. As the lens S T is moved farther out of, or puſhed into the tube, the image VW vill be ſmaller or larger, according to the diſtance of the oppoſite wall. To render the picture diſtinct, no light ſhould fall upon it but what paſſes through the lens, and for this reaſon the lanthorn muſt be uſed in a dark room. The lens ſhould be very convex, ſo that the object may be very near it; ſor you have ſeen, that by ſo much as the object is nearer to the lens, will the image be at a greater diſtance from it, and conſequently ſo much the larger; and ſince the image is inverted in order to make the picture on the ſcreen upright, it is neceſſary that the object ſhould be placed with the wrong end upwards. FURTHER REMARKS ON THE PROPERTIES OF CONVEX LENSES. Convex lenſes are uſed for looking at objects: to comprehend this, we muſt conſider their nature a little further. I have already told you, that when an object is very diſtant, the image is repreſented at the focus of the glaſs; and that the image is removed further from the lens, in proportion as the object approaches it; ſo that if the object is at the focal diſtance from the lens, the image is removed to an infinite diſtance. And for this reaſon, the rays ON, ON, ſig. 8, pl. 2, which ſall upon the point O, are reſracted by the glaſs, ſo that they become parallel to each other, as NF, and NF; and as parallel lines may be conſidered as proceeding to an indefinite diſtance; and that the image is always where the rays, which proceed from the object, are united after refraction; in the caſe where the diſtance OAoſ the object is equal to the focus of the glaſs, the image is removed to an infinite diftance. As it is indifferent whether the parallel lines NF, NF, meet on the right or leſt hand, the image may be conſidered as being on either ſide, but at an infſinite diſtance. From hence you vill eaſily conclude, where the image will be found, when the object comes ſtill nearer the lens than the focus. Let OP, ſig. 10, pl. a, be the object: now as the diſtance O A thercof ſrom the lens is leſs than the focal diſtance, the rays Om, O m, which proceed from the object, are too diverging to be rendered parallel by refraction; but continue divergent, as NF, NPT, afſter they have paſſcd through the glaſs, but much leſs ſo than before; ſo that by prolonging them on the other ſide the lens, they will meet ſomewhere, as at o; conſequently NF, NF, aſter refraction follow the ſame direction as if they proceeded ſrom the point o, and an eyè which receives theſe rays will be affected as if they came from o, and will imagine that the object oſ viſion is at o: there will, however, be no image formed at o, and in vain would you apply a ſcreen there to receive it. But an eye at E receives the ſame impreſſion as iſ the object OP exiſled at e. It is therefore important in ſuch caſes to know the ſiæq and place of the imuginary image op. VWith reſpect to the place, it will be ſufficient to remark, that if the diſtance ſrom the objcct A O was equal to the focal diſtance of the glaſs, the image would be at an infinite diſtance; but that as the objcct is brought to the lens, the more the imaginary image alſo approaches the glaſs, yet it's diſtance always excecds that of the object from the glaſs. To illuſtrate this by an example; let the focal diſtance of the glaſs be 6 inches, and the following tables will give you the diſtunces oſ the object, as well as the eorreſponding diſtance of the imaginary image o p. Diſßtance of tbe object AO.  Diſtance of the imaginary image A c 6 l Inſinite. 30 I2 6 3 I a -3B O  ,. The rule for finding the ſize of the imaginary image o p, is eaſy and general. Draw a line CP p, through the extremity of the object, and c the center oſ the glauſs, and at p, where it meets the line o p, perpendicular to the axis of the glaſs, you find o p for the ſiue of the imaginary image: from whence you ſee, that this image is always larger than the object; and that in proportion as its diſtance from the glaſs exceeds that of the object from the glaſs: you alſo ſce, that the image is not inverted. From theſe obſervations you will comprehend the uſe of convex lenſes to perſons who do not ſee near objects diſtinctly, but ſee well thoſe that are at a diſtance; for by the help of theſe glaſſes they ſee near objects as if they were at a diſtance. OP CONCAVE GLASSES. As convex glaſſes cauſe the rays of light to converge and unile, ſo thoſe which are concave make them separate and diverge; for which reaſon, if diverging rays fall upon a concave lens, they will diverge more after they have paſſed through it than they did before; and ſuch rays as converge before their incidence, will, after their paſſage, converge leſs, their eſtect being directly contrary to that of convex lenſes. Let us conſider their nature by a diagram, fig. 12, pl. 2, and OP as an object at a great diſtance, ſo that the rays OM, OM, may be deemed parallel. Theſe falling upon the concave glaſs are thereby rendered more divergent, and go on in the directions N F, NF, as if they had proceeded from the point o, although they really proceed from o. As the rays are deemed parallel, if the glaſs had been convex, o uould have been the focus; but ſince there is no real concurrence of the rays, this point is termed the imaginary focus of the concave lens, and ſometimes the point of diſperſion, as the reſracted rays ſecm to diverge from this point. . Concave glaſſes have, therefore, no real focal point; but one that is imaginary, whoſe diſtance Ao, however, is termed the focal diſtance. When the object O Pis at an infinite diſtance, the imaginary image o ꝑ is repreſented at the focal diſtance of the concave lens, and on the ſame ſide as the object; but though this image is imaginary, the eye is affected in the ſuame manner as if the rays proceeded from that point. When the object is nearer the glaſs, the image o p alſo approaches it; but ſo that the image is always nearer the glaſs than the object; whereas in convex glaſſes it is further from the lens than the object. To macke this clearer, let us ſuppoſe, that the focal diſtance of the concave lens be 6 inches; the Diſtance of theobject O A.ll Diſtance of the image O A. Infinite ſ6 301s5 12 l4 6l3 3l2 2l1 1 The ſame rule as I gave you before determines the ſiue of the image, by drawing a line from the center of the gluſs to the extremity oſ the objec ct, which will paſs by p, the extremity of the image; this image is not inverted. Indecd, it is a gencral rule, that the image is always upright when it is on the ſame ſide oſ the glaſs as the object. The ſigure ſheus you, evidently, that in concave glaſſes the image is always leſs than the object. You may now ſec why concave glaſſes are oſ ſuch uſe to ſhort- ſighted perſons, or thoſe who only ſee near objects diſtinctly; for they will repreſent diſtant objects to them in the ſame manner as if they were really very near. A meniſcus has the properties of a convex lens, when the inner radius is the greater, and oſ a concave when the inner radius is the ſmalleſt. If the two ſurſaces are concentric, it has the properties of neither; for the rays will then emerge parallel. If the radius of convexity be leſs than the radius of concavity, then the meniſcus will have all the properties of a convex lens of the ſame focal diſtance. Iſ the radius of the concavity be leſs than the radius of convexity, then the meniſcus will have all the properties of a concave lens, whoſe focal diſtance is the ſame. When any ſinall object, or any poini of that object, is ſeen by refracted light, it appears in the direction of that line, which the rays deſcribe aſter tbeir laſt refraction. If the rays, that come ſrom any ſmall object. paſs through a glaſs priſm, of which AC B, ſig. 6, pl. 3, is a ſection, the ray DE will be reſracted towards a perpendicular, when it enters the priſm, and will deſcribe the line ETF, and wuhen it goes out of the glaſs it will be reſracted from a perpendicular into the line F G; uhich line is the direction of it aſter it's laſt refraction, and the object D vwill be ſeen at L, inſtead of D; for in this and all other caſcs of the ſame ſort, the picture of the object on the retina will be in the ſame place that it would have been if the eye had been really looking at an object placed at L; for the refraction gives the rays the ſame direction as if they had come originally from L. From hence we underſtand why an object ſeen through a mulliplying glass, or through a glaſs that is cut into different ſurfaces inclined to one another, appears, at one view, in many different places. If the object F is ſeen through the glaſs a b c d, ſig. 7, pl. 3, by the ray AB, that paſſes through the ſurſace c b, the object by the eve at A, vill be ſeen at B, the ray D d paſſes through the ſurſace c d, and when it is reſracted comes to the cye in the direction AD, as iſ it proceeded from D, and thereſore the object appears at D; and for the ſame reaſon through the ſurface a b, it appears at C; conſcquently there uill be the appearance oſ as many objects as there are ſuch ſurfaces on the glaſs, for cach of them ſheus the ſame object in a diſferent place. If ſuch a glaſs be ſhaken before the eye, the objects on the other ſide will uppear alſo to ſhake, as the ſituation of the ray by uhich it is ſeen will De varied with every motion of the glaſs. Oùu refracted viſion, it is not ibe object ilſelſ we see, but the laſt image of it, which conſiſts of all the imaginary r adiants, or points, srom vhence the rays appear io diverge aſter their laſst refraction. That you may the better underſtand what I here mean by the laſt image, let ſig. 12, pl. 3, be an object nearer to a convex lens than it's principal focus. The rays that diverge ſrom any point b in this object will, by raſſing through the lens, be made to diverge leſs, and the imaginary radiant will be more renote than the real one. Thus the rays b g, bl, when they have gone through the lens, will not proceed ſtrait forward in the lines g k, I p; but will be refracted into the leſs diverging directions gm, In, as if they had come from the imaginary radiant e, which is more remote than the real one b. The ſame will happen to the rays rthat come from a, or c, or any other point in the object; ſo that there will be ſomewhere behind the lens, as at d f, as many imaginary radiants as there are real ones in the object, and theſe imaginary radiants taken all together compoſe the laſt irage. And ſince all the rays fall upon the eye, as if they had diverged from this laſt image, the eye will be affected by the object a b e, juſt in the ſame manner when it looks through the lens, as it would be without the lens, by an object in all reſpects like def, or as it would by the laſt image, if without the lens the laſt image could be made viſible; and becauſe the eye is àſfected when it looks through the lens, as if de f was the object, and not a bc, thereſore we ſay, that it is not the object itſelf, but it's laſt image that we ſee. This is univerſal; in refracted viſion the eye is affected by the rays of light aſter refraction, as if they had come not from the object itſelf, but from it's laſt image, which conſiſts of all the imaginary radiants from whence the reſracted rays appear to diverge at the time they ſall upon the eye. ToO FIND THE FOCAL LENGTHS OF LENSES BY ExPrRIMENTS. 1. When the focal length of the lens does not exceed two or threc feet, it may be found by holding the lens at ſuch a diſtance from the wainſcot oppoſite a window ſaſh, that the image oſ the ſa may be diſtinct upon the wainſcot, and this diſtance may be conſidered as the focal Iength of the lens; but if the focal length is long, you muſt compute the focus by the ſubſequent rule. RULE. Meaſure the diſtance between the lens and the object, and alſo from the image; multiply theſe diſtances together, and divide the product by their ſum; the quotient will give the focal diſtance. Or, the ſquare of the diſtance, oſ the obſerved focus, divided by the diſtance of the object from the image, uill give the exceſs oſ the obſerved focus beyond the true focal diſtance. 2. You may find the focus by making a candle the object. To do this, move the lens or the candle, and the paper for receiving it's image, ſo that when the image is moſt diſtinct the lens may be exactly between the other two; then halve the diſtance between the object or it's image, and the lens is the focal diſtance. 3. If a ſinall hole about 1 or p of an inch be made in the window ſhutter oſf a darkened room, and a lens and piece of puper be held behind this hole at proper diſtances, the place where the image of the hole is diſtincteſt, may be determined very critically, and ſrom thence the focal length may be found by the foregoing rule-. 4. By the ſun's imuge. Place the iens ſo that it's axis may point as neur as poſſible to the ſun; then holding a paper oppoſite thereto, the burning point, or where the image of the ſun is ſmalleſt, and the limb moſt diſtinct, is the focus. This method is ſuſſiciently accurate for ſpectac le glaſſes and reading glaſſes, and ſuch as are broad in proportion to their focal length; but will not anſwer tfor lenſes oſ a long ſocus, unleſs they are ſuſſiciently long to exhibit the ſolar ſpots; becauſe in theſe caſes the image is only a glare oſ light without diſtinctreſs; but the inconveniences may be removed by the following method. 5. Cover the lens with a piece of paſteboard or paper, and make two round holes therein at an equal diſtance from the edge of the lens, and on one of it's diameters. The lens being thus covered, point it's axis to the ſun: now if a paper be held behind the lens, you vill find the two circles or white ſpots produced by the two holes, gradually approach nearer to each other as the paper is moved further; at laſt they will coincide; and if the paper be moved ſtill further, they will again ſeparate. The diſtance of the paper from the glaſs when the circles unite being meaſured, gives the focal diſtance. ToO FIND THE FOCALLENGTIH OF A CONCAVE LENS. Let the lens be covered with paper, having two ſmall circular holes; and on the paper for receiving the light deſcribe alſo two ſmall circles, but with their centers at twice the diſtance ſrom each other of the centers of the circles. Then move the paper to and fro till the middle of the ſun's light, coming through the holes, falls exactly on the middle of the circles; that diſtance of the paper from the lens will be the focal length required. To rinuD THE FOCUS OP A PLANO-CONVEX AND A PLANO-CONCAVE LENS. By ſimilar experiments you will find, 1. That the focus of a plano-convex, or of a plano-concave glaſs, is equal to a diameter of it's convex or concave ſurface, that is, of the whole ſphere it belongs to. That the focal diſtance of a double convex or double concave glaſs, of equal convexities or concavities, is equal to a ſemi-diameter of either of it's ſurſaces; and conſequently that the focal diſtance of a glaſs of unequal convexities or concavities, will have an intermediate length between a diameter and ſemi-diameter, of that ſurface which is moſt convex or concave. TO MEASURE THE FOCAL DISTANCE OF AGLOBE OF WATER AND OF GLASS. Take a hollow globe of glaſs, or inſtead of it a thin round flaſk or decanter, and making a moderate round hole about an inch diameter, in a piece of brown paper, paſte it on one ſide of the belly of the decanter; and having filled it with water, hold the covered ſĩide to the ſun, that the perpendicular rays may paſs through the middle of the water, and the emergent rays will be collected to a focus, whoſe neareſt diſtance from the decanter will be equal to the ſemidiameter of the belly of it; as uill appear by receiving the rays upon a paper, held at that diſtance. That this effect is owing to the uater, and not to the glaſs, will be evident by emptying the decanter; for the light that paſſes then through the hole, uill then be as broad as the hole itſelſ, at all diſtances of the paper from the decanter. Iſ a ſimilar experiment be tried, with a ſolid globe or ball of glaſs, the diſtance oſ the ſocus from the ncareſt part of the ball will be one quarter oſ its diameter. TO FIND THE VERTEX OR CENTER OF A LENS. Hold the lens at a proper diſtance from the eye, and obſerve the two reſlected images of a candle made by the tuo ſurſaces. Move the lens till stheſe images coincide, and that point is the vertex; and if this be in the middle of it's ſurface, the glaſs is truly centered, otherviſe it is not. The theory of real images is eaſily illuſtrated by experiment. For this purpoſe I ſhall draw a Iong line on the table, and place this convex lens at A, ſig. , pl. a, whoſe principal focus are at F and f. Now ſct oſf theſe diſtances on each ſide of A, and then ſet ofſf the diſtance A F on the part of the line AB, marking the parts ſo ſet oſf, 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. On ſD make fi equal to Af, and divide it into fi, fſ, f4, &c. ſo that theſe parts be reſpectively equal 4, 1, 4, &c. oſ ſr or Af. Ihis done, let us darken the room, and place a lighted candle over the diviſion marked 25 the image of the candle will then be ſeen diſtinct but inverted, upon a paper held over the correſponding fraction on the other ſide at 5. If you place the candle at 3 or 4 the paper for receiving the images muſt be held over iſ or 1, &. So that if the candle be moved from 2a to an infinite diſtance, the whole motion of the image will be from : to ſ; if the candle be at 1, the image will be at ĩ on the other ſide. Iſ the candle be brought nearer to F, the motions of the image and candle will be reciprocal to what they were before. But if the candle be placed any where between F and the lens, there will be no image formed. OF THEDEGREESOFBRIGHTNESS AND DISTINCTNESS OF AN IMAGE. Whatever be the ſhape and magnitude of the hole in the paper that covers part of a lens, the ſhape and magnitude oſ the image will be the ſame as when the lens is uncovered; becauſe any ſmall part of a pencil of rays has the ſume ſfocus as the whole: but the brightneſs of the picture will be diminiſhed, in proportion as the hole in the cover is diminiſhed; becauſe the quantity of light which illuminates every point of a picture is diminiſhed in that proportion. A GENERAL VIEW OF THE PROPERTIES AND PHENOMENA OF SINGLE LENSES, DEDUCED FROM THE PRINCIPLES ALREADY ADVANCED. * Let RF, ſig. 1, pl. 4, be conjugate foci; P, p, the principal foci. By conjugate foci are meant two points ſo ſituated, that either of them being the radiant, the other will be the focus. Then, 1. Parallel rays falling on one ſide of a tonvex lens, A, vill be refracted to P, or p, on the other ſide, ſig. 1, pl. 4 2. Parallel rays falling on one ſide of a concave lens, A, ſig. a, pl. 4, will by refraction diverge from P, or p, on the ſame ſide. 3. In a convex lens, rays diverging from P or p, ſig. 1, pl. 4, will emerge parallel on the other ſide. 4. In a concave lens, ſig. 2, pl. 4, rays converging to por P, will emerge parallel, going out on the ſame ſide. In convex lenſes, rays, fig. 1, pl. 4, diverging from R beyond P uill converge to F beyond P, and the contrary. 6. In convex lenſes, rays diverging from R fig. 3, pl. 4, which is nearer P, will diverge from F on the ſame ſide with R. 7. In convex lenſes, rays converging to F, ſię. 4, pl. 4, will by reſraction converge to R, nearer than P or fſ. 8. In concave lenſes, rays converging to R, ſi. a, pl. 4 beyond P, will diverge from F bey ond p, and the contrary. 9. In 9. In concave lenſes, rays converging to F, ſig. S and 6, pl. 4, ncarer than p, uill by refraction converge to R beyond T. 10. In concave lenſes, rays diverging from R, fig. 7, pl. 4. nearer than p, vill diverge from F nearer than p. 11. In concave lenſes, rays diverging from R, fic. 8, pl. 4, nearer than p, uill diverge from F nearer ſtill than p. A meniſcus may be conſidered as convex or concave, according as the center of it's inner ſurface is further off or nearer than the center of the outward ſurface. The length of an object is to the length of the image made by a lens, as the diſtance of the object from the center of the lens, to the diſtance of the image from the lens. The area of the object is to the arca of the image, as the ſquare of the object's diſtance from the lens is to the ſquare of the image's diſtance therefrom. A convex lens magniſies an object, when it is nearer than twice the principal focal diſtance; but if further off, the object is diminiſhed. A concave lens diminiſhes an object in all caſes. If the object and it's image be both on the ſame ſide of the lens, the image will be erect; iſ they be on different ſides, the image will be inverted. When the object and image are on different ſides of the lens, as the object approaches the lens, the image recedes from it; or if the object recedes, the image approaches. If the object and image be both on one ſide oſ the lens, if the object moves towards the lens, the image alſo moves towards it; and the contrary. In a convex lens, if the object be beyond the principal focus, it's image will be on the other ſide of the glaſs, and inverted. But if the object be nearer than the principal focus, the image will be on rhe ſame ſide of the glaſs, and erect. The diſtance and magnitude of the image may be increaſed at pleaſure, hy cauſing the object to approach the principal focus. In a concave lens, the object and image are always on one ſide of the lens. The image made by a lens, becomes viſible by placing the eye to receive the diverging rays going from the image, at a proper diſtance for diſtinct viſion. The image ſormed in the air by æ lens, may not only be ſeen by the eve placed in the diverging rays, but it may alſo be ſeen upon a picce of paper laced at the focus. If an object be placed at the principal focus of a lens, it's apparent magnitude at any place beyond the dens will be invariably the ſame, and equal to the apparent magnitude when ſeen from the center of the lens with the naked eye; ſo thar the apparent magnitude of an object placed i in the principal ſocus, will continue, whether the eye be moved nearer to or ſfurther ſrom the lens. The ncarer the eye is to a lens, the more oſ the object appears; the ſarther off, leſs of it is perceived. If the object be nearer than the principal focus, it's s appurent magnitude grous leſs in going from the glals. If the object be further, the apparent magnitude is increaſed, when the eye goes further from rhe glaſs. If the eye be ſixed at the principal focus, the apparent magnitude of an object will he invariably the ſame, wherever the object is ꝑplaced beyond the glaſs. If the eye be fixed at a leſs diſtance than the principal focus, the apparent magnitude of an object is diminiſhed, though by ſlow degrees, as it is removed from the lens. If the eye be fixed at a greater diſtance than the principal focus, the apparent magnitude of an object is increcaſed, as it is removed from the glaſs, till it comes to the conjugate focus in reſpect to the eve, and then it becomes infinite and confuſed, and begins to be inverted, and going further off is again diminiſhed. Iſ the eye and the ol ject be ſixed, and a concave lens be moved from either of them to the other, the apparent magnitude of the object will decreaſe to the middle, and then increaſe again. The brightneſs of an image formed by a lens from a luminous object, will be as the area of the lens directly, and the ſquare of the diſtance reciprocally. Though the brightneſs of the image increaſes with the area of the glaſs, the diſtinctneſs decreaſes; for it is only the rays very near the vertex that are refracted to a ſingle point in the picture; thoſe that are farther oſf deviate more and more, and thus render the picture confuſed. Other phenomena of lenſes will be conſidered in the courſe of theſe Lectures, which cannot be ſo well treated of till I have explained the nature of viſion. You now begin to be acquainted with the properties of another ſubtil agent, whoſe particles are immenſely minute, whoſe progreſi is aſtoniſhingly rapid, whoſe power and influence is beyond comprehenſion, maintaining an intercourſe between ſyſtems, and diffuſing numberleſs bleſſings in it's progreſs. You have ſeen that a body, fit to reflect light and exhibit colours, when placed in the light, not only returns the rajs oſ light that ſall upon it, to the luminous body by which it was enlightened, but ſends the picture of itſelſ quite round the hemiſphere in all directions, and to every point. Place a thouſand, a million of ſuch bodies near each other, each perſormis the ſume operation; the rays of light and their colours come inſtantaneous to the ſpectator's eye ſrom ecach, without being diſturbed or diverted in their paſſage by the numberleſs rays returned in difſerent directions by other contiguous bodies. You have ſcen the vehemence with which this agent, uhoſe parts are ſo wonderfully minute, acts when its rays are collected by the burning-glaſs; that no terreſtrial ſubſtance was capable of v ithſtanding it's eſſects without being deſtroyed, or decompoſed. Some oſ the eſſects produced by glaſſes of diſferent ſigures, have been explained to you. You have alſo Tſeen objects ſeemingly ſuſpended in the air, where nothing was to be ſound that was ſenſible to the touch. In the camera obſcura, you ſaw nature draw her oun picture inverted, and in miniature: you ſau a picture painted in a moment with a beauty, a vivacity, and ſoſtneſs of colours, that would make a landſcape drawn by the firſt artiſts appear faint and languid: the picture of the camera was animated, the trees were agitated by the winds, the flocks bounded upon the lawn, and the ſun-beams played upon the water: andyou learnt that all theſe ſcenes depended upon the refraction of the rays of light, and were made acquainted with the laus oſ this reſraction. In the xviith Lecture yon vill ſee theſe laus applied to explain the nature of viſion. I cannot ſiniſh this Lecture without pointing out to you the analogy betueen the light of revelation, and the light oſ the heavens: * the ſimilitude is ſuch, that the language belonging to one may vith with great propriety be transferred to the other. As the firſt knowledge of religion was revealed by Gob; ſo the ſirſt material light was created by him. Gob, who alone is the living light of ſpirit, ſou, and ſentiment; the perpetual fountain of every ſtream of beauty and truth; us ſaid, LET THERE BE LIGHT; and inſtantly the internity oſ his ever-living light kindled up an externity of corporeal irradiation, that has it's effluence from him, and cannot beam but by him. Though the ſolar light is perpetually ſhining forth, it falls very unequally on the world: in ſome places the day is equal to months, in others it's duration is only that of a few hours. It comes pure from its ſource, but often meets with a foul atmoſphere in it's courſe that obſcures it, and changes it's direction. It ſhews many things diſferent from what they are, but never miſleads any one. It ſhines indifferently on all objects, is totally rejected by ſome, tranſmitted by others, bent and diſtorted by a third kind, and uſefully imbibed by a fourth. It is the means of the knowledge of many things, yet it's own nature is but little kcnown. It enlightens and enlivens the world, and promotes the vegetation of poiſon as well as of wholeſome food. Is not all this equally true of the light of revelation, as of material light? They that cenſure the one, may find pretences equally ſtrong to traducc the other; and whatever objections the infidel points againſt the ſcriptures, will be found to apply equally ſtrong againſt the manifeſtation of God in the viſible courſe of nature. LECTURE XVI. OF CATOPTRICS. FII R having explained to you, as conciſely ſ as I am able, the laus oſ reſraction, and the eſfect produced by theſe laus; I ſhall proceeè 10O explain the doctrine of catoptrics, or that part of cpties which treats oſ the reſlection of light. You vill here, among other things, learn how the figure of a man ſix fect high is ſeen in a glaſs mirror not above three feet; how in a convex mirror figures are reduced to a Lilliputian ſiæe, and in a concave mirror expanded to a gigantic ſiæe; wonders that the curious would wiſh0 comprehend, and the inexperienced to examine. Beſore Neceton publiſhed his diſcoveries concerning the nature and propertics of light, it was a principle generally received, that the rays of light vere reſiected, as other bodies, by ſtriking on their ſolid and impervious parts, as you ſee a marble bound when ſtruck upon the pavement. Newton taught mankind, that the particles of light are turned back before they touch the reflecting body, hy ſome potwer which is equally diffuſed all over the ſurface of the body. If, ſays he, the rays of light were reflected by impinging on the ſolid parts of bodies, their reflections ſrom ſolid bodies could not be ſo regular as they are; for however poliſhed the ſmootheſt object may ſeem to our ſight and touch, yet it is in fact one continucd aſſemb lage of ine qualities. For in poliſhing glaſs with ſand, putty, or tripoly, it is not to be imagined, that thoſe ſubſtances can by grating r and freiting the glaſs bring all it's leaſt ſaces ſhall be truly plane, or truly ſpherical, and look all the ſame uay, or compoſe one even ſurface. The ſmaller the particles are, the ſmaller will be the ſcratches by which they continually wear away the glaſs until it be poliſhed; but be they ever ſo ſmall, they can wear away the glaſi no otherwiſe than by grating and ſcratching, and breaking the protuberances, and therefore poliſh it no otherwiſe than by bringing it's roughneſs to a very fine grain, ſo that the ſcratches and fſrettings of the ſurface become too ſmall to be viſible. From ſuch a ſurface it cannot be ſuppoſcd, that rays will be reflected with ſuch uniformity as we uſually obſerve: on the contrary it is highly probable, that if light were reflected by impinging on the ſolid parts oſ glaſs, it would be ſcattered as much by the moſt poliſhed, as by the rougheſt ſurfacę. It is therefore a problem, how glaſs poliſhed by fretting ſubſtances, can reflect light in ſo regular a manner; and this problem is ſcarce otherwiſe to be ſolved, than by ſaying that the reflection of a ray is not effected by the reflecting body, but by ſome power of the body which is regularly di ſfuſed all over it's ſurface, and by which it acts upon the ray without immediate contact, ſo that it is reflected before it arrives at the ſurface. A ray of light can fall but two ways upon a mirror, that is, either perpendicularly or obliquely; and experience has proved, that when light is reflected, the angle of reſtection is always equal to the angle of incidence. Thus, ſuppoſe ab, ſig. as, pl. 1, to be the ſurface of a plane mirror, if a ray of light fc falls perpendicularly thereon, it is reflected in the ſame direction, making ſtill a right angle with the mirror. Iſ it falls in an oblique direction, &c. it is reflected in the direction c d, making with the mirror the angle of reflection deb perfectly equal to the angle of incidence e c a. I ſhall prove this to you by two experiments; firſt, I ſhall let a ray paſs through a hole into a dark chamber, and ſall obliquely upon a plane mirror; you vuill find, that at equal diſtances from the point of reflection, the incident and reflected ray will be the ſame height from the ſurface. It is more accurately proved by the braſs circle uſed before, ſig. s, pl. 2. I place the two radii at equal angles from the diameter: now if you look through the hole or ſight down upon the center of the mirror, you uill ſee the point of the other radii; uhich proves, that the ray which comes from that point is reflected from the center of the mirror to the eye, in the ſame angle in which it ſell on the mirror. This axiom, that the angle of reflection is always equal to the angle of incidence, holds good in every caſe of reflection, whether from plane or ſpherical ſurfaces, and that whether they are convex or concave. All refection is reciprocal. If the ray ec, aſter it has been reflected in the line dc, is turned bac k again in that direction, it will be reflected into e c; thereſore if deb is the angle of incidence, e a c will be the angle of reflection; and if e c a be the angle oſ incidence, dcb will be the angle ol reflection. This general law, that ſbe angle of incidence is always equal to tbe angle of reflection, is the ſfoundation of all catoptrics, and is ſufficient ſor demonſtrating all the phenomena thereof: other laws are only conſequences deducible from this principle, or applications thereof to particular effects. With refiected as with refracted rays, it is neceſſary that ſeveral rays ſhould act at the ſame time, in order to make an impreſſion on our eyes; theſe rays may be diſpoſed differently with reſpect to rach other; they may be either parallel, convergent, or divergent; and the ſurface on which they fall, may be either plane, convex, or concave. Each of theſe circumſtances we ſhall conſider ſeparately. I. Parallel rays falling upon a plane mirror are parallel after reſlection: The parallel rays d h; c a, ſig. 1, pl. 5, are reflected from the ſurface a b to h and k, making the angle of reflection i b h equal to the angle of incidence fb d, and the angle of reflection g à k equal to that of incidence ea c; and conſequently from the principle of geometry the two rays db, e a, are parallel after reflection. ãl This may be proved alſo by letting two parallel rays (in a dark chamber) fall upon a mirror; and you vill find that they retain their paralleliſm after reflection in every inclination of the mirror. 2. When incident divergiug rays are reſlected from a plane mirror. The diverging rays db, ca, fig. a, pl. 5, are reflected to h and k, and have the ſame degree of divergence at F as they would have had at E. Iſ they had gone on in their firſt direction, the points at F and F are equally diſtant from the points of contact a and b; thereſore the divergence of tbe rays is tbe ſame aſfter reſlection as before. 3. When incident converging rays falling upon a plane mirror are reſlected tberefrom. The converging rays db, c a, fig. 3, pl. s, if the mirror were not interpoſed, would meet at E, but are ſo refiected from a and b, as to make the angles of reflection g b k, ea h, equal to their reſpective angles of incidence fb d, eac, and unite in F, a point at the ſame diſtance ſrom a and b as the point E: ibeir convergence after reſlection is therefore the ſume as before it. Let us now conſider a convex ſurſace, and you will find, I. That parallel rays falling upon a convex ſurface are rendered diverging by reflection. 2 . That converging rays, when reſlected from a convex ſurface, become leſs convergent, and may be rendered parallel, or even diverging, according to the degree of convexity of the reflecting ſurface. 28 . Divergent rays are rendered more diverging, ſo that a convex ſurface always tends to ſcatter the rays by diminiſhing their convergence, and increaſing their divergence. li A every curved ſurſace may be conſidered as formed of an inſfinite number oſ ſmall ſtrait lines, which conſtitute the elements thercof; I ſhall, to render this ſubject more clear, repreſent a convex ſurface by tuo ſtrait lines inclined to each other: by thus making the clements conſpicuous, you will more readily comprehend why the rays of light, when reflected from a convex ſurface, take a diſferent direction ſrom what they had when they fell upon the mirror. Let b d, ſig. 4. pl. s, repreſent a convex mirror, and a b, c d, parallel rays falling.thereon; and becauſe the angles of reflection c bf, hd i, are always equal, the rays are, as you ſee by the figure, rendered diverging, and proceed to e and h. In the ſame manner the converging rays a b, c d, ſig. s, pl. 5, which if the mirror bd were not interpoſed would unite in m, have their direction fo changed by reflection, that they proceed to and unite at , much further from the points of contact b and d, than the point m; and you muſl perceive from the figure, that the inclination of the two elements b d, may be ſo increaſed as to render them parallel, or even diverging. Thus the rays ab, cd, ſig. 6, pl. 5, which without the interpoſition of the mirior would diverge but very little at m, are thereby rendered more diverging; ſo that they are much ſurthei apart at l, than atm we have now only to conſider the directior of rays oſ light when reſlected from a concave ſurface; and here you will find, I. That parallel rays are by reſtection made converging. 2. That converging rays become more convergent. 3. That diverging rays become leſs divergent. Aview of the diagrams is ſufficient to prove the truth of theſe propoſitions. Let b d, ſig. 7, pl. s, repreſent a concave mirror; the rays a b, c d, which were parallel before reſſection, are by the laws thereof made to converge in b. The rays a b, cd ſig. 8, pl.  which, without the interpoſition of the mirror, would unite at m, are thereby ſo reflected as to meet at l, nearer the points of Contact b d than m. Laſtly, the rays a b and c d, ſig. 9, pnl. s, uhich before reflection were divergent, converge after reflection mecting at o. From the principles thus laid down, it is eaſy to ſee what will be the effect of mirrors, and to explain the principal phenomena which they occaſion. By a mirror, or ſpeculum, we, in general, mean any ſubſtance whoſe ſurface is ſuſficiently poliſhed to reflect uniformly the greater part of the rays which fall upon it, and to exhibit an image of the objects placed before it. They are generally divided into plain, convex, and concave mirrors: there are beſides theſe couical and cylindrical, pyramidical and priſinatical mirrors. OF PLANE MIRRORS. It will be neceſſary here to remind you of what has been already mentioned; namely, that a p enoil of rays emanating from any given point of ſpace, is the means by which the ſight aſſures us, rhat a body exiſts at or in that point; it is plain, thereſore, that we are liable to deception in that reſpect; for if the pencil be ſo affected by reflection (or refraction) as to proceed with different divergency or direction, that is, in the ſame direction as it would have proceeded if coming ſrom ſome other point, the ſenſe will reſer the place oſ the object to the point, which is in the direction oſ the laſt courſe of the rayg. . In a plane mirror a b, fig. 10, pl. s, the image of an object c appears to an eye at e, behind the mirror in the direction e g, anã always in the interſection g, of the perpendicular c g, and the reflected ray. e g, and conſequently at g, as far behind the mirror as the object c is before it. We therefore ſee the image in the ſame place, whereſoever the refieccted ray be by which it is perceived; for as a plane mirror does not alter the relative poſition of the rays which fall on it, the diverging rays proceeding from c, are reflected rowards the eye e, by the mirror a b, with the ſame degree oſ divergence, and have their imaginary point of union g at the ſame diſtance behind the mirror that c is beſore it. PFoor the ſame reaſon a plane mirror does not change, or alter the figure or ſize of objects; but the whole image is equal and ſimilar to the whole object, and has a like ſituation with reſpect to one ſide of the plane that the object has with reſpect io the other ſor the converging rays Km, L n, fig. 11I, pl. 5, proceeding from the extremities oſ the object K L, and ſalling upon the mirror a b. are reflected touards the eye e with the ſame deree of convergence, and conſcquently ſhew the image kl under an angle equal to that by which the object would be ſeen ſrom the point i, if the inirror were not interpoſed. From what has been explained, it follows, that if an object KL is inclined to a plane mirror it's image k l will be inclined thereto in a contrary direction. If an object AB, ſis. 13, pl. s, be placed parallel to a plane mirror C D, and at the ſame diſtance therefrom as the eye o; the part of the mirror CD, on which the rays AC, BD, from the ohject fall, which are reflected to the eye, will be one balf the length of AB. For the image being as far behind the glaſs as the object is before it, the rays O G, OH, are each divided at the middle oſ the mirror CD, and conſequently where they only ſpread half as much, as they would do at double the diſtance. Thereſore to ſee the whole of an object in a mirror, the length and breadth of the mirror muſt be half the length and breadth of the object. Hence if the length and breudth oſ an object be given, it is eaſy to determine the ſize of a mirror that will ſhew the whole of an object when placed at the ſame diſtance therefrom as the eye. Hence a perſon viewing himſelſ in a plane looking-glaſs, placed upright. will ſee his image complete in a part of the glaſs, whoſe length and breadth is equal to half the length and breadth of the correſponding parts of his owun body; and this will be always the caſc at whatever diſtance he ſtands from the glaſs. A ſpectator will ſee his own image as far beyond the ſpeculum as he is before it; and as he moves to or from the ſpeculum, the image will, at the ſame time, move towards or from him on the other ſide; but apparently with a double velocity, becauſe the two motions are equal and contrary. In like manner, if, while the ſpectator is at reſt, an object be in motion, it's image behind the ſpeculum will be ſeen to move at the ſame rate. And iſf the ſpectator moves, the images of objects that are at reſt will appear to approach, or recede from him, after the ſame manner as when he moves towards real objects; plane mirrors reflecting not only the object, but the diſtance alſo, and that exactly in it's natural dimenſions. One principle is ſuſficient for explaining, with facility, the phenomena of objects ſeen in a plane mirror. It is this: That the image of an object, ſeen in a plane mirror, is always in a perpendicular in the mirror joining tbe ob ject and the image ; and that the image is as much on one ſide the mirror as the ol ject is on tbe other. With the aſſiſtance of this principle and a little geometry, you muy readily ſolve the principal queſtions that can be propoſed on this ſubject. The celebrated Archimedes, at the ſiege of Syracuſe, is ſaid to have deſtroyed the ſhips oſ Marcellus, by a machine compoſed of ſpeculums. Since a plane ſpeculum, in theory, reſſects all the light, which is incident under the ſame afſections with which it was incident, the rays of the ſun coming from a vaſtly diſtant object may be conſidered as parallel, and will be reflected parallel to cach other, and conſequently will heat and illuminate any ſubſtance in the ſame manner as if the ſun ſhone upon it. Two ſpeculums, which reflect the light on the ſame ſubſtance, will heat it tuice as much as the ſum's direct light. Three will heat it three times as much; and by increaſing the number of ſpeculums, a prodigious degree ot heat may be produced. Though a plane ſpeculum is ſuppoſed, in theory, to reflect all the light which falls upon it, yet in practice almaſ halp ibe light is leſt on account of the inaccuracy oſ the poliſh, and the uant of perfect opacity in the ſubſtance of the mirror. Notwithſtanding this, M. Buſfon, in 1747, conſtructed a burning machine of this kind. It conſiſted of 168 plane mirrors, cach 8 inches tance might be varied, and alſo the number of glaſſes, as occaſion required. In the month of March, 1747, with 40 glafſes he burnt a plank at the diſtance of about 70 fect. O F CONVEX MIRRORS. Convex mirrors ſpread or diverge reflected rays; they render parallel rays diverging; they diminiſh the convergence of converging rays; in ſome caſes they render them parallel, and even divergent. et us ſuppoſe an object de, ſi. 13, pl. 5. placed before a convex mirror a b. Of the two cones of rays proceeding from the extremities of the object, the rays d p, and e p, which if the mirror were not interpoſed would proceed to and unite at p, are reflected leſs converging on the line f g5 the rays d k, el, which would have converged at m, are reflected parallel; the two rays d h, and e i, which would have met at c the center of convexity, are reflected back on themſelves, becauſe of the perpendicularity of their incidence; they are, however, diverging; and all the rays proceeding from points beyond the two laſt will be reflected more diverging. In convex mirrors, as well as thoſe that are plane, the image always appears erect, and behind the reflecting ſurface, but diſfers from it in other reſpects; for, I. Tbe image, in a convex mirror, is alπays ſmaller than the object, and the diminution is greater in proportion as the object is further from the mirror. This will appear clear to you on reflecting on the properties ofſ a reflecting convex ſurface, that incident converging rays are thereby rendered leſs convergent: thus let CD, ſig. 14, pl. s, be an object placed before a convex mirror a b, two rays Ce, Dd, proceeding 234 LECTURES OE NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. ſr m the extremities oſ the object, theſe, if the muror vere not interpoſed, would converge at ſ but arc refiected hy the mirror leſs converging, ſo as to meet ati, thus ſorming a more acute angle; the object appears ſmailler than it would have done if it had been viewed ſrom the point f. 2. The image does not appear ſo far bebind the reflecting ſurface as in a plane inirror. Let G, ſig. 15, pl. s, be a point oſ any object, ſrom whence a diverging cone oſ rays proceeds, and ſalls upon the mirrors; the e as are reſiected more diverging, and have cnſequentl; their imaginary focus, or point of uc.on 7, much nearer, by which means the image appears to be nearer the reflecting ſurſace than the objcct; and this eſ.ect increaſes in proportion to tue convexity of the mirror. Concave mirrors have a real ſocus, convex mirrors only a virtual ſocus, and this focus is behind the mirror, diſtant thereſrom halſ the radius oſ it's convexity. The image of a ſtrait object, not too ſmall, and placed parallel or oblique to the mirror, is ſeen curved in the mirror, becauſc the different ints of the object are not all at an equal diſtance from the ſurface of the mirror. The point o, ſig. 14, pl. 5. ſor example, oſ the object d e is ncarer than the reſt to the ſurface of the mirror, the extreme points d e are more diſtant; they will oſ eonſequence be repreſented behind the mirror, at diſtances roportional to thoſe at which they are placed heſſe. whence it becomes bent or curved. OF CONCAVE MIRRORS. I have already ſhewn you, that it is the property of concave mirrors to collect the rays of light they reflect, converging parallel rays, increũng the convergence or thoſe that are already verging rays, in ſome caſes rendering them parallel, and even convergent. Theſe effects are all in proportion to the concavity of the mirror. Tuhe point where the rays unite is called the focus of the mirror; but this focus is not the ſame for all kinds of incident rays. Parallel rays a b, d e, falling upon a concave mirror mo, are reflected ſo as to unite at F, ſig. 16, pl. 5, which point is diſtant ſrom it's ſurface 3 of the diameter of the ſphere of the mirror; this point is called the focus of parallel rays, or true focus of the mirror. Converging rays, ſuch as f g, hi, are reflected more converging, and unite at , between the focus of parallel rays and the mirror. Laſtly, diverging rays proceeding from a point further from the mirror than the true focal point, as Rm, Ro, are reflected converging, and meet at a point P, further from the mirror than the focal point of parallel rays. But if the point K, from which the diverging rays proceed, is nearer the mirror than the point E, they are diverging; that at g would proceed to f, and that at i towards h. The focus therefore of parallel rays is at one fourth the diameter of the ſphericity of the mirror. The focus of converging rays is nearer the mirror than that of parallel rays; but the focus of diverging rays is more diſtant. Plane and convex mirrors exhibit their images as if behind the mirror and erect. The efſectof concave mirrorsis different; they only ſhew the image behind the mirror and erect. when the object is placed between the mirror and the focus of parallel rays, and then the image is larger than the object. Let AB ſig. 17, pl. s, be an object placed before a concave mirror E F, but nearer than the focus of parallel rays: the two rays Ae, Bf, from the extremities of the object, if the mirror were not interpoſed, would converge in d; but are reflected more converging, and unite at D, and there ſorm a larger angle, and of courſe exhibit the image a t larger than the object. This image appears further from the back-ſide of the mirror than the object does from the foreſide. Let A, ſig. 18, pl. 5, be a point oſ any object placed nearer the mirror than it's focus, and from which a cone of diverging rays proceeds; uheſc vwill be reflected leſs diverging, and therefore have their imuginary ſocus a further off, and conſequently the image will ſeem at a greater diftance behiind the mirror, than the object is ſrom the front of it. But if the object be further from the mirror than F, for example, at e, ſig. 18, pl. s, the rays e b, ed, diverging but little, are reflected convergent, and exhibit the image at E; ſo that if the eyc o recedes far enough to receive the diverging rays ſrom E, it uill perceive the image at E between itſelf and the mirror. The reaſon is plain; every enlightened point of an object becomes viſible by means oſ a cone of diverging rays procecding therefrom; uwe ceuſe to ſce it if the rays become parallel or converging, which happens when the object is further from the mirror than it's focal point F; the eye therefore muſt recede, till the rays, having croſſed, become divergent. This image is always inverted, as ba, the image oſ BA, ſig. 19, pl.55 ſor we cannot ſee the whole of an object AB, unleſs diverging rays from it's extremities ſall upon the eye; and this cannot in the preſent inſtance take place till aſter theſe rays have croſſed betu een the object and mirror, by which of courſe they are invertcd. I ſhall endeavour to illuſtrate further, by a diagram, the theory oſ the foci ofſ rays reflected by n ſpherical ſpeculum. Through the center O oſ the ſpeculum A4, ſi. s, pl. 6, draw an indefinite line B D; biſect OA in F; from the points O and A, divide the lines OB, AD, into parts each equal to OF or FA, marked by the figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, &c. And from F, take on each iide F 1, F§, F4, F4æ, &c. each equal to the whole, or 4, 1, , &c. of FO, FA. Nov, if in the line OB, the point 1 or 2, 2, 4. &c. be the focus of incident rays, the correſpondent point 1, or 1, à, , &c. in the line OF, will be the focus oſ the reflected rays. And vice verſa, if the laſt be the foci of incidence, the former will be the foci aſter reflection. In like manner, if 1, 2, 3, a, &c. in the line AD be the foci of incidence, 1, 4, 5. 1, &c. vill be the foci of reflected rays; and vice verſu: ſo that the ſocus of incidence and reflection unite in O and A: and their motions from O and A towards B and F in the one caſe, and towards D and EFin the other, are exactly ſimilar, F being the ſocus of parallel rays in both caſes. Iſ in a dark room a lighted candle be held farther from a concave ſpeculum than it's principal ſocus F, as ſuppoſe at 2, it's image will be ſeen diſtinct, but inverted upon a white paper, held at the correſponding point 1. And if the candle be moved to or ſrom the ſpeculum, ſo as to retain the diſtinct image thereoſ, you vwill obtain an ocular proof of the theory of the foci of incident and reflected rays; when the candle is at o, the paper will be there alſo. But as the image of an object between F and a concave ſpeculum, or any where before a convex one, is on the other ſide of the ſpeculum, in either caſe, the experiment of the candle and the paper cannort take place. The appearance of the image in the air between the mirror and the object, has been productive of many agrecable deceptions, which, when exhibited with art and an air of myſtery, have been very ſucceſsful, and a ſource of gain to many oſ our public /bowmen. I uas well pleaſed at one oſ theſe exhibitions, by a man in Bond-ſtreet, where a death-head and other objects wete exhibited in this manner, in ſuch a way as to ſurprize the ignorant, and yet not diſguſt thoſe who were better informed. If you place yourſelf before this concave mirror, but farther from it than the focus, you vill ſee an inverted image of yourſelf in the air between you and the mirror, but you will find the image of a ſmaller ſize than yourſelf. If you hold out your hand towards the mirror, the hand of the image will come out towards your hand, and when at the center of concavity be of an equal ſize with it; and you may ſhake hands with this aerial image. If you move your hand farther, you will find the hand of the image paſs by your hand, and come between it and your body; if you move your hand towards either ſide, the hand of the image will move towards the other, the image moving always contrariwiſe to the object. All this while, thoſe who are by-ſtanders ſee nothing of the image, becauſe none of the reflected rays that form it enter their eyes. To render this effect more ſurprizing and more vivid, the mirror is oſten concealed in a boxX. This pleaſing and ſimple experiment has been exhibited as an illuſtration of the Newtonian doctrine of ſpace. The experiment ſhews, that by an image formed in the air, at a certain diſtance between a concave ſpeculum and a perſon looking into it, extenſion and form become an object of ſenſe, where there exiſts neither ſolidity nor ſenſible reſiſtance. But this does not prove, that an image can be formed in a vacuum, in empty ſpace, or where there is no matter, unleſs it can firſt be roved, that there can be no matter where we are not ſenſible of reſiſtance. For oꝑ the contrary, it may be inferred from this phenomenon, that thoſe ſpaces, which in a Iooſe and incorrect ſenſe we call emptiy, are as ſull of matter as thoſe in which we find the moſt ſolid matter: for as our corporeal ſenſes can be only affected by matter, they are certainly infallible ſtandards for determining where matter is; ſo that you may be as aſſured of a fullneſs of matter, where you ſee any thing though you cannot feel it, as you would be certain there was matter where you felt it, though you could nor ſee it, or though it were of the nature of that matter to be inviſible. All kinds of reſlected images ſhew, that wherever an object can be formed to impreſs the ſenſes of ſight, there muſt be as great a fullneſs of matter as in the original object, from whence the image was carried to thoſe ſpaces where it is again rene wed. Mr. Ferguſon mentions two pleaſing experiments to be made with a concave mirror, which you may take an opportunity of trying at leiſure. If a fire be made in a large room, and a ſmooth mahogany table be placed at a good diſtance near the wall, before a large concave mirror, ſo that the light of the fire may be reflected from the mirror to it's focus upon the table; if you ſtand by the table, you will ſee nothing but a longiſh beam of light; but if you ſtand at ſome diſtance, as towards the fire, you will ſee an image of the fire on the table, large and erect: and if another perſon, who knows nothing of the matter before hand, ſhould chaànce to come into the room, he would be ſtartled at the appearance, for the table would ſeem to be on fire, and by being near the wainſcot, endanger the whole houſe. There ſhould be no light in the room but what proceeds from the fire. If the fire be darkened by a ſcreen, and a large candle be placed at the back of the ſcreen, a perſon ſtanding by the candle will ſee the appearance of a fine large ſtar or rather planet upon the table, as large as Venus or Jupiter; and if a ſmall wax taper be placed near the candle, it will appear as a ſatellite to the candle; if the taper be moved round the candle, the ſatellite will go round the planet. Numerous and aſtoniſhing are the phenonena that may be produced by concave mirrors: one or tuo more I ſhall exhibit, your own ingenuity ulill enable you to vary them. Stand up on this ſtool, and tell me what you ſce on the pot near the partition. A bunch of flowers. Put out your hand, and lay hold of them. They have evaded your endeavours, and you find that you attempted to graſp. a ſhadow. The ſenſe of ſight is certainly ſubject to the greateſt illuſion, and this experiment is one among many inſtances. To explain the myſtery, go behind the partition, and vou vill find that I have placed a mirror exactly facing the hole in the partition. There is alſo an Argand's lamp, ſo placed as to throw a ſtrong light on the object, without thro. ing one on the mirror. The bunch oſ flowers is ſituated beneath the aperture in the partition, but inverted ſo as to receive the light from the lamp. The ſpace between the back part of the partition is painted black to prevent any reflection of light from falling on the mirror. The reſt is exactly ſimilar to what you have already ſeen, and what has been already explained. Take a glaſs bottle, fill it partly with water, and cork it in the common manner; place this bottle oppoſite a concave mirror, and beyond it's focus that it may appear reverſed; then place yourſelf ſtill farther diſtant than the bottle, and it will be ſeen in the air inverted, and the water which is actually in the lower part of the bottle will appear to be in the upper. If you invert the bottle while beſore the mirror, the image will appear in it's natural erect poſition, and the water will appear in the lower part of the bottle: while it is in this inverted ſtate, uncork the bottle, and while the water is running out, the image is filling; but as ſoon as the bottle is empty, the illuſion ceaſes. If the bottle likewiſe be quite full, there is no illuſion. The remarkable circumſtances in this experiment are, 1. NGt only to ſee an object where it is not, but alſo where it's image is not. 2. That of two objects which are really in the ſame place, as the ſurface of the bottle and the water it contains, the one is ſeen in one place, the other in another, &c. It is ſuppoſed that this illuſion ariſes partly from our not being accuſtomed to ſee water ſuſpended in a bottle with the neck downuard, and partly from the reſemblance there is between the colour of air and the water. As parallel rays which fall on a concave mirror are reflected ſo as to unite at a focus; and as the ſun is ſo remote, that the rays of each beam may be conſidered as parallel, they will converge to the principal focus of the mirror, and the heat produced by this means will be ſufficient to ſet fire to ſuch bodies as are placed beſore the mirror at the principal focal diſtance, that is, half a ſemidiameter of the mirrors concavity. The diſferent degrees of heat at the focus of different concave mirrors, is eſtimated in the ſame manner as we have already eſtimated the power at the focus of a convex lens. The ancients made uſe of concave mirrors to rekindle the veſtal fires. Plutarch, in his liſe oſ Numa, ſays that the inſtruments uſed for this purpoſe, were diſhes, which were placed oppoſite to the ſun, and the combuſtible matter placed in the center, by which it is probable he meant the focus, conceiving that to be at the center oſ the mirror's concavity. You have, no doubt, long ſince perceived that there is a great reſemblance between the properties of convex lenſes and concave mirrors. Convex lenſes and concave mirrors form an inverted focal image of any remote object by the convergence of the pencil of rays. Concave lenſes and convex mirrors have alſo conſiderable reſemblance in their properties; they in general form an erect image in the virtual focus, by the divergence of the pencil of rays. In thoſe inſtruments, as teleſcopes, whoſe performances are the effects of reflection, the concave mirror is ſubſtituted in the place oſ the convex lens, and the convex mirror may be uſed inſtead of the concave lens; but their diſpoſitions with reſpect to each other muſt neceſſarily differ from thoſe oſ lenſes, on account of the opacity oſ the one, and the tranſparency of the other. The following curious experiments by Mr. King,  are too important to be paſſed over; beſides which, they have an intimate relation to ſome of the ſubjects already treated. Mr. K. placed a common ſize candle at the diſtance of ſix feet from a concave glaſs mirror, two feet and an half in diameter; and at the diſtance of ſeventeen feet three inches, he placed a ſecond glaſs mirror, two feet diameter; and in the focus of this glaſs, at two feet ſix inches, he placed the bulb of a thermometer, graduated with Fahrenheit's ſcale. In five minutes the quickſilver in the thermometer, though at a5 feet 9 inches from the candle, roſe 8 degrees, namely, from 60 to 68; on being removed from the focus, it fell again, to 6. That it's riſe was not occaſioned by any additional warmth in the room was certain, becauſe another thermometer which was in the room did not riſe at all in the interval. The alteration of the height of the quickſilver was therefore ſolely owing to the concentration and convergency of the rajs oſ the light oſ the candle at the focus. Ilc He then removed the candle, and, under ihe fame circumſtances, placed a little wire grate 4 inches in diameter, containing 3 pieces of Iighted charcoal, and caufing them to burn bright by blowing a common pair of bellows, the thermometer was again placed in the focus; in ſix minutes it roſe 19 degrees, from 6o to 79, although the heat of the room was no way increaſed by the experiment, as it was very large. One remarkable circumſtance attended this experiment, which was, that there was very ſenſibly to be perceived a ſmall increaſe of heat the whole way ſtom the ſurface of the ſecond mirror to the focus; whereas when the rays of the fun are made ufe of, no ſuch increaſe oſ heat at all is ever perceived withim the conical convergency. Aſter making ſeveral ſimilar experiments, all of which concurred in proving that the effect was produced by the rays of light and heat from the ignited bodies, Mr. . placed a tea urn of boiling water in the place of the charcoal, at the diſtance of 6 feet frum the firſt mirror, and placing the thermometer in the ſocus oſ the ſecond mirror, in the ſpace of five minutes the quickſilver roſe one degree, which was even more than could be expected; in the next five minutes, the thermometer advanced one degree more, and yet the other thermometer in the room remained ſtationary; in another five minutes, the ſteam cooling, the thermometer began to deſcend, and in five minutes imore the quickſilver fell one degree. Tuhe reſult of theſe experiments is clear and obvious: That fire is in a degree ſubject to the ſame kind of refiexibility and refrangibility  with the rays oſ light. . R a If  For a convex lens interpoſed between the mirror and the If a luminous body be placed in the focus of a concave mirror, it's rays will be reflected in parallel lines, and will therefore ſtrongly enlighten, at a great diſtance, a ſpace of the ſame dimenſion with the mirror. If the luminous object be placed nearer than the focus, it's rays will diverge, and conſequently enlighten a larger ſpace. It is on this principle that reverberators are conſtructed. But few articles on this ſubject remain to be diſcuſſed. I have only to ſhew you how to ſind the principal focus of theſe mirrors, and then give you a conciſe view of the properties we have already inveſtigated, and an explanation of the varions phenomena of pictures viewed in a concave ſpeculum. TO FIND THE FOCAL LENGTH OFP A SPHERICAL SPECULUM. 1ſt. For a Concave Speculum. Place the ſpeculum ſo that it's axis may be nearly towards the center oſ the ſun. If the ſpeculum be concave, find the burning point, or reccive the image upon a white piece of paper; and the diſtance between the focus ſo found, and the vertex oſ the ſpeculum, is the ſocal length. Or, cover the ſpeculum vith a ſheet of opake paper, in which make two or more holes, and obſerve where the beams of light reflected from theſe holes unite, and this will be the focal diſtance. Or, laſtly, place the ſpeculum at the end of a long table, in a vertical poſition; place a candle at the oppoſite end of the table, ſo that it's flame may be oppoſite to the vertex of the ſpeculum; then take a piece of uhite paper, and having fixed it to a ſtick, place the ſtick in the ſocket oſ a candleſtick, ſo that the paper may be ſupperted at about the ſame height with the candle; them move the paper or the candle to and fro, till the image of the candle on the paper is exactly over the candle itſelf, and the point of coincidence is the center of the ſpeculum. 2. For a Convex Speculum. Stick two round opake patches thereon, and hold a white paper parallel to the ſpeculum, and obſerve where the ſnades of the patches fall upon it, as at G, H, ſig. 1, pl. 6; meaſure exactly the diſtance AG, and the diſtance betwixt the centers of the ſhades G, H, and between the centers of the patches; then G HA D(xe H) to AD, ſo is AG (æ De) to AF, the diſtance required. Or, cover it with paper, having two pin holes made, one near each edge of the mirror; expoſe it go the ſun, holding another paper before it, having a hole large enough to let the ſolar rays paſs through to the two pin holes. You will ſee two white ſpots oſ reflected light on each ſide the hole; move the paper backward and forward, till the diſtance of the ſpots be twice the diſtance oſ the holes in the cover, and that diſtance of the paper from the lens is the principal focus. GENERAL PROPERTIES OP SPECULUMS. To ſee the image of an object made by any ſpherical ſpeculum, the eye muſt be placed in the diverging rays, facing the image, and at a proper diſtance for diſtinct viſion. If the eye be placed near the ſpeculum, in tThe converging rays before they reach the image, it will perceive the image of the object beyond the glaſs, and at the ſame diſtance ncarly as the object is before it, and of the ſame mugnitude. If an image be viewed with both eyes, placed very near the image, and in the diverging rays. either it will not be ſeen at all, or it will appear double; for the axes of the eyes cannot both be directed to an object extremely near. Though an eye cannot ſec an image in the air, except it be placed in the diverging rays; yet iſ that image be received on a white paper, it may be ſeen in any poſition of the eye. For the rays reflected from the mirror to the image and beyond, flow but in that one direction; but when the image is received on white paper, the rays are reflected in every direction. lIis the eye be moved whilſt it views the image, the image will appear to be moved; for raus will come ſucceſſively to the eye from different points of the ſpeculum. If an object be placed in the principal focus of a concave ſpeculum, it's apparent magnitude to the eye, at any place whatſoever, will be invariably the ſame, and equal to the apparent magnitude to the naked eye, when ſeen from the center of the ſpeculum. Conſequently the apparent magnitude ot an object placed in the pribcipal ſocca will always continue the ſame, however the eye is moved backward or ſorward from the ſpeculum. The nearer the eye is to the ſpeculum, the more oſ the object appears, and vice verſa. If the toiò be nearer than the principal focus, it's apparent magnitude grows leſs in going from the ſpeculum:; iſ it be further off, it increaſes. The apparent magnitude of an object will be invariable wherever it be placed, if ibe eye be a: the principal focus. When the eye is at a leſs diſtance than the principal ſocus, the magnitude of the object decreaſes as it is moved from the ſpeculum. When the eye is fixed at a greater diſtance than this focus, the apparent magnitude of an object increaſes in going from the ſpeculum till it arrives at the conjugate focus; then it is all confuſion. Afterwards it diminiſhes again, and is inverted. A face in going from a concave decreaſes tc the principal ſocus, and then increaſes. . O r PICTURES SEEN IN A CONCAVE SPECULUM. If a picture, drawn according to the rules oſ perſpective, be placed before a concave ſpeculum, a little nearer than it's principal focus, the image of the picture will appear extremely natural, and very nearly like the real one from whence it was taken. For not only the objects are greatly magnified, ſo as to approach nearer their natural ſize; but they have alſo different apparent diſtances, inſomuch, that a view of the inſide of a church appears very like a real church; and landſcape pictures as the real objects would do, ſeen ſrom the ſpot where the view was taken. . This curious phenomenon vill be in a great meaſure accounted for, by attending to this diagram, fig. 3, pl. 6& Where the curve p qr is the geometrical image of rhe ſtrait object P QR, or that curve which contains the foci of all the pencils of light that diverge from P R. and whoſe axes paſs through the ceniter o of the ſpeculum B AC, after their reflection by that ſpeculum. Nov it is proved by geometry, that the geometrical image of a circle facing the ſpeculum, and whoſe center is at Q, and whoſe diáãmeter js PR, will be a hollow figure, formed by the rotation of the curve p q r, round the axis O ꝗq. Iſ this hollow figure is ſuppoſed to be a real thing, whoſe inſide ſurface is variouſly diſtinguiſhed into parts by different colours, and a picture of it be drawn upon the circle PR, the point of ſight being at O, a ſpectator placed at o, would be alſected much in the ſume manner, by rays coming to him ſrom the picture, aſter reflection by the ſpeculum, as he would by rays coming to him directly from the hollow figure, the ſpeculum and the picture being removed; for in this caſe, ſ the hollow ſigure, and the geometrical image ef ibe picture upon tbe circle, are both coincident. Again, the geometrical image oſ a rectangular parallelogram A B, ſig. 4, pl. 6, placed where PO R is, ſig.3, will be alſo a hollow ſigure; but more like a pyramid with four ſides, than to the figure deſcribed by the rotation of the curve pPqr. In like manner a leſſer parallelogram u ithin the former will have the image of it's ſides like thoſe oſ the former, but at a greater diſtance; and ſo likewiſe the ſides of the ſeveral parallelograms cd, e f, &c. will have their images in a ſeries one behind the other, the middlemoiĩt being fartheſt of all; ſo that the geometrical image of the whole figure does ſomeu hat reſemble the ſruſtrum of a hollow pyramid with ſour ſides, and which, on account of the greater apparent diſtance of the ſmaller or middle parts, appears nearly like a holIow priſm, a ſection oſf which is pst r. Nov if ps, or rt, be the length, and st, or pr, the breadth of the inſide of a church, a perſpective view of which, from O, is drawn upon the plane PR, the geometrical figure will not be very unlike the church itſelſ. For the picture upon the lane PR, is a ſigure properly conſiſting of ſeveral parallelograms diminiſhing towards the middle, aſter the manner oſ thoſe above deſcribed; and if the picture be not too large in proportion to the ſize of the ſperulum, the curvities ariſing ſrom the form of the ſpeculum, will not be very conſiderable. But as moſt of the pencils of light entering the eye, diverge from points that are at great diſtances, their difſerent divergencies are not alont ſuſficient for determining the true place of their foci: and the apparent image of a blank ſurface placed at PR, will not appear near ſo concave as the geometrical image. Here, however, we muſt have recourſe to ſome other cauſe, and we ſhall find many concurring ones. The contiguous parts of the picture of the floor, for inſtance, form a long ſeries of viſible images, contiguous likewiſe to one another. The images of the remoter parts appear alſo at the ſame time fainter and ſmaller, becauſe the pictures of the remoter parts of the real floor diminiſh faſter in proportion, than the apparent diſtances of the images oſ the pictures increaſe; ſo that from all theſe cauſes conſpiring together, the eye receives much the ſame impreſſion as if it looked at a real floor; in both caſes, the appearance is much the ſame; a long extended ſurface, a little diminiſhed in breadth, and that gradually, towards the farther end. In like manner the walls appear erect and extended on ecach ſide, and the roof above facing the pavement; and all gradually inclining, aſter the ſame manner as a large room appears to the naked ſight when viewed from one end. Beſides the above helps, the windowclights in the ſides, the ſhades of upright objects thrown upon the pavement, &c. in the pictures, do alſo contribute their ſhare; and all conſpiring together, do ſuſficiently ourweigh the imperfections of the geometrical image. So that inſtead of a diſtorted picture, we ſce in a manner a real church; the great magnitude of the whole, it's viſible concavity, and proportionable length and diſtance of parts, all contributing powerfully to excite this idea. Landſcapes, &c. are in like manner ſurprizingly improved by a concave ſpeculum. Theſe phenomena appear rather more perfect ance will be the ſame to one who does not know ahat the picture on the paper repreſents, which proves that the ſaid phenomena are not founded upon mere prejudice. A young child, who had never ſeen any thing like what was repreſented, ſhews great marks oſ joy and ſurprize upon looking at a print in a concave ſpeculum. If it can be ſaid that nature is any where improved upon, I think this is the place: for if the print or picture be finely executed, the opportunity we have of viewing it's image without any extraneous light intruding into the eye, is an advantage we cannot have when we look at remote objects, and is productive of a wonderſul effect. OF VISION BY LIGHT REFLECTED AT A CONVEX SPECULUM. We have very little to add to what we ha ve already ſaid on this ſubject. In a convex ſpeculum, the images of objects are always ſeen erect, a little convexed cowards the eye, and diminiſhed, yet pretty nigh to the ſpeculum; and the greater the convexity, the nearer, the ſmaller, and the more convex will the images of objects be. If the ſpeculum be a pretty large ſegment, it will exhibit the images of the objects that are nretty wide aſunder; ſo that part of the cieling, floor, and two ſides of the room, may be ſeen at the ſame time, the whole making a kind of picture very agreeable in it's effect: and the nearer the eye is to the ſpeculum, the larger will be the ſield of the viſible images. The appearance is a kind of mean between tbe objects themſelves and a good picture of them on a ſlat ſurface: and upon tbis account, and alſo for grouping tbe objects, a convex ſpeculum may be very uſeful io a landſcape painter. If, while the objects and ſpeculum remain fixed, you move to or from the ſpeculum, theapparent laces and magnitudes of the images will remain invariable: but if an object moves to or from the ſpeculum, it's images i alſo appear to move the contrary way; and as it approaches nearer or recedes farther, it will appear more and more enlarged or dimin ifhed. If a convex mirror be placed againſt a window having an extenſive proſpect, or facing the end of afrcet, the great multiplicity of objects that are ſeen one behind the other, and the diminution of their images, will ſometimes, after ring into the ſpeculum, make us fancy they are a great way off; and, perhaps, further than the obJects themſelves. But on looking more attentively, this miſtake will be corrected, and the apparent places of the images will not differ ſenſibly from their real places, or thoſe places whence the the rays diverge to the eye. OP VISION BY PLANE SPECULUMS. We have already explained to you the abſtract theory of images ſormed by the reflection and refraction oſ plane and ſpherical mirrors; I ſhall now conſider the phenomena of viſion by plane mirrors. Dbjects, as we have obſerved, ſeen by reflection of plane ſpeculums, generally appear ſo perfect and natural, that iſf the ſpeculum itſelſ is not perceived, we are liable to miſtake the images for che real objects of which they are the types. A iman appears alive, corporeal, and not a mere ſurface; and any ſeries of objects placed before the ſpeculum exhibit alike ſeries on the other ſide, all appearing in their due places, agreeable to the theory of images and of viſion; with this difference, that the images appear ſomewhat darker than the objects, on account of the loſs of light by reflection; and this, when the images are remote, will affect their apparent diſtances; and more eſpecially if, as the caſe often is, part of the floor ſuſtaining the real objects is not ſeen, or if the ſpecuIum is not vertical. But when the images are near, theſe cauſes have no ſenſible eſfect. Vhen you ſee vour own image, or that of an object behind you, in the ſpeculum, if the image be erect, it will appear inverted as to right and left; and the reaſon is, becauſe the object and the image face each octher, or look contrariwiſe. The caſe is not unlike, when the object is between us and the ſpeculum, though we are apt to make it different for want of conſidering that it is the back of that towards us, and ſo call that the right ſide of the object, which we ſhould call the leſt, if we were on the other ſide. The phenomena of viſion in plane ſpeculums agree ſo well with the theory of images, that we need ſay nothing more on this head, but proceed to explain the phenomena, when two or more ſpeculums are combined together, or when one is placed in an inclined ſituation. If a plane mirror be inclined to the horizon in an angle of a5 degrees, with it's fuce downwards, an upright object will have it's image in an horizontal poſition, and the image of an object lying borixontal vill be erect. If AB, ſig. 6, pl. 6, be a plane lookingglaſs, with it's reflecting ſurface downwards, and CD be an object parallel to the horizon, then the mirror AB, which makes half a right angle will make half a right angle with the object; or ABC vill be an angle of 45. Now, at whatever diſtance a point G, in the object is from the mirror, the correſpondent c, in the image will appear at the ſame diſtance from the mirror on the other ſide; therefore C E will be equal to c E: for the ſame reaſon any other point D, vill be juſt as far diſtant before the mirror as it's correſpondent point d is behind it; ſo that as the object forms an angle of 450 on one ſide oſf the mirror, the image will form alſo an angle (from the ſame angular point) of 450 on the other, 45 added to 45 making 90o, or a right angle, ſo that the image is perpendicular to the object, and being therefore perpendicular to the horizon will appear erect. For the ſame reaſon, an upright object will have it's image in an horizontal poſition; conſequently if you ſtand upright before a mirror inclined to the horizon, the face upwards, you will ſee your image extended horizontally, as it were, on the floor, with your face upuards. Hence, if you look into a plane ſpeculum, inclined to the horizon in an angle of 455, but with the face downwards, vou will ſee yourſelf as it were in a flying poſture; you will ſeem to be ſuſpended horizontally in the air with your face downwards; and if the ſpeculum is ſufficiently long, you will ſeem to fly upwards or downwards, as you walk t or from the ſpeculum. If the ſpeculum be inclined in any other angle, the angle of the image will be varied in the ſame manner: theſe poſitions you may eaſily verify by means of a common dreſſing-glaſs, as the inclination thereof may be altered at pleaſure. On theſe principles is conſtructed an optica deception, which Dr. Hooper has named the aunimated optic balls. On a ſlat board a ſerpentine groove is formed in ſuch manner, that if the board be inclined, and a ſmall ivory ball be placed at the top of the uppermoſt groove, it will roll with the ſame velocity till it gets to the bottom. This board is placed in a box in which there is a looking-glaſs ſo inclined that the board appears vertical, and the lower end uppermoſt; conſequently the ball will ſeem to roll upwards. When this experiment is made to be exhibited in public, every thing is contrived to conceal the principle, and heighten the deceptfion. . In any number of plane ſpeculums, all lying in tbe ſame plane, there can be ſeen; from tbe ſame place, only one image of tbe ſame object. For let there be ever ſo marty, they have only the eſfect of one mirror, and the object is ſeen by rays proceeding therefrom to the eye. It an eye is at I, fig. 7, pl. 6, witbin the angle ABC, formed by two plane mirrors AB, BC, it will ſee as many images of an object O, placed alſo witbin tbis angle, as you can let fall perpendiculars ſucceſſively on the mirror from the object and eacb oſ tbe images. I. Let fall the perpendicular OD, on the mirror BC; make N D equal to NO, and the point D will be the place of the image: ſor if you draw I D from the eye, and from g, where it meets the mirror, draw g o, you vill find the angte of incidence O g N equal to the anglte Byg I. 2. If from the point D you let fall on the mirror A B, the perpendicular D E, and make k E & D, the point E will, for the ſame reaſons be the place oſ the ſecond image, whoſe object ſi . 3. If from E you let fall on the mirror BC, a perpendicular EQ. and make QF equal to E Q. F will be the place of the third image, of which E is the object. . 4. If from F à perpendicular is let ſall on A B it will paſs beyond B to F G, beyond the limits oſ the mirrors. In the ſame manner you may fhew that there is in H, an image of the object O, ſeen by the ray Ih, reflected by the incident ray Oh; and a ſecond in &, ſeen by the ray c I, reflected from c ſe de flected from the incident ray Ot, that there is a third in L, ſeen by the incident ray Ol, reflected in la, and then in a k, and afterwards in kI; and that there can be no more, becauſe the perpendicular L M, from the laſt image, falls without the mirror. From the figure you willſee, that the firſt image is ſeen by one reflected ray; the ſecond by two; the third by three; and ſo on. The diſtance of each image ſfrom the eye is equal to it's incident ray, added to the ſum of it's reflected ray. The firſt image is brighter than the ſecond, the ſecond than the third; and ſo of the reſt: for the intenſity of the light is continualy diminiſhed, a conſiderable quantity being loſt at every reflection. . The larger the angle formed by the mirrors, the sfewer the number of images; for the cathetus oſ incidence, ſeparate from each other by an angular motion, equal to that with which the mirrors are ſeparated, and are conſequently carried nearer and nearer to the angular, and fall ſucceſſively beyond it; ſo that when the mirrors form a right angle, cthere can be but two images, and when it is very obtuſe, there can be but one; the number of perpendiculars that can be let fall from rhe object or the images of the object on the two mirrors. If the two mirrors are parallel, and infinitely extended, there would be an infinite number of images: but as they go on, their diſtance is greater, and their brightneſs leſs; they thereſore ſoon become inſenſible. So that if two plane mirrors be placed parallel to each other, there will be a ſeries oſ images of the floor or ſpace between them, indefinitely extended both ways; there being no other limitation of their number than what is cauſed by the decreaſe of light from the continued 256 LFCTUKES OM NATURAL PHILOSOPut. reflections. Iſ you ſtand between two ſuch mirrors you vwill ſee in that fronting you, the images both of your fore and back part repeated ſeveral times, but continually fainter the farther oſi. On this principle are conſtructed a variety of ingenious recreations; particularly thoſe that are termed rhe boundleſs g galler, γ, the magical mirrors. The firſt of cheſe conitſts of a long box, furniſhed at each end with a mirror, placed directly oppoſite to each other; a ſinall quantity of quickſilver is taken oſf from one oſ them, in order that you may view theſe in the inſide of the box; two or three painted ſcenes are placed in the box, and the top is covered with gauZe. The ſcenes being painted on both ſides, are ſucceſſively reflected from one mirror to the other: if, for example, the painting conſiſts of trees, they will appear like a very long viſta, of which the eye cannot diſcern the end; ſor ecach mirror repeating the objects continuallv more ſaintly, contribute greatly to augment the illuſion. The other conſiſts of a ſquare box, with four plane mirrors placed perpendicular to the bottom of the box, certain objects in relief are placed on the bottom, and the top covered with gauze placed ſloping wiſe like the roof of an houſe, Icaving only an aperture at the top for the eye. When you look in the Dox, vou will find that the mirrors, ſrom being oppoſcd to each other, mutually reflcct the incl loſel ſigſures; the eye beholds a boundleſs extent completely covered with theſe objects, and if they are properly diſoſed, the illuſion will occaſion no ſmall ſurpriſe, and a ſford great entertainment. In a ſingle plaune mirror, that is made of ſhick glaſs with quickſilver behinud it, many images of any bright object, as a candle, may be ſeen. . The firſt ſurſace of the glaſs being ſolid and poliſhed, is itſelſf a mirror, which ſends back all the rays which do not traverſe the glaſs, and thus forms a weak image of the object. By looking at a candle obliquely in a mirror, you will ſee very evidently, by it's exhibiting a ſeries oſ images, that the rays of light are reflected ſeveral times between it's ſurſaces: the images, however, all decreaſe in brightneſs, till at laſt the rays become too faint to exhibit an image. Theſe are more diſtinguiſhable, the more obliquely they are viewed. This phenomenon proves very ple-nly, that light ſuffers a conſiderable diminution in its puſſage through glaſs. If a plane mirror turns upon an axis, the angular motion of ithe images is double that of the mirror. . Let AB, ſig. a, pl. 6, be a mirror, OE an incident ray, EF a reflected ray. Now ſuppoſe the mirror to turn upon an axis at E, and to take the ſituation CD, then the incident OE will have G E for it's reflected ray. Now the angle F E G, which expreſſes the angular motion or quantity, that the reflected ray has moved from it's firſt ſituation F E, is double of AEC, the angular motion of the mirror. Ifſ, therefore, the mirro? moves one quarter of a circle, the reflected ray moves a half circle: it is for this reaſon that the images of the ſun, by a mirror, move ſo faſt; and hence, alſo, the images thereof reflected b water, even nearly quiet, appear much agitated. particularly when received at ſome diſtance ſrom the point oſ incidence. To judge of tbe goodneſs of plane mirrors. Having endeavoured to explain the principle of the phenomena of plane mirrors, I ſhall now proceed to ſuch robſervations as may enable you to judge of their goodneſs. A ſpeculum ſhould be exactly figured and well poliſhed. The goodneſs of the figure of a plane ſpeculum is eaſily known, by obſerving if images ſeen in all poſitions, eſpecially in very oblique ones, and from all parts of the ſpeculum, appear exactly equal, and ſimilar to the objects: that is, if the images, eſpecially the remoteſt objects in the room, appear natural, without having any part of them diſtorted, the ſpeculum has a good figure. The ſtrait edges of the rails of wainſcot are good objects for the experiment. A plane muſt be exceedingly erroneous, that will diſtort a face looking into it, becauſe the rays being returned almott directly back to the eye, ſmall aberrations cannot be ſenſible. But if two perſons look at each other's image as obliquely as they can, they will ſoon perceive if the ſpeculum be faulty. It is deemed a very diſficult thing to grind a true plane; and the ditſficulty of making a good looking-glaſs is ſtill greater, becauſe the two ſides ſhould be exactly parallel as well as flat. If the images of a candle ſeen very obliquely, and in different obliquities, and from all parts of the glaſs, do not always keep pretty nearly at equal diſtances one from another; it is a proof that the ſides of the glaſs are neither flat nor parallel. The better a ſpeculum is poliſhed, the brighter will be the images; that is, the eye will receive more light ſrom it. The darker the colour of a glaſs ſpeculum, the higher is the poliſh. Different glaſſes, though equally well poliſhed, will not always appear equally dark; yet generally the above rule takes place, and the darkeſt is to be preferred. LECTURE XVIL. ON THE NATURE OF VISION. T has been my endeavour, in the preceding Lectures, to reſcue Philoſophy from the imputation ſhe has long lain under oſ being dangerous to religion and piety. It was not uncommon formerly to ſuſpect every one who profeſſed to purſue the light of nature, of unſoundneſs of principles, and of a ſecret deſign to undermine the Belief of a Providence, and the being of a God. Nor can it be denied, that there has been ground for ſuch a ſuſpicion; for thoſe who really had ſuch evil deſigns, proceeded by attempting to explain the ſurrounding phenomena by the powers of nature, and thus endeavouring to confine the attention of mankind to them alone. But the ſtate of natural philoſophy is now altered; it is become an innocent, inoffenſive ſcience, a uſeful miniſter in the temple of the LOED. . In ancient times, nature was eſteemed an original ſource of being, diſtinct from the ALMIOHTY; matter was thought to be poſſeſſed of a being which HE never gave it, and the elements to have their differences and qualities independent of him. Theſe notions have long ſince been exploded, and Gob is acknow ledged to be the creator of all things viſible and inviſible. It is now clear, that the abſtract and ſenſible eſſences oſ nature receive their permanency, and her courſes their ſtability, ſrom the covenant orimmutable will of Gob; her ſubſtances, both material and ſpiritual, together with their primary as well as ſecondary qualities, their applications to one another; their mutual aſfections, and all effects and events reſulting thereſrom, being derived primarily from no other ſource than the power, the viſdom, and the goodneſs of Gopn. Nature is the work of Gon, her acts are his acts, her productions his giſts, her every operation an execution of his will. e Great, then, is the error of thoſe who have ſet up nature as a firſt principle, in the place of Gopb, whereby to account for phyſical operations and productions; for nature is nothing in itſelf, but a mere word without any meaning or idea belonging to it, if conſidered in any other view than as that ſyſtem of laws whereby God upholds this viſible world, and produces the infinite variety of forms and effects in it, according to an eſtabliſhed and regular courſe of ſubordinate cauſes and means; and conſequently, where the mind terminates it's views in a ſuppoſed nature as a ſelf-moving agent or principle, it robs GoDp of the honour due to his majeſty, and transfers it to an idol of it's own mak; 1 The ſtudy of the human frame, &c. has been regarded with the ſame unfavourable ſuſpicion as philoſophy. For there being a great deal of mechaniſm in the human compoſition, thoſe who applied to a cloſe examination and ſtudy oſ the machine, were apt to think too ſlightly of the ſpiritual part, inſomuch, that it has been a current ſaying, wherever you ſee three phyficians, you ſee tno atheiſts. But I do not apprehend that they now retain the ſame ſentiments. They erred, becauſe they ſaw that the underſtanding might ſometimies be reſtored to madmen by medicines: they knew that ſome of their drugs had a powerful efſect upon the imagination, ſo as to warm it with ſanguine hope, or chill it with deſponding melancholy: they found that a delicacy of texture in the fibres of the brain, a purity oſ the circulating juices, had an influence on the natural talents, and occaſioned a predominancy of ſome one of the principal humours that diſtinguiſhed the characters of men 3 that an unnatural preſſure, or a little heterogeneous mixture in the medullary ſubſtance within the head, diſabled rhe ſoul from exerciſing her functions; and that in general the tenour and colour of our thoughts depended very much upon the diſpoſition of the body. Arguing from appearances, which vill ever miſlead, they imagined that powers had heen aſcribed to the ſoul, which really reſided in the body, and were tempted in an evil hour too haſtily to conclude, that ſhe had none belonging to her; but that thought itſelf, with all it's varieties, were nothing more than mere configuration and a diverſity of motions in matter.  Beginning at the wrong end, and trac ing the intellectual operations from organized matter as their ſource and cauſe; they could not but infer, that the cauſe being taken away, the effect muſt neceſſarily ceaſe. Seeing that a contuſion, or other injury of the brain, occaſions a diſorder or loſs oſ the underſtanding and memory, they thence argued that the brain is the principal cauſe or foundation of theſe powers; whereas perception, thought, and memory, do not flow from the brain, but from the mind into it, as the proper medium for the manifeſtation of the intellectual powers. The defect or deſtruction of the organ does not occaſion any abſolute loſs or annihilation of intellect, for that ſtill remains the ſame in it's own ſpiritual principle, it only hinders it from manifeſting it's operations in the natural world.' To ſuppoſe that mind and matter arc the ſame, becauſe the diſorder of the body apparently influences the ſoul, is as abſurd as to ſay that the art, ſcience, and intelligence of a muſician, lies entirely in the ſtrings or pipes of his inſtrument, becauſe his knowledge is more or leſs conſpicuous, according as they are more or leſs tuned. It is a ſophiſtry that can only dazæle ſuperS 3 ficial ſicial minds, that thus take appearances for realities cſffects for cauſes. But this temptation is now removed; for a more exact ſerutiny into the properties of matter has clearly ſhewn, that no aſſortment of matter, how nicely ſoever arranged, can form an intelligent being. Let materialiſts inſiſt as ſtrongly as they pleaſe, that the characters and thoughts oſ men reſult from their machinery and organization; we know that no ſuch reſult could take place, unleſs there were a perceptiv ve ſpirit to receive the action of the machine. To imagine otherwiſe would be as abſurd as to ſuppoſe that a bible might rcach a ſentiment of religion without a reader to peruſe it, or the graſs a ſenſation of green, without an eye. to diſcern it. Some things, indeed, the mind performs through the tcody; as for example, the various works and energies of art. Orthers it perſorms without ſuch a medium, as when it thinks, and reaſons, and concludes. Now, though the mind, in either caſe, may be called the principal ſource, yet theſe laſt are moſt properly it's own peculiar acts, as more immediately referable to it's peculiar powers; and thus is mind ultimately the cauſe of all. c The ancient atheiſts, as Anaximander, Democritus, &c. founded their tenets on the hypotheſis of matter being the ſirſt and only principle to the excluſion of all ſpiritual ſubſtances. Their followers in infidelity, in modern times, have done the ſame: nor, indeed, is there any other ſuppoſition, weak as it is, on which the ſy ſtem of atheiſm can be raiſed. e That the abſurdities of a doctrine, which baniſhed all wiſe deſigns and final cauſes from the creation and government of the world, might not, by unſupported aſſertions, ſhock the common ſenſe of markind, the authors and abettors of this impious ſcheme employed their invention tc form theories to account for effects without cauſes, or at leaſt, without adequate cauſes; as by maintaining the eternity of the world in it's prefent form; or advancing, at leaſt, an eternity oſ atoms, which, by the direction of chance, and a lucky jumble, formed themſelves into the preſent orderly ſyſtem. e But as they were equally puzæled to account for life, conſciouſneſs, and intellect, upon their corpuſcular plan, they found themſelves under the neceſſity of aſcribing to matter, under particular modifications, certain active powers, which are abſolutely inconſiſtent with it's known eſſential properties, affirming the ſoul to be nothing more than a mere refined and delicate configuration of atoms, and the mental operations to proceed from the mechanical motions of rarified matter: thus making the principles of life and underſtanding to be only the modes of that which has nothing vital or intelligent in it, and thus aſcribing more to thbe effect tban is in tbe cauſe to give. Theſe complicated abſurdities have been ſo thoroughly detected and confuted, that atheiſm, as a ſyſtem, ſcarce lifts up it's head, but hides itſelf under falſe colours. It does not now preſent itſelf as the open, but as the whited ſepulchre; does not proſeſſedly declare war againſt the majeſty and exiſtence of Almighty God, but ſlily endeavours to undermine his attributes, and by falſe reaſoning to invalidate the prooſs of the immortality of the ſoul. Some philoſophers among the ancients, as well as among the moderns, imagined that man was nothing but mere matter; but matter ſo curiouſly organized, that the impreſſion of external objects produces in it ſenſation, perception, remembrance, and all the other mental operations. This ſooliſuv opinion could have no other origin than the conſtant connection the Author of nature hath eſtabliſhed between certain impreſſions made upon our ſenſes, and our perception of the objects by which the impreſſion is made; from which they wealkly inferred, that thoſe impreſſions were the proper efficient cauſes of the correſponding perception. But no reaſoning can be more fallacious than this; that becauſe two things are always conjoined, one muſt be the cauſe of the other. Day and night have been joined in a conſtant ſucceſſion ſince the beginning of the world: but who is ſo fooliſh as to conclude from this, that day is the cauſe of night, or night the cauſe of the following day? There is, indeed, nothing more ridiculous than to imagine, that any motion or modification of matter ſhould produce thought, and render it capable of ſenſation and knowledge. For thoſe things, which are inferior and ſecondary, can by no means be the principles or cauſes of the more excellent. If any one ſhould relate of a teleſcope, ſo exactly made as to have the power of ſeeing; of a whiſpering-gallery, that had the power oſ hearing; of a cabinet ſo nicely framed as to have the power of memory; or of a machine ſo delicate as to feel pain when it was touched; the relation would be ſo abſurd, and ſo ſhocking to common ſenſe, that it would not find belief even among ſavages. Yet it is the ſame abſurdity to think, that the impreſiions oſ external objects upon the machine of our bodies, can be the real effſicient cauſe oſ thought and perception. The moſt perſect organization is but a perfect arrangement of material elements, and gives but a new extrinſic relation of parts to parts, and can never give capacities vhich did not beſore exiſi. Nay, the very materialiſt rialiſt himſelf, with all his boaſted attachment to matter, is forced to have rocourfe to powers which are as different from the common capacities of body, as the ſentient ſubſtance of the immaterialiſt is from the material element. Even the man of matter, when ſpeaking of reſiſtance in bodies, ſays,  that rRESISTANCE is in moſt caſes cauſed by ſomething of a quite different nature from any thing MATERIAL. It is no wonder that philoſophers, whoſe ideas of mind and being are only derived from body and ſenſation, ſhould be thus inconſiſtent; for they have a ſhort method of explaining away the nature of truth. They reduce it to mere opinion, and conſider it as a factitious thing which every man makes for himſelf; which comes and goes juſt as it is remembered or forgot; which, in the order of things. makes it's appearance the laſt of any, being not only ſubſequent to ſenſible objects, but even to our ſenſutions of them. But there are other reaſoners, who have had different notions; who repreſent truth not as the laſt, but the firſt of beings; who call it immutable, eternal, omnipreſent. To theſe it muſt appear ſomewhat ſtrange, how men ſhould imagine, that a crude account of the method how they perceive trutb, was to paſs for an account of ſruth itſelf: as if to deſcribe the road to London, could be called a deſcription of that metropolis. You are better learned than to conſider truth as opinion: you know that it ſhines with unchangeable ſplendor, enlightening throughout the univerſe every poſſible ſubject ſuſceptible oſ it's benign influence. Paſſions, and other objects, may prevent indeed it's efficacy, as clouds and vapours may obſcure the ſun; but itſelf neither . admits * For a confutation of materialiſm. ſee Berrington's Letters or admits diminution nor change, becauſe the darkneſſ only reſpects particular percipients. Among 1heſe, therefore, you muſt look for ignorance and error, and for that sſubordination of intelligence vhich i is their natural conſequence. From all theſe conſiderations vou will, I hope, be perſuaded to flee ſrom materialiſim as frcm the plague. It is an opinion that is inimical to virtue, that darkens the proſpects oſ futurity, unbinds the reins to vice, and is deſtructive oſ all true religion. Iaving 9 given you an account of the general theory of reſſection and reſraction of light, I ſhall row proceed to the theory oſ viſion. Ihe ſubject is not onlv curious and entertaining in itſelf, but vithout it there is no accounting for ſeveral oprical phenomena, or even underſtanding the theory of optical inſtruments, and the manner by which rhey extend ſo prodigiouſly the natural boundaries of viſion. It is alſo preſumed, that it can be no unpleaſing ſpeculation ro obtain an idea of the ſecret mechaniſm by which the ere communicates ſo many diverſiſied and animated perceptions to the ſoul, and by which ue are enabled to diſcover, with ſo much eaſe and rapidity, every ſurrounding object. In the ſtructure of the eye vou vwill find the maũ evident manifeſtations of exquiſite art and deſign, every part clegantly framed, nicely adjuſtcd, and commodiouſly placed, to anſwer in the moſt perſect manner every polſible good purpoſe, and thus evince that it is the vork of unerring wiſdom, prompted to action by infinite locve. So manifold are the bleſſings we derive ſrom this organ, that the mind of man ſeems almoſt inadequate to the conception, and his pen to the deſcription oſ them. Wile it ſorms our idcas of magnitude and diſtance, it annihilates ſpace, by placing the neareſt and moſt diſtant objects cloſe together. To it we are indebted for the delightful ſenſations that ariſe from the proportion and variety of forms, the harmonious mixture of colours, and the graces of beauty. It enables us to ſeek, to ſee, and to chuſe our food; to go here and there, as the calls of friendſhip, or the occaſions of buſineſs, require; to traverſe the ocean, ranſack the bowels of the earth, viſit diſtant regions, accumulate wealth, and multiply knowledge. Aſſſted by it, we become acquainted with the works oſ the CREATOR, and can trace his wiſdom, his power, and his goodneſs, in the texture of plants, the mechaniſm of animals, and the glories of the heavens. The value of this ſenſe is heightened, vhen we conſider the miſeries attendant on the want oſ it; for among the numerous evils that afflict the human race, there is none more juſtly dreaded, nor more deeply deplored, than a deprivation of ſight. It is to have one oſ the chief inlets of happineſs cut off, to be ſhut up in perpetual darkneſs, to labour under ten thouſand inconveniences, and to be expoſed to continual dangers. How poignantly this loſs was felt by our great poet, is painfully evident from his oun words: e With the year Seaſons return; but not to me returns Day, or the ſweet approach of ev'n or morn, Or ſight of vernal bloom, or ſummer's roſe, Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine; But cloud inſtead, and ever-during dark Surrounds me, from the chearful rays oſ men Cut off, and for the book of knouledge ſair, Preſented with an uniterſal blank Of nature's works, to me expung'd and raz'd, And viſdom at one entrancc quite ſhut out. A SIHORT DESCRIPTION OF THE IYE.* In defcribing the eye, it is natural to conſider, firſt, the external parts, then the internal, or thoſe which arc more immediately ſubſervient to the purpoſes of viſion. The eye, as is well known, is ſituated below the forchead; it is placed in a bony cavity, called the orbit; the form is globular, it is compoſed of ſeveral coats and humours, and furnifhed with veſſcls properly adapted to it's various functions. The oye conſiſts of ſeveral couts or teguments, u hich form a ball perfectly globular except on tho ſore part, which is a little more protuberant than the reſt. Within this ball are included three different liquids or tranſparent ſubſtances, called humours. Tho orbit of the eye is of a conical ſhape, but rather irregular in it's dimenſions; it is compoſed of ſeven bones, and lined with fat, which ſorms a ſoſt bed for the eye to reſt on, and facilitates its various motions. A conſiderable part of the boettom of the orbit is open for the admiſſion and tranſmiſſion of the nerves, veins, and arteries. Thoſe prominent arches of hair, which we term the evebrotws, defend the eyes from the light vhen it is too ſtrong, and prevent their being incommoded by any ſubſtances that might ſlide down the forchead, and thence fall into the eyes. That the eyebrows may be more effectually uſeful, and form a more perfect ſcreen, they are ſurniſhed uith muſcles to draw them doun, and corrugate them;  What ſollows on this ſuhject is extracted ſrom my ϖ Eſſ.y them; and when we are walking in a duſty road, or when we are expoſed to a dav ling light, we pull own the eyebrows, and thereby ſhade the eye from the glare, and protect it from the duſt. We may gather from hence, that thoſe ſhades which encompaſs the forehead, and that project about three inches from it, are properly adapted to guard weak eyes from every oſſenſive glare oſ light. The prominency of the eyebrows gives a character to the face; and hence Le Brun, in his directions to a painter, with regard to the paſſions, places in them the principal force of expreſſion. The eyebrous form a deep ſnade on the canvas, which relieves the other colours and ſcatures. Adepreſſion of the eyebrow is an indication of concern and grief; whilſt an elevation thereof ſnews that the mind is either aſſected with joy, or enjoying the ſerene delights of tranquillity. The eyelias, like two ſubſtantial curtains, protect and cover the eves while we ſleep; when we are awake, they diffuſe, by their motion, a fluid over the eye, which cleans and poliſhes it, and thus renders it ſitter for tranſmitting the rays of light. Each eye is furniſhed with two lids, the one ſuperior, the other inferior, joining at the two extremities, which are called canthi, or angles. Both eyelids are lined with a membrune, which alſo infolds as much oſ the globe oſ the eye as is called the white, and it prevents any duſt, or other extruneous particles, from getting behind the eye into the orbit. That the eyclids may ſhut with greater exactneſs, and not fall into wrinkles when they are elevated or depreſſed, each edge is ſtiffened by a cartilaginous arch. The eyelaſhes, like two paliſades of ſhort hair, proceed from theſe cartilaginous odges, warning the eye of danger, pro2 tecting it ſrom ſtraggling motes, and warding ofi the wandering fly. They alſo intercept many rays proceeding ſrom objects that are above the axis of viſion, and thereby render the images of other objects more diſtinct and lively: for, as in the camera obſcura, the image is always brighteſt when no rays are allowed to enter, but thoſe which form the picture. The eyelaſhes contribute their ſhare in giving beauty to the face, to ſoften the outlines oſf the eyelids, and throw a mildneſs on the features. Both the eyelids are moveable; but the upper one moſtly ſo, the lower one moving but little, being rather obſequious to the motions of the adjacent parts, than moved by any particular forces of its owun. The hairs of the eyelaſhes grow only to a certain length, and never need cutting: the points oſ the ſuperior one are bent upwards, thoſe of the lower eyelaſh downwards. Thus whenever we can trace things to their final cauſe, we find them always marked with deſign, and can find no circumſtance ſo minute, as to eſcape the attention of the Supreme Being. From vwhat has been ſaid, we may perceive why the ſight of thoſe, whoſe eyelaſhes are black, is, in general, much ſtronger than thoſe who have them fair or white; the black eyelaſhes are a better ſhade for the eye, and reflect no light from their inner ſide, to weaken and cfface the picture on the retina. Montaltus gives an account of a young man, whoſe eyelaſhes and eyebrows were of an intenſe white, and his ſight obſcure during the day, but clear at niglit. Ihis perſon was taken priſoner by the Moors, vho dyed his eyelaſhes black, by which his ſight was much ſtrengthened: in courſe oſ time the dye uas waſhed off, and his ſight became weak again. Dr. Ruſſell, in his natural hiſtory of Aleppo, ſays, that it is the cuſtom among the Turkiſh women to black the inſide of their eyelids, not only as an ornament, but as a means oſ ſtrengthening the ſight. When the eyelids are loſt, a ſymptom uhich frequently follows a malignant ſmall-pox, the ſight is alwajs conſiderably impaired. By ſhutting the eyelids partially, we can exclude as much Tight as we pleaſe, and thus further defend the eyes from too ſtrong a light, which every one's experience proves to be as injurious to them us more groſs matter. Numerous are the melancholy inſtances on record, which confirm this truth: Xenophon relates, that many of his troops were blinded by the ſtrong reflection from the ſnow over which they were obliged to march. Dionyſius, the tyrant of Sicily, among other means which he uſed to gratify his revenge, and ſatiate the cruelty of his temper, was accuſtomed to bring forth his miſerable captives ſrom the deep receſſes of the darkeſt dungeons, into uwhite and well-lighted rooms, that he might blind them by the ſudden tranſition from one extreme to the other. Actuated by principles equally cruel, the Carthaginians cut off the eyelids of Regulus, and then ex poſcd him to the bright rays of the ſun, by which he uas very ſoon blinded. Theſe facts make it clear that a protuberant eve is not ſo well calculated for viſion, as one that is deep ſunk in the head: neither extreme is indeed deſirable; yct undoubtedly, oſ the two, that which is deep ſet is preferable, as affording the cleareſt ſight, and being leaſt liable to injurie; from external accidents. Thoſe animals which have hard cruſiaceous eyes, as the lobſter, crab, &c. have no eyelids; whereas moſt brute animals have an additional one, called the nictitatiug memòrane, which they draw over their eyes like a curtain, to wipe off whatever incommodes them. The velocity with which the eyelids move to and fro is ſo great, that it does not in the leaſt impede the ſight. This curious circumſtance may be illuſtrated by the well-known phenomenon of a burning coal appearing like a ring of fire, when whirled round about with rapidity, in the circumference of a circle. Now it is highly probable, that the ſenſation of the coal, in the ſeveral places of the circle, remains on the mind until it returns again to the ſame place. Iſ, thereſore, our eyelids take no longer time to paſs and repaſs upon our eyes, than what the coal of fire takes to go round, the impreſſion made by any object on the eye will ſuffer no ſenſible interruption from this motion. To prevent the eyelids adhering together, they are ſupplied with a row of ſebaceous glandules, which diſcharge a ſoft liniment, that mixes with, and is waſhed off with the tears. The lachrymal gland is placed in the upper and outer part of the orbit. It is deſigned to furniſh at all times water enough to keep the outer ſurface of the eye moiſt, and thus give the cornea a greater degree of pellucidity. In order that this liquor may be rightly diſpoſed of, we frequently cloſe the eyelids without being conſcious of it. At the inner corner of the eye, between the eyelids, ſtands a caruncle, whoſe oſfice ſeems to be to keep that corner of the eye from being totally cloſed; ſo that any tears, &c. may flow from under the eyelids, when we ſleep, into the puncta lachrymalia, which are little holes, one in each eyelid, near the corner, for carrying into the noſe any ſuperfluous tears. The eye is furniſhed with ſix muſcles, whioh ſpread their tendons far over the eye; by theſe it can be moved upwards and downwards to eithei ſide, and in every intermediate direction, and thus view ſurrounding objects without moving the head. To facilitate theſe motions, a great quantity oſ looſe fat is placed all round the globe of the eye, between it and the orbit. Four of the muſcles are ſtrait, and two oblique; of the two ſtrait muſcles, two are ſituated vertically oppoſite one another, and the other two horizæontally. Each of the ſix has a roper name, according to it's ſituation and oſfice. Pſunnot paſs over the muſcles, without taking notice of a ſtriking inſtance oſ deſign in the wiſe diſpoſition of the parts. It is ſometimes neceſſary to have an oblique motion of the eye, towards the noſe, and there being no room on that iide ſfor muſcles, a ſmall bone is placed on the Iide oſ the noſe, with a hole in it, to ſerve as a pulley, through which the tendon oſf a muſcle paſſes to a convenient inſertion, and thereby ſuch an oblique motion is given to the eye, as would otheruiſe have been impoſſible. The eyes are placed in the moſt eminent pait of the body, near the brain, the ſcat of ſenſation. From their elevated ſituation, our proſpect is enlarged, and the number oſ objects taken in at one view, increaſed; we command an ample horicon on earth, and a glorious uemiſphere oſ the heavens. Every part of the human frame aflords indiſputable prooſs oſ the uwiſdom and bencficence of its Creator, becauſe all ure adapted to anſwer in the beſt manner the end ſor uhich they were formed. Ihus the globular figure oſ the eye is the moſt commodious we can ſorm any idea of, the beſt adapted ſor facilitating the various motions oſ the eye, for containing the humours within, and receiving the images ſrom uithout. Many are the advantages that are derived from our having two eyes, ſome that are known, ot 1ers that are unknown; for the correſpondence of the double parts in the human frame, and their relation to the tuo great ſaculties of the human mind, has not been ſufficiently attended to by anatomiſts. By having tuo eyes, the ſight is rendered ſtronger, and the viſion more perſect; for as each eye looks upon the ſame object, a more forcible impreſſion is made, and a livelier conception formed by the mind. The eyes together view an object in a different ſituation ſrom u hat either of them apart uwould do, and enable us to perceive ſmall diſtances accurately. Hence we ſind, that thoſe uho have loſt the ſight of one eve, arc apt to make miſtakes in the diſtances oſ oljccts, even uithin arm' length, that are eaſily avoided by thoſe who ſee with both eyes. Such miſtakes are principally ſcen in ſnuſffing a candle, threading a needle, or in filling a tea-cup. IThis uaptneſs to misjudge diſtances and ſituations is, however, gradually diminiſhed by time and practice. M. hen an object is placed at a moderate diſtance, we ſee more of it by means of the two eyes, than uee poſſibly could with one; the right eye ſeeing more oſ the right ſide, and the left eye more of its correſponding ſide. Thus by both eyes we ſce in ſome meaſure round an object: and it is this uhich aſſiſts in giving that bold relievo, which ue ſee in nature, and which no painting, how exquiſite ſocver, can attain to. The painter muſt be contented with ſhading on a flat ſurſace; but the eyes, in obſerving natural ohjects, perceive not only the ſhading, but a part of the figure that lics behind thoſe very ſhadings. The prreeption ue have oſ diſtance with one eye, as uas juſt now obſerved, is more uncertain, and more liable to deception, than that uhich we have by both; therciſore, if the ſhading and relief be executed in the beſt manner, the picture may have almoſt the ſame appearance tc one eye as the objects themſelves would have, but it cannot have the ſame appearance to both. This is not the fault of the artiſt, but an imperſection in the art. To remove theſe defects, the connoiſſeurs in painting look at a picture with one eye through a tube, which excludes the view oſ all other objects. Iſ the aperture in the tube next the eye be ſmall, we have no means leſt to judge of the diſtance but the light and colour, which are in the painter's power. An object ſeen with both eyes, appears a little brighter, or more luminous, than it does when ſeen with one alone, as will be evident by looking alternately with both eyes and with one only: and the difference of brightneſs will be ſtill more maniſeſt, if at the ſame time that a part oſ a flat object, oſ an uniform colour, is ſcen with both eyes, the light ſrom the adjacent part is excluded ſrom one oſ them: which may be done, by applying a book to one ſide of the head, ſo that it may reach a little forwarder than the face. But although the diſference of brightneſs, in the two caſcs, is very perceptible, yet it is not very conſiderable, nor is it eaſy to determine it accurately. Dr. Jurin, by a variety of experiments, concluded, that an objec ſeen with both eyes, appeared only one thirteenth part brighter, than when ſcen with one alone. Our eyes have an uniform or parallel motion, by which, when one is turned to the right or lest, upwards or downwards, or ſtrait forwards, the other aluays goes along vith it in the ſame direction. When both eyes are open, we ſind them always turned the ſame way, as if both were acted upon by the ſame motive ſorce. This phenomenon is the more ſingular, as the muſcles which move the two eyes, and the nerves which ſerve the muſcles, are entirely diſtinct and unconnected. T 2 To To account for and explain the cauſe of this motion, has puzzled the philoſopher, and embarraſſed the anatomiſt: that it originates from the grand moving principle, or generating cauſe within us, the mind, there can be little doubt; but how the mind operates, to produce this eſfect, we are altogether ignorant. Some eſfectual purpoſes are no doubt anſwered by this motion, for nothing is created in vain. One is ſuppoſed to be that of ſeeing objects ſingle that are viewed with both eyes; ſfor there are two pictures formed of every object, one in each eye. Hence, if any of the muſcles of one eye, either from ſpaſm, paralyſis, or any other cauſe, is reſtrained ſrom following the motion of the other, every object will be ſeen double. The ſame effect is produced, if, while we are looking at any object, we alter the direction of one of our eyes, by preſſing it aſide by the finger; an experiment frequently made by children, who are generally delighted with any uncommon appearance. Whatever may be the cauſe, the fact is certain, that the object is not multiplied as well as the organ, and appears but one, though ſeen with two eyes: another inſtance of the ſkill of the contriver of this noble organ, and the exquiſite art he employed in the formation of it. Having conſidered the principal external parts oſ the eye, and ſhewn that they are framed to protect ehis delicate organ, with a care ſtrictly proportioned to it's curious texture, and extenſive uſefulneſs, that it is fortified with ſtrong bones, lodged in a deep receptacle, and guarded with a moveable cover; we now proceed to treat of the internal parts, or thoſe which conſtitute the globe of the OF THE GLOBE OF THE EVYE. es Iſ the conſtruction of the univerſe were not ſo evident a prooſ of the exiſtence of a ſupremely wiſe and benevolent Creator, as to render particular arguments unneceſſary, the ſtructure of the eye might be offered as one, by no means the leaſt; this inſtance, among numberleſs others, demonſtrating that the beſt performances of art are infinitely ſhort of thoſe which are continually produced by the DIVINE MECHANIC. The globe of the eye, or the organ of ſight, may be deſined in general as a kind of caſe conſiſting of ſeveral coats, containing three pellucid humours, which are ſo adjuſted, that the rays proceeding from luminous objects, and admitted at a hole in the fore part of the eye, are brought to a focus on the back part of it, where they fall upon a ſoft pulpy ſubſtance, from whence the mind receives it's intelligence of viſible objects. It is not to be expected, that any account given of the eye can be altogether accurate; for as it is impoſſible to examine all the parts oſ the eye whilſt in a natural and living ſtate, ſo is it alſo nearly impoſſible, when it is taken out of it's ſocket, to preſerve the figure oſ the parts entire; a circumſtance which accounts for the diſagreement we find among anatomiſts. OF THE COATS OF THE EvE. The eye is compoſed externally of three coats or teguments, one covering the other, and forming a ball perfectly globular, except at the fore part, which is a little more protuberant than the reſt; within this ball are three diſferent ſubſtances, called humours. The firſt, or outer coat, is called the ſclerotica; the ſecond, or middle one, is called the choroides; the interior one is named the retina. Sclerotica. Cornea. The exterior membrane, uhich incloſes and covers the whole eye, is called ſclerotica and corneat: it is, however, ſtrictly ſpeaking, but one and the ſame membrane, wich di fſerent names appropriated to diſſerent parts; the hinder and opake part being more generally denominated the ſclerotica, the fore and tranſparent part the cornca. The ſclerotica is hard, elaſtic, of a white colour, reſembling a kind of parchment; the hinder part is very thick and opake, but it grous gradually thinner as it advances towards the part uhere the white oſ the eye terminates. The fore part is thinner, and tranſparent; it is alſo more protuberant and convex than the reſt of the eye, appearing like a ſegment of a fmall ſphere applicd to a larger, and is called cornea from it's tranſparency. The cornea is thick, ſtrong, and inſenſible; it's tranſparency is neceſſary for the free admiſſion of the light. IThis membrane is compoſed of ſeveral plates, laid one over the other, repleniſhed with a clear water, and pellucid veſſels; theſe plates are more evidently diſtinct in the ſfore than the hinder part. The ſclerotica is embraced on it's outſide by ſix muſcles, by uhich the eye may be moved in any direction. Choroides. Uvea. Iris. Under the ſclerotica is a membrane, known by the name of the choroides; it is a ſoſt and tender coat compoſed of innumerable veſſels; it is concentric to the ſclerotica, and adheres cloſcly to it by a cellular ſubſtance, and many veſſels. This membrune is outwardly oſ a brown colour, but inwardly of a more ruſſet broun, almoſt black. Like the ſclerotica, it is diſringuiſticd by two different names, the fore part being c called. the nvea, while the hinder part retains the name oſ the choroides. The fore part commences at the place where the cornea begins: it here attaches itſelſ more ſtrongly to the ſclerotica by a cellular ſubſtance, forming a kind of white narrow circular rim: the choroides ſeparates at this place from the ſclerotica, changes it's direction, turning, or rather folding, directly inwards, touards the axis of the eye, cutting the eye as it were tranſverſely: in the middle of this part is a round hole, called the pupil. or ſight of the eye: the pupil is not exactly in the middle of the iris, that is to ſay, the centers of the pupil and iris do not coincide, the former being a little nearer the noſe than the latter. This part, when it has changed it's direction, is no longer called the choroides: but the anterior ſurface, which is of different colours, in different ſubjects, is called the iris; the poſterior ſurface is called the nveu, from the black colour with which it is pninted. The iris has a ſmooth velvet-like appearance, and ſeems to conſiſt of ſmall filaments regularly diſpoſed, and directed towards the center of the pupil. The eye is denominated blue, black, &c. according to the colour of the iris. The more general colours are the hazel and the blue, and very oſten both theſe colours are found in the ſame eye. It has been obſerved, that in general thoſe, whoſe hair and complexion are light-coloured, have the iris blue or grey; and on the contrarv, thoſe w hoſe hair and complexion are dark, have the iris of a deep brown: whether this occaſions any difference in the ſenſe oſ viſion, is not diſcoverable. Thoſe eves which are called black, when narrouly inſpected, are only of a dark hazel colour, appearing black, becauſe they are contraſted with the uhite oſ the eye.  The black and the blue are the moſt beautiful colours, and give moſt fire and vivacity of expreſſion to the eye. In black eyes there is more force and impetuoſity; but the blue excel in ſwectneſs and delicacy.? The pupil oſ the eye has no determinate ſize, being greater or ſmaller, according to the quantity oſ ligght that falls upon the eye. uhen the light is ſtrong, or the viſual object too luminous, we contract the pupil, in order to intercept a part of the light, uhich would otherwiſe hurt or dazæ le our eyes; but uhen the light is ueak, ue enlarge the pupil, that a greater quantity may enter the eye, and thus n.ale a ſtronger impreſſion upon it. This aperture dilates alſo for viewing diſtant objects, and becomes narroucer ſor ſuch as are near. IThe contraction oſ the pupil is a ſtate oſ violence, efſected by an exertion of the uill: the dilatation is a remiſſion of pouer, or rather an intermiſſion of volition.  The latitude of contraction and dilatation of the pupil is verv conſiderable; and it is very admirable, that while the pupil changes it's magnitude it preſerves it's ſigure. Anatomiſis are not agreed, whether the iris be compoſcd oſ tuo ſcts of fibres, the orbicular and radial, or of either. Haller ſays, he could never diſcover the orbicular ſibres, even uwith a microſcope; the radial ſcem viſible to the naked eye, and are ſuſficicnt to anſuer all the purpoſes required in the motion of the iris: when the pupil is contracted the radial ſibres are ſtrait, when it is dilated they arc draun into ſerpentine ſolds. In children this aperture is more dilated than in grown perſons. In elderly people it is ſtill ſmaller than in adults, and has but little motion; hence * Anatomlſts obſerve. that in animals oſ prey, both beaſts and bics, the pupi is 1omd as in man, which fits them 10 ſee every way: but in large animals which feed on graſs, the pupil is onlong horiæontally, ſor taking in a large circular ſpace ol ground: the pupil in animals oſ the cat kind, which climb trees hence it is, that thoſe who begin to want ſpectacles, are obliged to hold the candlie between the eye and the paper they read, that the ſtrong light oſ the candle may ſorce their rigid pupils into fuch a ſtate of contraction, as uill enable them to ſee diſtinctly. Thoſe who are ſhort-ſighted, have the pupils of their eyes, in general, very large; whereas in thoſe uhoſe eyes are perſect, or long-ſighted, they are ſmaller. The whole of the choroides is opake, by which means no light is allowed to enter into the eye, but what paſſes through the pupil. To render this opacity more perſect, and the chamber of the eye ſtill darker, the poſterior ſurface of this membrane is covered all over uith a black mucus, called the pigmentum nigrum. This pigment is thinneſt upon the concave ſide of the choroides, near the retina, and on the ſore ſide oſ the iris; but is thickeſt cn the exterior ſide of the choroides, and the i inner ſide of the uvea. The circular edge of the choroides, at tuat part where it ſolds inuards to form the uvea, ſcems to be of a diſferent ſubſtance from the reſt of the membrane, being much harder, more denſe, and of a uhite colour; ic has been called by ſome writers the ciliary circle, becauſe the ligamentum ciliare (of which we ſhall ſoon ſpeak) ariſes from it. Retina. The third and laſt membrane of the eye is called the retina, becauſe it is /pread like a net over the bottom of the eye; others derive the name from the reſemblance of the net which the gladiators called retiarii, employed to entangle their antagoniſts. It is the thinneſt and lcaſt ſolid of the three coats, a ſine expanſion of the medùllary part of the optic nerve. The convex ſide of it lines the choroides, the concave ſide covers the ſurface oſ the vitreous humour, terminating where the choroides ſolda inwards. Ii is an eſſential organ of viſion; on it the images of objects are repreſented, and their picture formed. This membrane appears to be black in infants, not ſo black at the age oſ twenty, oſ a greyiſh colour about the thirtieth vcar, and in very old age almoſt white. The retina, however, is always tranſparent and colourleſs: any apparent changes, therefore, of it's colour muſt depend upon alterations of the pigmentum, which is ſeen through it. Optic Nerve. Behind all the coats is ſituated the optic nerve, which paſſes out of the ſcull, through a ſmall hole in the bottom of the orbit which contains the eye. It enters the orbit a little inflected, of a ſigure ſomewhat round, but compreſſed, and is inſerted into the globe oſ the eye, not in the middle, but a little higher and nearer to the noſe; an artery runs through the optic nerve, goes ſtrait through the vitreous humour, and ſpreads itſelf on the membrane that covers the backſide of the cryſtalline. Monſ. Mariotte has demonſtrated, that our eyes are inſenſible at the place where the optic nerve enters; if, therefore, this nerve had been ſituated in the axis of the eye itſelf, then the middle part of every object would have been inviſible, and where all things contribute to make us ſce beſt, we ſhould not have ſeen at all; but it is wiſcly placed by the divine artiſt ſor this and other advantageous purpoſes, not in the middle, but, as we have already obſerved, a little higher and nearer to the noſe. OF THE IIUMOURS OF THE Evr. The coats of the eve, which inveſt and ſuport each other, after the manner of an onion, or other bulbous root, include it's humours, by vhich name are underſtood three ſubſtances, the one a ſolid, the ſecond a ſoft body, and the third truly a liquor. Theſc ſubſtances are of ſuch forms and tranſparency, as not only to tranſmit readily the rays of light, but alſo to give them the poſition beſt adapted ſor the purpoſes of viſion. They are clear like water, and do not tinge the object with any particular colour. Aqueous tlumour. The moſt ſluid oſ the three humours is called the aqueous one, ſilling the great interſtice between the cornea and the pupil, and alſo the ſmall ſpace extending from the uvea to the cryſtalline lens; it is thin and clear like water, though ſomewhat more ſpirituous and viſcous; its quantity is ſo conſiderable, that it ſwells out the fore part of the eye into a protuberance very favourable to viſion. The uvea ſwims in this fluid. It covers the ſorepart of the cryſtalline; that part ofſ this humour, which lies beſore the uvea, communicates with that which is behind, by the hole which forms the pupil of the eye. It is included in a membrane, ſo tender, that it cannot be made viſible, nor preſerved, without the moſt concentrated lixivial fluid. It has not been clearly aſcertained whence this humour is derived; but it's ſource muſt be plentiful; for if the coat containing it be ſo wounded that all the humour rruns out, and the eye be kept cloſed for a ſcaſon, the wound will heal, and the fluid be recruited. The colour and conſiſtence of this humour alters with age; it becomes thicker, cloudy, and leſs tranſparent, as we advance in yeus, which is one rcaſon, among others, why many elderly people do not reap all that beneſit from ſpectacles vwhich they might naturally expect. Crytalline. The ſecond humour oſ the eye is the crylalline, which is as tranſparent as the pureſt cryſtal; and though leſs in quantity than the aqueous humour, yet it is of equal weight, being of a more denſe and ſolid nature; in conſiſtency it is ſomewhat like a hard jelly, growing ſoſter ſrom the middle outwards. Ivs form is that of a double convex lens, oſ unequal convexities, the moſt convex part being received into an equal concavity in the vitreous humour. The cryſtalline is contained in a Kind oſ caſe, or capſule, the fore part cof which is very thick and elaſtic, the hinder part is thinner and ſofter. This capſule is ſuſpended in it's place by a muſcle called ligamentum ciliare, which, together with the cryſtalline, divides the globe of the eye into two unequal portions; the firſt and ſmaller one contains the aqueous humour, the hinder and larger part the vitreous humour. The cryſtalline has no viſible communication with it's capſule, for as ſoon as this is opened the humour within ſlips clean out. The cryſtalline is placed ſo, that it's axis correſponds with that of the pupil, and conſequently it is not exactly in a vertical plane dividing the eye into two equal parts, but ſomewhat nearer the noſe. It is formed of concentric plates or ſcales, ſucceeding cach other, and theſe ſcales are formed of ſihres clegantly ſigured, and wound up in a ſtupendous manner; theſe are connected by cellular ſibres, ſo as to form a tender cellular texture. Between theſe ſcales is a pellucid liquor, which in old age becomes of a yellow colour. The innermoſt ſcales lie cloſer together, and form at laſt a ſort of nucleus, harder than the reſt of the lens. The cryſtalline has no viſible communication with it's capſule, ſo that when this is opened, it readily ſlips out: ſome ſay, that a ſmall quantity of uater is effuſed round it. Lecuvenhoeck has computed that there are neai two thouſand laminæ, or ſcales, in one cryſtalline, and that each of theſe is made up of a ſingle fibre, or fine thread, running this way and that, in ſeveral courſes, and meeting in as many centers, and yet not interfering with, or croſſing each other. The yellow colour, wherewith the crynalline is more and more tinged as we advance in years, muſt make all o jects appear more and more tinged with that colour: nor does our being inſenſible oſ any change in the colour of objects, prove to us that their colour continues the ſame; for in order that we ſhould be ſenſible of this change, the tincture muſt not only be conſiderable, but it muſt happen on a ſudden, as will be more ſully explained hereafter. In the cataract it is opake; the ſeat of this diſorder is in the cryſtalline lens. Vitreous Humour. The vitreous is the third humour of the eye; it receives it's name from it's appearance, which is like that of melted glaſs. It is neither ſo hard as the cryſtalline, nor ſo liquid as the aqueous humour; it fills the greateſt part of the eye, extending from the inſertion of the optic nerve to the cryſtalline humour. It ſupports the retina, and keeps it at a proper diſtance for receiving and forming diſtinct images ofſ objects. The vitreous humour is contained in a xery thin pellucid membrane, and concave at it's fore part, to receive the cryſtalline; at this place it's membrane divides into tuo, the one covering the cavity in which the cryſtalline lies, the other paſſing above, and covering the fore part of the cryſtalline, thus forming a Kind oſ ſheath for the cryſtalline. The fabric of the vitreous humour is cellular, the ſubſtance of it being divided by a very fine tranſparent membrane into cel2 lules, or little membranous compartments, containing a very tranſparent liquor. Ligamentum Ciliare. There is ſtill one part to be deſcribed, which, though very delicate and ſmall, is oſ great importance; it is called the ligamentum ciliare, becauſe it is compoſed of ſmall filaments, or fibres, not unlike the cilia, or eyelaſhes; theſe fibres ariſe from the inſide of the choroides, all round the circular edge, where it joins the uvea; from whence they run upon the ſore part of the vitreous humour, at that place where it divides to cover the cryſtalline; thoſe fibres are at ſome diſtance ſrom one another, but the interſtices are filled up with a dark-coloured mucus, giving it the appearance of a black membrane. OF THE FIGURE REPRESENTING THE EvVE. Figure 1, repreſents a ſection of the eye through the middle, by an horizontal plane paſſing through both eves; the diameter of the ſigure is about twice the diameter oſ the human eye. The outermoſt coat, which is called ſclerotica, is repreſented by the ſpace betueen the two exterior circles BF B; the more globular part, adjoining to the ſclerotica at the points B B, repreſented by the ſpace betueen the two circles at b AB, is the coruca. The next coat under the ſclerotica is a membrane of leſs firmneſs, repreſented by the two innermoſt circles of BPE B, and called the choroides. Adjoĩning to the choroides, at B B, is a flat membranc, called the uvea. aa is the pupil, heing a ſmall hole in the uvea, a little nearer the noſc thunm the middle. V the optic nerve; the fibres of this nerve, aſter their entrance into the eye, ſpread themſelves over the choroides, forming a thin membrane, called the retina, and is repreſented in the figure by the thick ſhade contiguous to the circle B F B. EER is the cryſtalline humour; it is ſuſpended by a muſcle Bbb B, called the ligamentum ciliare. This muſcle ariſes behind the uvea at BB; where the ſclerotica and cornea join together at b b, it enters the capſula, and thence ſpreads over a great part of it's anterior ſurface. The aqueous humour occupies the ſpace BAB b Cb. The larger ſpace Bb Db BF contains the vitrenus humour. The foregoing deſcription, I preſume, uill be found ſufficient to give a general idea of the conſtruction of this wonderful organ: for a fuller account I muſt reſcr you to the uwriters on anatomy. Enough has Leen exhibited to ſhew with what art and wiſdom the eve has been conſtructed.  And he muſt be very ignorant of it's ſtructure, or have a ſtrange caſt of underſtanding, who can ſeriouſly doubt, w hether or not the rays of light and the eve uere made for one another, with conſummate wiſdom, and perſect ſkill in optics. eIf we ſhould ſuppoſe an order of beings endued with every human faculty but that of ſight, how incredible would it appear to ſuch beings, accuſtomed only to the ſlow information of touch, that, by the addition of an organ, coniiſting of a ball and ſocket of an inch diameter, they might be enabled, in an inſtant of time, without chunging their place, to perceive the diſpoſition of a wholc army, the order of a battle, the figure of a magnificent palace, or all the variety oſ a beautiſul landſcape? If a man were, by feeling, to find out the figure of the Peak of Teneriffe, or even of St. Peter's church at Rome, it would be the work oſ a life-time. ece It would appear ſtill more incredible to ſuch beings as we have ſuppoſed, if they were inſormed of the diſcoveries which may be made by this little organ, in things far bevond the reach of any other ſenſe. That, by means of it, we can ſind our way on the pathleſs ocean, traverſe the globe oſ the earth, deterimine it's ſize and figure, meaſure the planctary orbs, and make diſcoveries in the ſphere of the ſixed ſtars.  Would it not appear ſtill more aſtoniſhing to theſe beings, if they ſhould be further informed, that by means of this organ we can perceive the tempers and diſpoſitions, the affections and paſſions, oſ our fellow-creatures, even when they uant moſt to conccal them? that by this organ we can often perceive uhat is ſtrait and crooked, in the mind as well as rhe bod;? that it participates of cvery mental emotion, the ſoſteſt and moſt tender, as well as the moſt violent and tumultuous? that it exhibits theſe emotions with force, and infuſes into the ſoul of the ſpectator the ſire and the agitation of that mind in uhich they originate? Io many my ſterious things muſt a blind mun give credit, if he uill Believe the relations oſ thoſe that ſee! his ſaith muſt exceced that which the poor ſceptic derides as impoſlible, or ondemns as abſurd. eeJt is not, thereſore, without reaſon, that the faculty of ſeeing is lookd upon as more noble than the other ſenſcs, as having ſomething in it ſuperior to ſenſation, as the ſonſe of the underſtanding, the language of intelligence. The evidence ofſ reaſon is culled ſeeins, not fceling, ſmellinim, taſting: nav, ue expreſs the manner of the divine knouledge by ſecing, as that kind oſ knowledge which is the moſt perfect in onuſelves.? . Or OPF VISION. The repreſentation of objects upon a ſheet oſ paper, by means of a lens placed at a hole in a window-ſhutter, is exceedingly ſimilar to what happens to our eyes when we view objects. For viſion, ſo far as our eyes are concerned, conſiſts in nothing but ſuch a refraction oſ the rays of light by the tranſparent ſkins and humours of the eye as will form a diſtinct picture of the object on the retina. For the ſtructure of the eye plainly indicates, that in order to attain diſtinct viſion, it is neceſſary that u certain quantity of rays from every viſible point of an object ſhould be united at the bottom of the eye, and that the points oſ union of the rays of the different pencils ſhould be as diſtinct and ſeparate as poſſible. The eye is admirably contrived for effecting theſe purpoſes: all the rays coming from any viſible point of an object, that can enter the pupil, are united cloſely together upon the retina, and thereby make a much more powerful and ſtronger impreſſion than a ſingle ray alone could do; to anſwer this purpoſe, the retina is placed at a proper diſtance behind the refracting ſurfaces, and each pencil of rays is refracted orderly into diſtinct focuſes, that the whole object may be diſtinculy ſeen at the ſame inſtant. Theſe effects are owing to the refraction of the rays of light; for if theſe rays were not ſo refracted, very ſew of them would ſtrike upon the leaſt ſenſible point of the viſionary nerve, and the rays from different objects, or from different parts of the ſame objects, would ſtrike at the ſame place at once, and thus create an indiſtinctneſs equal to blindneſs. When the light is weak or ſtrong, the pupil is accordingly enlarged or contracted, for the admiſſion of more or fewèr rays, that the impreſſions on the retina may be rendered ſuitable to the reſpective caſes. ; As the cryſtalline humour is denfeſt in the middle, it is highly probable that it is not equally refractive. This difference in denſity of the conſtituent parts of the cryſtalline is admirably contrived for correcting the aberration from it's figure, as well as that of the cornea. The more remote rays of each pencil, by paſſing through a medium gradually diminiſhing in denĩity from the middle towards the extremes, have their focuſes gradually lengthened, which correct the aberrations of the figure, that ſo they may unite nearer together. The concave figure of the retina is ſomewhat ſerviceable ſor the ſame purpoſe. It is by no means eafy to determine with accuracy the meaſure oſ refraction of the different humours of the eye; from ſuch experiments as could be made, it has becn found that the refractive powers of the aqueous and vitreous humours are much the ſame with common water, and that of the cryſtalline a little greater. The cornea and aqueous humour being ſuppoſed to have the ſame refractive powers, all three may be conſidered as one denſc medium, whoſe refractive ſurface is the cornca: and the cryſtalline humour may be conſidered as a convex lens, placed in a given poſition, within the ſaid medium. Whence the humours oſ the ejc all together make a kind of compound lens, whoſe eſfect in refracting rays, having a given focus oſ incidence, is eaſily ſound by the laus ofſ optics. I have conſtructed three models to explain the action oſ the rays oſ light upon the eve. Theſe models are repreſented at fig. 8 and 9, pl. 35 ſig. 10, pl. 2. Ihe rays oſ light are here formed of ſilk ſtrings of different colours; the globe of the eye is repreſented by a glaſs ball. Fig. 8, pl. 3, is the natural ſtate of the eye. Fig. 9, pl. 3, repreſents the rays falling ſhort of the retina for a ſhort-ſighted eye. Fig. io, pl. 4, exhibits the action of the rays in a long-ſighted eye. Let PO R, fig. 8, pl. 3, be an object; then the pencils of light BP B, B O B, BR B, from the points P OR, are firſt refracted by the cornea, ſo as to belong to focuſes behind the eve; then by the anterior ſurſace of the cryſtalline humour, they are again refracted towards focuſes nearer to the eye than before; and laſtly, in going out of the cryſtalline into the vitreous humour, they are again refracted, ſo as to unite in the points pqr. lIn like manner, the pencils of rays coming to the cornca from every phyſical point of the object PO R, are, by the different refracting ſurfaces of the eye, brought orderly to unite upon the retina, and there form, as it were, an image pqr of the object, but in an inverted poſition; the upper part of the object being painted upon the lower part of the retina, the right ſide of the object upon the left of the retina, and ſo of other parts. Thus the cavity of the eye is a kind of camera obſcura, the cornea and eryſtulline making a ſort of compound lens, whoſe aperture is limited by the breadth a a of the pupil. And that the parts of the eye are adapted to produce ſuch an image, may be proved by experiment: for if the tunica ſclerotica be taken away from the back of an eye newly taken out of the head of any animal, and this eye be placed in a hole made in the window-ſhutter of a dark room, ſo that the bottom of the eye be towards you, a beautiful, but inverted, picture of external objects will be exhibited. painted 'in the moſt lively colours. If the humours of the eyo, by age, or any other cauſe, ſhrink and decay, the corneatat and cryſtalline flatter than before; and the rays not being ufficiently bent, arrive at the retina before they are united in their focus, and meet in ſome place behind it, ſee fig. 13, pl. 4, and therefore form an imperfect picture at the bottom of the eye, and exhibit the object in a confuſed and indiſtinct manner. This defect, of which we ſhall treat more particularly hereafter, is remedied by ſpectacles with convex glaſſes, which, by increaſing the refraction of che rays oſ light, caufe them to converge more, and thus convene diſtinctly at the bottom of the eye. On the other hand, if the cornea and cryſtalline be too convex, the rays unite before their arrival at the retina, ſee fig. 9, pl. 3, and the image chereon is of courſe indiſtinct. This defect, like the preceding one, may be remedied by the uſe of glaſſes, though of a contrary figure; ſor here they muſt be concave, inftead of convex: a lens, of a proper concavity, placed before the eye, will make the rays diverge ſo much more than they do in theis natural ſtate, as will cauſe them to meet at the retina. OF THE ARTIFICIAL EvEIf the eye of an animal be taken out, and the ſkin and fat be carefully ſtripped off from the bac k part of it, till only the thin membrane, which is called the retina, remains to terminate it behind, and any object be placed before the front of the oye, the picture of that object will be ſeen figured as with a pencil on the retina. There are thouſands of experiments which prove that this is the mechanical effect of viſion; but none of them which render it ſo evident as this with the eye of an animal: an eye of an ox newly killed, ſhews it happily. and with very little trouble. hil ſingly and ſatisſactorily illuſtrated by the inſtrument which is called an artiſicial eye, and which has been lately conſiderably improved by Mr. Smith. The artificial eye is ſo conſtructed as not only to ſhew the optical effects of viſion, but to give alſo an accurate idea of it's conformation. It is one oſ the moſt perfect and ſatisfactory inſtruments in a philoſophical apparatus. The part repreſenting the globe of the eye, and containing the humours, is fixed in a ſocker where it may be moved in any direction. This ſocket is fixed to a ſcreen to ſhade the eye, that the picture formed on the back part may be more diſctinct: the hole in the front of the ſcreen is ſhaped and coloured ſo as to exhibit nearly the form of our eye. Take the eye in your hand, and turn it towards any bright object, at a moderate diſtance, and you vill ſee a lively, beautiful, diſtinct, but inverted picture of the object before it, on the rough part of the glaſs repreſenting the retina. Unſcrew the cover that confines the ball of the eye, and take it out that we may diſſect it. The outermoſt coat repreſents the ſcierotica, the more protuberant part is the cornea. This being removed, you find a plano-convex lens, repreſenting the firſt chamber of the aqueous humour; under this is a flat piece of tortoiſeſhell, to repreſent the iris, with a hole in the middle for the pupil; this being removed, you find a plano-concave lens, forming the ſecond chamber of the aqueous humour. Now take off the ſecond coat, or the choroides, and you vwill find a ſmall lens, whoſe fides are of unequal convexities, to repreſent the cryſtalline humour; underneath this is a large glaſs of the ſhape EDEV, ſig. 10, pl. 3, occupying the reſt of the globular ſpace, and anſwering to the vitreous humour. o repreſent the nature of viſion in a longſighted eye, I ſubſtitute a plano-convex lens for the firſt chamber of the aqueous humour, whoſe convexity is Ieſs than that we uſed before. Turn the eye, in this ſtate, towards a bright object, and you find the image thereof is very imperfect on the retina; but on applying a proper ſpectacle glaſs before the eye, you obtain a perfect image. By ſubſtituting a more convex lens for the firſt chamber of the aqueous humour, we have a ſhortſighted eye, and an imperfect picture on the retina: by placing a proper concave lens before the eye, the rays are rendered leſs convergent, and made to unite at the retina, and there form a diſtinct image of the objects as before. OPF THE INVERTED POSITION OF THE IMAGE. If viſion be owing to the picture on the retina, it may be aſked, why the object appears in it's natural upright poſition ? how, when nature draws the picture the wrong way, her errors are ſo readily corrected' If it were as eaſy a taſk to give a ſatisfactory explanation of this abſtruſe queſtion, as it is to ſtart objections to every ſyſtem hitherto ſuggeſted, to account for the operations of the mind on the body, and the body on the mind, it would have been explained long ago. * The difficulty would be ſtill greater, if it was the picture we ſaw, and not the object; but the picture is not ſeen at all, the eye can ſee no part of itſelf; the picture is the inſtrument, by means of which . See, on this ſubject, Reid on the Mind, Porterfield on the Eye, Hartley on Man, Bonnets Eſſai Analytique ſur l' Ame, which the object is perceived; but it is not perceived itſelf; the inſtrument neither perceives, compares, nor judges; theſe are powers peculiar to that pſycological unity which ue call the mind. It is abſolutely neceſſary, in conſidering this ſubject, to diſtinguiſh between the organ o perception, and the being that perceives. A man cannot ſee the ſatellites of Jupiter, unleſs aſſiſted by a teleſcope: does he therefore conclude from this, that it is the teleſcope that ſees thoſe ſatellites? By no means; the conclufion would be abſurd: nor would it be leſs abſurd to conclude, that it is the eye that ſees: the eye is a natural organ of ſight, but the natural organ ſees as little as the artificial. Our ſenſes are inſtruments, ſo framed by the Author of our being, that they correſpond with, or have a determined relation to, thoſe qualities in objects which they are to maniſeſt to us. It is thus vith the eye; it is an inſtrument moſt admirably contrived for manifeſting viſible objects to the mind; for this purpoſe, it refracts the rays of light, and forms a picture upon the retina; but it neither ſees the object, nor the picture. The eye will refract the rays of light, and form the picture, after it is tacen out of the head. but no viſion enſues. Even, when it is in it's proper place, and perfectly ſound, an obſtruction in the optic nerve takes away viſion, though the eye has performed all it's ſunctions. We knouw, indeed, how the eye forms a picture of viſible objects on the retina; but hou this picture makes us ſee objects, we know not: and iſ experiment had not informed us that ſuch a picture was neceſſary, we ſhould have been entirely ignorant oſ it. The ſcat of ſenſation, wherever it is placed, does not appear to be paſſive in receiving images; the images are the occaſion of it's re-action, and directing a ray from itſelf towards every object it perceives; and this action and re-action are reciprocal. Hence we oſten ſee objects when the eye is turned from them, and oſten do not ſee the object on which the eye is turned, if the attention be otherwiſe engaged. The pictures upon the retina are, however, a mean oſ viſion; for ſuch as the picture is, or ſuch as the action of the rays of light is on the retina, ſuch is the appearance of the object in colour and figure, diſtinctneſs or indiſtinctneſs, brightneſs or faintneſs; but as we are totally ignorant of the mechaniſm of the mind, or of the organization of the mental eye, we cannot ſay how this effect operates, and can only conclude, that the natural eyo is an inſtrument of viſion. It appears very clear from Dr. Darwin's experiments, that the retina is often in an active ſtate, and that upon the activity oſ this organ many of the phenomena of viſion depend; an impreſſion on the retina being firſt made by an active power, which produces a conformable change and reaction, that paſſes directly to the ſenſorium, occaſioning, though in an unknown manner, the perception of objects. On a ſubject, therefore, confeſſedly ſo obſcure, and which is perhaps beyond the limits of human conception in it's preſent ſtate, every explanation muſt be imperſfect, every illuſtration inadequate. Among the various attempts of human ſagacity, to ſhew why an inverted image is the mean oſ exhibiting objects to the mind in an upright poſition, the ſollowing is perhaps one of the leaſt imperfect. Every point of an object is ſeen in the direction of a right line, paſſing from the picture of that point on the retina, through the center of the eye, to the object point; and, therefore, ſuch points indicate to the mind the exiſtence of the object point, and it's true ſituation; and of courſe, that the ob- ject, whoſe picture is loweſt on the retina, muſt be ſeen in the higheſt direction from the eye; and that object, whoſe picture is on the right of the retina, muſt be ſeen on the left: ſo that by a natural law of our conſtitution, we ſee objects erect by inverted images, and if the pictures had been erect on the retina, we ſhould have ſeen the object inverted. But ſuppoſing the preceding illuſtration to be the true one, and quite ſatisfactory, many difficulties ſtill remain, to perplex the philoſopher, and embarraſs the anatomiſt. There are parts of the eye which aſſiſt in perfecting the organ of viſion, whoſe nature and functions are among the deſiderata of ſcience. We are ignorant of the oſfice of the optic nerve, or in what manner it performs that office. That it has ſome part in the faculty of ſeeing, is evident; becauſe in an amauroſis, which is ſaid to be a diſorder of the optic nerve, the pictures on the retina are clear and diſtinct, and yet there is no viſion. We know ſtill leſs of the uſe and functions of the choroid membrane; it is neceſſary, however, to viſion; for it is well known, that a picture upon that part of the retina where it is not covered with the choroid, namely, at the entrance of the optic nerve, produces no more viſion than a picture upon the hand.  There are, therefore, other material organs, whoſe operations are neceſſary to ſeeing, even after the pictures upon the retina are formed; whenever we become acquainted with - Reid on the Human Mind. 1 This is not concluſive, for where there is no choroid, thero is no retina, the optic nerve being not yet expanded into that membrane. If the choroid was taken away from behind the retina, there is reaſon to believe that viſion would ſtill tahe with the uſe of theſe parts, more links of the chain will be brought into our view, and we ſhall better comprehend this wonderful inſtrument. Having had occaſion to mention that there is no viſion produced by that part of the retina which is not covered by the choroid membrane it will be proper to illuſtrate this circumſtance more fully, and ſhew in what manner this fact has been aſcertained, the diſcovery of which occaſioned a long controverſy concerning the proper ſeat of viſion. Experiment. Fix three black patches, A;B, C, upon a white wall, at the height of the eye, A being to the leſt, and C to the right: place yourſelf facing theſe patches, ſiut the right eye, and direct the left towards the patch C, you will then ſee both A and C, but the middle patch B vill diſappear. Or if the left eye be ſhut, and the right directed towards A, you uwill ſtill ſee both A and C, but B will diſappear. Iſ the eye be directed towards B, both B and A vill be ſeen, and not C; for which ever of the patches is directly oppoſite to the optic nerve vaniſhes. This experiment is rather difficult at firſt, but becomes eaſy by a little practice. In our uſual intercourſe with common objects, we are not ſenſible of this deſect, becauſe we turn the viſual parts of the eye with ſo much rapidity upon the inviſible part of the object, that the loſs, without peculiar attention, is imperceptible: this loſs, however, in one eye, is remedied by the uſe of both, as the part of the object that is not ſeen by one, will be diſtinctly perceived by the other. This defect of ſight, though common to every human eye, vas never known, until it was diſcovered by the ſagacity oſ Monſ. Mariotte in the laſt century. OFPF THE EXTENT OR LIMITS OF VISION. Having conſidered the general principles ofſ viſion, I ſhall now proceed to conſider further the nature, properties, and extent of power of the eyes. As in a dark chamber, a very ſlender beam of light is viſible; ſo in all caſes when the ſurrounding medium is very dark, objects are ſeen by ſmall quantities of light. Hence, when the medium round the eye is dark, a ſmall quantity of light will ſuffice for viſion, the eye being, by the excluſion of the adventitious light, rendered ſenſible to the moſt delicate impreſſions. The extent, therefore, of our ſight is increaſed or diminiſhed, in proportion to the quantity of light that ſurrounds us, ſuppoſing the illumination of the object to remain the ſame. Hence it has been calculated, that if the ſame object, which during the day we ſee at the diſtance of 3436 times it's diameter, were equally illuminated during the night, it would be viſible at 1oo times greater diſtance. Thus in a dark night the feeble light of a candle may be ſeen at a great diſtance; and the fixed ſtars, though they have no ſenſible diameter, are viſible, and the darker the night, the more of them are ſeen. A certain quantity of light is, however, neceſſary, even in this caſe, for vlſion; for the impreſſions of light from the ſatellites of Jupiter and Saturn, are too feeble to be perceived without the aſſiſtance of a teleſcope. At the approach of day, and as the rwilight increaſes, the eye begins to be enlightened by the reflection of the atmoſphere, the ſtars grow fainter, and in proportion as the light increaſes, gradually diſappear, firſt thoſe of the leaſt, and at laſt thoſe of the largeſt magnitude. As the day advances, the moon herſelf loſes of her luſtre, till at length her light is overpowered, and ſhe is no longer ſeen. In the ſame manner, ſmall particles are ſeen floating in a beam of light let into a darkened room; but as ſoon as the room is enlightened, thoſe particles diſappear. One of the reaſons why we are often unable to diſtinguiſh diſtant objects, is the profuſion oſ rays reflected from intermediate objects, which, by their brilliancy, prevent us from perceiving the fainter rays that proceed from thoſe which are more diſtant; ſo that when the objects are very remote, their picture on the retina is eaſily obliterated, by the vigorous and lively impreſſions made by thoſe that are nearer. But when the intermediate ones emit a feeble light, when compared to that which proceeds from the more remote ones, theſe will form a diſtinct picture on che retina, and become perfectly viſible. The extent oſ viſion is not only limited by the light oſ the ambient medium, which enters the eye with the pencils oſ light that proceed from furrounding objects; but it is further impeded by the heterogeneous particles that are conſtantly flonting in the air: theſe, by their opacity and reflective power, form a kind of veil, that obſcures the viſion of remote objects; and the more the medium is loaded with theſe particles. and the more remote the object is from the ſpectator, the more obſcure and indiſtinct it will appear, and the limits oſ viſion be more confined. The exhalations which continually riſe from the earth, augment this obſcurity, and render the air leſs tranſparent, eſpecially near the earth: the celeſtial bodies generally, therefore, appear more obſcure when near the horizon, than when they are at a greater elevation; becauſe, in the firſt caſe, they are ſeen through that part of the at4 moſphere which is contiguous to the ſurface of the earth; but in the latter, through a part which is at a greater diſtance. Every one knows, that objects at a given diſtance are more diſtinctly ſeen, and are viſible at a greater diſtance in clear, than in foggy weather. Thus early in a clear morning, and when the air is free from vapours, and not much enlightened, a hill or a head-land is viſible at a great diſtance; but as the day advances, the land becomes more obſcure, till at length, by the great opacity of the intervening vapour, and the light reflected by it to bhe eye, the object becomes leſs and leſs perceptible, and at laſt totally diſappears. Hills, and other high lands, are ſeen more diſtinctly in the morning, partly from this circumſtance, that by their elevation they are more illuminated than the parts intervening between them and the ſpectator. Bur the obſcurity ariſing from the exhalations is not the leaſt part of the inconvenience they occaſion; the riſing exhalations have a kind of undulating motion, like that of ſmoke or ſteam, ſo that objects ſeen through them appear to have a tremulous or dancing motion, which is ſenſible even to the naked eye. If diſtant objects be viewed on a hot ſummer's day, this effect is ſo ſenſible in teleſcopes, as to render them entirely uſeleſs for terreſtrial objects, when they augment apparent magnitude more than eighty times. From this want of tranſparency in the atmoſphere, ariſes that gradual diminution in the light of objects, which painters call the aerial perſpective, by which they endeavour to give that degradation ofſ colour, and indiſtinctneſs of outlines, peculiar to objects at a diſtance: ſor iſ the air were perſectly tranſparent, an object would be equally luminous at all diſtances, hecauſe the viſible area and the denſity of light decreaſe in the ſame proportion. Another cauſe which limits the extent oſ viſion, and for the removal of which optical inſtruments are more particularly adapted, is thei ſmallneſs in proportion to their diſtances: for excepting in the caſe oſ luminous objects ſeen in the dark, it is neceſſary that an image on the retina ſhould have ſome determinate magnitude, in order to become perceptible; thus a houſe may be ſeen at a conſiderable diſtance, but we muſt approach nearer before the windows are diſcernible, and nearer ſtill to diſtinguiſh the bricks. It is not eaſy to determine with accuracy the quantity of the minimum viſibile, or the angle that is ſubtended by the ſmalleſt viſible object. Mr. Harris has inferred, ſfrom ſeveral experiments, that objects are ſeldom viſible under an angle leſs than 40 ſeconds, and at a medium not leſs than two minutes. A ſimple object, as a white or black ſquare, upon the oppoſite colour, is perceivable under æ leſs angle than the parts of a compound one. The more objects differ in colour, the more eaſily we can diſtinguiſh their ſeveral impreſſions on the retina: different degrees of light on the ſame object will render it viſible at different diſtances, and under different angles: indeed the moſt general cauſe of the non-viſibility of objects, is the want of ſufficient light in the pencils that proceed from them; ſeveral contiguous objects are ſcarce diſcernible one from the other, unleſs they each ſubtend angles that are not leſs than four minutes. A long ſlender object is viſible under a ſmaller angle than a ſquare object of the ſame breadth: a ſiſting of ſeveral ſquares joined together; and though one of theſe ſquares may be too ſmall to be ſeen, yet the pencils of light coming from cach of them being contiguous, and ſtriking at the ſame time upon the retina, are capable, by their united ſtrength, to awaken the viſive faculty, and ſo to render she objects viſible from whence they came. For the ſame reaſon, a ſmall object in motion is eaſier diſcerned than if at reſt, and may be viſible in the one caſe, though not in the other. A ſmall ſtar, by day or twilight, that cannot be caſily ſeen through a teleſcope directed to it, will become viſible by ſhaking or moving the teleſcope. TFhere is a great difference in the degree of ſenſibility of different eyes. We have becn rold of perſons ſeeing a ſatellite of Jupiter without the aſſiſftance of glaſſes: a circumſtance thar to many appears incredible. But when we conſider how much the various circumſtances oſ light affect viſion, and how much ſurther our Iſight is extended at ſome favourable opportunities than at others, theſe extraordinary accounts may be the more readily credited. The following calculation of M. de la Hire will give ſome idea of the extreme ſenſibility of the optic nerves. The ſail of a windmill, ſix feet in diameter, may be ealſily ſeen at the diſtance of 4000 toiſes, and the eye being ſuppoſed to be an inch in diameter, the picture of this ſail at the bottom of the eye will be the eight thouſandth part of an inch. This ſhews with what wonderſful accuracy the rays of light are refracted by the eye, ſo that a pencil oſ rays coming from one point of the object, ſhall meet in a point on the retina, ſo as not to deviate the eight thouſandth part of an inch. If an object be held too cloſe to the eye, it becomes indiſtinct, and the more ſo the cloſer it is held, notwithſtanding it's apparent magnitude is thereby increaſed, and a very ſlender object will become totally inviſible. To the generality of eyes, the neareſt diſtance of diſtinct viſion is about ſeven or cight inches; at this diſtance they commonly read a ſmall print, and examine all minute objects. It is true ſome eyes can ſee ſmall objects beſt at the diſtance of fix, four, and even three inches; and ſome again at twelve, fifteen, or twenty inches; but theſe are only particular caſes, and do not, therefore, aſfect the preſent inquiry. A globular object that is leſs than rls inch in diameter, is, to the generality of eyes, totally inviſible: and, excepting in few caſes, an object cannot be ſeen that is leſs than æ45 inch in diameter; an object oſf that breadth ſubtending an angle of 1 min. at the diſtance of 8 inches ſrom the eye. But when the field, on which the object is placed, is nearly of the ſame colour with it, we cannot ſee it under an angle leſs than about 4 min. In ſuch circumſtances the ſmalleſt viſible object is not leſs than ris of an inch in diameter. At a medium, the ſize rùſs inch diameter is the ſize of the leaſt globular object diſcernible by the naked eye. OPF DISTINCT AND INDISTINCT VISION. It will be proper in this place to explain, with more accuracy, what is meant by diſtinct viſion, and what is the difference between ſeeing an object diſtinctly, and ſeeing it clearly; as the clearneſs or brightneſs with which an object is ſeen, is often confounded with diſtinct viſion. We ſee an object clearly, when it is ſuſficiently illuminated, to enable us to form a general ideæ of it's figure, and diſtinguiſh it from other objects : we ſee it distinctly, when the outlines oſ it are well defined, when we can diſtinguiſh the parts of it. and determine their colour and ſituation. Thus we may be ſaid to ſee a diſtant object clearly, when we can perceive that it is a tower; but to ſee it diſtincily, we approach ſo nea as to be able to determine not only it's general outline, but to diſtinguiſh the parts of which it is compoſed. This may be made more evident, by adverting to the experiment of the dark chamber, in which we ſhall find a conſiderable diſference betueen the diſtinctneſs and brightneſs oſ the picture; and Icarn, that a confuſion of the parts is not the ſame thing with obſcurity. For the picture may be diſtinct in all it's parts; the ravs which come from one and the ſame int in the object, may be exactly collected into one and the ſame point upon the paper; and yet, if but few rays paſs through the lens, and conſequently the ſpace where the picture is painted ſhould be but ſaintly enlightened, this picture, though it is diſtinct, will be faint and obſcure. On the other hand, though the picture be confuſed, either becauſe the paper is placed at an improper diſtance from the lens, or for any other cauſe; yet if many rays paſs through the lens, and ſtrongly illuminate the paper, the picture, notwithitanding the want oſ diſtinctneſs, will be a bright one. The brightneſs or clearneſs vith æbich an obje & is ſven, depends principally on the ſollowing circumſtances. I. On the quantity of light proceeding from the object to the eye; and this is in a great meaſure regulated by the diſtance, for the intenſity of ight diminiſhes in an inverſe ratio to the ſquare f the diſtances. 2. It depends on the colour of the object itſelf, and oſ thoſe objects which ſurround it. 3. On the manner in which the light falls upon the object, and is reflected ſrom it. 4. On the aperture of the pupil, for the wider this is, the greater will be the number of rays that are tranſmitted to the retina. 5. On the tranſparency and purity of the humours of the eye, and the ſoundneſs oſ the reſt of the viſive parts. 6. On the tranſparency of the atmoſphere. When all theſe circumſtances concur, an ohject will appear bright and clear; but leſs ſo, in proportion as any of them are wanting. In order, however, to obtain diſtinct viſion, it is requiſite. not only that the object be ſuſſiciently illuminated, but alſo that the ſeveral pencils, on their arrival at the retina, ſhould be ſeparate, and not mixed together; and when this is not the caſe, the outlines of the object and it's parts will appear faint, hazy, and ill-deſined. We may, therefore, conſider the ſollocing conditions as neceſſary towards obtaining diſtinct viſion. I. The objects ſhould be ſuſſiciently illuminated: now all other circumſtances being the ſame, the nearer an object is, and the brighter it's colour, the more light the eye receives ſrom it; this is one reaſon why near objects are more diſtinctly ſeen than thoſe that arc more remote. 2. The geometrical image of objects ſhould fall either upon the retina, or very near it, and theſe images ſhould be ſuſſiciently large, otherw iſe the parts of the object cannot be diſtinctly perceived: the want of ſirne in this image is alſo a cauſe of the indiſtinctneſs of remote objects. 3. It is alſo requiſite that the eye be in perfect order, and it's humours tranſparent, in order that the impreſſions of light may be lively and diſtinct. In a given eye, and a given diſpoſition of that eye, an image upon the retina will be moſt perſect when the object is at ſome determinate diſtance from the eye; and it is near this point or place, that objects, if they are not too ſmall, will be diſtinctly ſeen. An object at a greater or leſs diſtance, will have it's image either before or behind the retina; and in either caſe, if the diſtance of the image from the retina be conſiderable, the viſion will be indiſtinct. Dr. Jurin has, however, ſhewn that it is not neceſſary to diſtinct viſion, that the images of obJects, or the points of union oſ the rays, be preciſely upon the retina, there being ſome latitude both before and behind the retina, within which, whatever images be formed, the viſion will be equally diſtinct; and this latitude will be greater or leſs, according as the viſual angles ſubtended by the reſpective objects, are greater or leſs. . Let a printed page, in which there are letters oſ three or four different ſizes, be placed at ſuch a diſtance, that every ſort of print may, without any ſtraining cr effort of the eye, be perfectly diſtinct; in this caſe it may be reaſonably preſumed, that the images of the ſeveral letters fall upon the retina. If the printed leaf be brought gradually nearer and nearer, the ſmalleſt print will firſt begin to be confuſed, whilſt the larger remains as diſtinct as before: by advancing it ſtill nearer, the ſmaller print will become more confuſed, the next ſize above it a little confuſed, whilſt the large print is ſtill as legible as before; and ſo through ſeveral degrees, till the whole is in confuſion. The ſame experiment may be made the contrarv way, by uſing a pair of ſpectacles, of a proper convexity. From hence it is evident, that we may have diſtinct viſion, when the focuſes of the pencils are at ſome diſtance, either before or behind the retina, and that the larger the object, the greater is this latitude. Rut as in this caſe the pencils ſrom every point either meet beſore they reach the retina, or tend to meet beyond it, the light that comes from them muſt cover a circular ſpot upon it, and will, therefore, paint the image larger than perfect viſion would repreſent it: and conſequently, every object, placed either too near or too remote for perfect viſion, will appear larger than it is, by a penumbra of light, cauſed by the circular ſpaces, which are illuminated by pencils of rays proceeding from the extremities of the objects. Theſe circular ſpaces are called circles of diſſipation. This accounts for ſhort-ſighted perſons finding near objects appear rather magnified, uhen they uſe a concave that is not ſo deep as that to which they are accuſtomed. On acccunt of theſe penumbræ, it is clear that tuo ſtars will appear to be nearer than they really are; and if they be really very near, will appear to be but one, but brighter than either of them taken alone: fo that the tuwo ſtars will have the ſame appearance as if one brighter ſtar appeared in the middle of the ſpace occupied by two ſtars. When objects are large, they will appear tolerably diſtinct at a much leſs diſtance than ſmall objects, becauſe the penumbræ will not interfere ſo much. PFor this reaion, a large print may be read much nearer the eye than a ſmall one; the former will appear only ill-defined, but ſuſfficiently diſtinct, when the latter is quite indiſtinct, the penumbra of one letter interfering with that of another. It is very diſiicult ro aſcertain preciſely the natural diſtancc of diſtinct viſion, or that diſtance at which the eye, without any ſtrain or effort, is ſuited to ſee objccs diſtinctly. If we ſuppoſe this diſtance to be that at which we uſually read a large fair print, this will be about fifteen or ſixteen inches, and leſs it cannot be, as we are rather more concerned with large objects than the letters of a book; and when we view objects nearer, it is on account oſ their minuteneſs: nor is it probable that the diſtance can be many feet, as, in order to examine objects, we are always deſirous to have them near the eye, except they are very large. The neareſt diſtance of diſtinct viſion is in general computed to be about ſeven or eight inches from the eye. That point in any object, to wbich the optic axis is directed, is ſeen more diſtinctly than ihe reſt. The truth of this poſition is confirmed by every one's experience: if we turn our eyes directly toward one particular part of an object ſo as to look ſteadily at it, we may indeed, iſ the object be not very large, ſee all the reſt oſ it at the ſame time; but this part will appear more diſtinct than the reſt: but looking ſteadily at an object is turning our optic axis towards it. OP THE CIHANCE IN THE CONFORMATION OF THE EYE FOR DISTINCT VISION, AT DIFFERENT DisTANCES. As a ſhip requires a difterent trim for every variation oſ the direction and the ſtrength of the wind, ſo, if we may be allowed to borrow that word, the eyes require a different trim ſfor every degree oſ ligl it, and ſor every variation in the diſtunce of the objes, while it is within certain limits. The eyes are trimmed for a particilar object, by contracting certain muſcles, and relaxing others; s the ſhip is trimmed for a particular vind, by ura uing ſome ropes, and ſlackening others. The ſailor learns this trim of his ſhip, as we learn the trim of our eyes, by experience. A ſhip, although it be the nobleſt machine that human art can boaſũ, is far inferior to the eye; for it requires art and ingenuity to navigate her, and the ſailor muſt know what ropes to pull, and which to ſlacken, to accommodate her to a particular wind. But the eye is fabricated with ſuch ſuperior wiſdom, and the principles of it's motion ſo contrived, that it requires no art nor ingenuity to ſee by it: we have not to learn what muſcles we are to contract, nor which we are to relax, in order to fit the eye to a particular diſtance oſ the object. But although we are not conſcious of the motions we perform, in order to fit the eyes to the diſtance of the object, we are conſcious of the effort employed in producing theſe motions, and probably have ſome ſenſation which accompanies them, and to which we give as little attention as to many other ſenſations; and thus a ſenſation, either previous or conſequent upon that effort, comes to be conjoined with the diſtance of the object which gave occaſion to it, and by this conjunction becomes one of the ſigns of that diſtance. Trhat we are capable of viewing objects with nearly equal diſtinctneſs, though they be placed at conſiderable diſtances from ecach other, is evident; but the alteration which takes place in the eye for this purpoſe, or the mechaniſm by which this effect is produced, is not eaſily aſcertained. It ſeems clear from the ſirſt view of the ſubject, that when ſeveral objects are at different diſtances beſore us, they will not appear equally diſtinct at the ſame time. Leſt it ſhould be ſuſpected that the indiſtinctneſs in this caſe may be owing to the impreſſions not being made upon the correſponding ponding fibrils of the two retinas, let us make a trial with one eye alone, while the other is ſhut: thus place two ſmall objects, as two pins, one behind the other, and let the one be at a foot, and the other at about ſix inches diſtance from the eye. Either of theſe objects, when looked at attentively, will appear diſtinct; but the other, at the ſume time, although it be in the axis of the eye, will be confuſed. And from hence it is very clear, that the ſame conformation of the eye is not adapted for diſtinct viſion at all diſtances, and that the eye by ſome means changes it's conformation, ſo as it may be better ſuited for viſion at different diſtances. In a ſimilar manner to the foregoing experi.ment, if the eye looks attentively upon the little ſcratches or particles of duſt upon a window-glaſs, the objects without doors will be indiſtinct; and when we look at the external objects, the opake particles upon the glaſs, which before were diſtinct, will now be confuſed. It alſo frequently happens, that when we firſt look at an object, it will appear very confuſed, which confuſion will vaniſh by degrees, and in a little time the object will become quite diſtinct. In like manner, if after poring ſome time on a book, we ſuddenly look at objects farther off, they vill at firſt appear confuſed, and become diſtincter by degrees. A ſimilar indiſtinctneſs takes place, when from looking at remote objects, we ſuddents look at one that is necar. To what can we attribute theſe phenomena, but to a change in the conformation of the cye for viſion at theſe different diſtances? a change which requires ſome ſmall time for it's performance. It cannot be owing to the laſt impreſſion on the eye not being oblirerated; for in that caſe, the ſame confuſion would be obſervable upon ſhiſting the eye from one page of a book to the other. Theſe phenomena are ſtronger when they happen without our thinking upon them; for when we make the experiment on purpoſe, and the mind is already prepared for what is to happen, it has time in part to fruſtrate our deſign: the more ſo, as theſe changes are ſomeuhat painful. Authors are much divided in their opinions concerning the change that is made in the conformation ofſ the eye, to procure diſtinct viſion at different diſtances; ſome thinking it to be a change in the lengrh of the eye, others that it is a change in the ſigure or poſition of the cryſtalline humour, others that it is a change in the cornea. The authors of cach opinion have their objections to all the reſt, and perhaps the truth may lie among them all. As the rajs of light ſuſfer a greater refraction at the cornea than they do afterwards, it is plain that a leſs change, as to quantity, in the radius of the cornea, ulill effect the buſineſs, than would be ſuſſicient in any other part of the eye: but at the ſame time it muſt alſo be conſeſſed, that moſt perſons who have heen couched ſor cataracts, are obliged to have glaſſes of difſerent convexities, in order to have diſtinct viſion at difſerent diſtances; from whence it ſcems neceſſarily to follow, that the cryſtalline humour is concerned in changing the conſformation of the eye. Perhaps the cornca, and the cryſtalline, if not ſome other parts of the eſe beſides, may contribute to produce this eſſect: ànd in order to obtain diſtinct viſion at a nearer diſtance, at the ſame time the cornea is rendered more convex, the axis oſ the eye may be a little luengdhened, the cryſtalline made more convex and brovght ſoruarder, all which changes conſpire to tl e ſame end; and the contrary for obtaining vifion at a greater dittance. It has been iewn by uriters on optics, that if an object be viewed diitinctly at three different diſtances from the eye, the firſt oſ which may be the leaſt diſtance at which it can be viewed diſtinctly, the ſecond double the firſt, and the third infinite, the alterations in the conformation oſ the eye, neceſſary for viewing an object diſtinctly at the firſt and ſecond diſtances, whoſe difference is but ſmall, are as great as thoſe that are neceſſary for the ſecond and third, whoſe diſference is infinite. Hence, if a ſhort-ſighted perſon can read a ſmall print diſtinctly, at two different diſtances, whercoſ the larger is but double the leſſer, as great alterations are made in his eyes, as in one whoſe eyes are perfect, and that can ſee diſtinctly at all intermediate diſtances, between infinity and the largeſt of the two former diſtances. For the ſame reaſon, a ſhort-ſighted perſon can ſee diſtinctly at all diſtances, with a ſingle concave of a proper figure; for the cauſe of ſhort-ſightedneſs is not a want of power to vary the conformation of the eye, but that the whole quanrity of refractions is always too great for the diſtance of the retina from the cornea. We may hence alſo clearly perceive why our eyes are ſo oſten fatigued in looking at near objects; for in this caſe, the muſcles oſ the eves, and the ligamentum ciliare, are obliged to m ake a conſiderable eſfort, to give the eyes the neccilary conformation; which cffort being greater in proportion as the object is nearer, muſt be painſul and laboriousewhen the object is very nigh. When the eje has been attentively fixed on an object at ſome determined diſtance, it cannot immediately ſee another object diſtinetly; whether it be at a greater or leſſer diſtance, it appears conſuſed and imperſect, till the eye has adapted itſeli to the diſtance at which the ohject is placed. OPF THE PUPIL OF THE EYE, AND OF IT'S MOTIONS. In ſpeaking of the ſtructure of the eye, we have ſhewn that the uvea has a ſmall round hole nearly in the middle, called the pupil, through which the rays muſt all paſs beſore they can get to che bottom of the eye, and paint the images of obJects on the retina. The conſideration of the various affections of this part of the eye, will be found of great importance, both to the vender and purchaſer of ſpectacles; ſor upon the ſtate and aperture of the pupil, the requiſite degree of magnifying power very much depends. Ihe author of nature has proportioned the magnitude of the pupil, ſo that it may beſt anſwer the purpoſes of viſion, and the ſenſibility of the retina: if it were too large, the retina would be fatigued, and hurt by the great quantity of light. Hence it is that thoſc creatures cannot bear the light of day, which, in order to ſcarch for and procure their food at night, have the pupil of their eyes very large. Further, if this aperture had been much larger than it really is, the eye would not have been a dark cell, and ſo much adventitious light would have e ntered, as to render the picture upon the retina ouſcure and indiſtinct: for as in che camera obſcura, the pictures are moſt lively and perfect when all the light is excluded. but what comes from the object, and ſerves fo form the picture; ſo it is with our eyes; the picture on the retina is moſt perfſect when all the extraneous light is excluded, and none mixes with the picture, but what tends to it's formation. Onm the other hand, if the pupil had been very ſmall, it would not have admitted a ſuſſicient quantity oſ light; the impreſſion on the retina would have been weak, and the picture ſaint and obſcure; when the pupil is very ſmall, convex glaſſes are neceſſary, in order to increaſe the quantity of light. All animals have a power of contracting and dilating the pupil of their eyes. The natural ſtate appears to be that of dilatation, and the contraction a ſtate of violence, produced by an effort originating in the mind. When the light is too ſtrong, or the object too bright, we contract the pupil, to intercept that part of the light which would injure the eye; but when the light is weak, we dilate the pupil, that more light may enter the eye. If a perſon look towards the ſun, you will obſerve the punil become exceeding ſmall; but ifſ he turns his eyes ſrom the light, and be gradually brought into a dark place, you will obſerve the pupil to dilate, in proportion as the light becomes more faint and obſcure. There are alſo other circumſtances which will cauſe the pupil to contract, as when the object is nearer the eye than the limits of diſtinct viſion: for in this caſe, the pencils of rays proceeding from the object are too diverging to be united in correſponding points on the retina; but by contracting the pupil, many of the rays are excluded, and the picture is rendered more diſtinct. It is for this purpoſe, that many ſhort-ſighted perſons contract a habit of corrugating their eyebrows in reading, a habit which would be prevented by the uſe of concave ſpectacles. Dr. Jurin has ſnewn, that the contraction oſ the pupil does, in general, depend more upon the ſtrength of the light, than on the ſenſation of confuſion in the object. Let any perſon take a book by day-light, and ſtand near the middle of a room, with his back to the light, and then hold the book ſo near that the letters may appear indiſtinct, but not ſo much ſo, but that they may be read, though with diſſiculty; on turning towards the light, it will be read with more eaſe. Again, holding the book at the ſame diſtance, go into the darkeſt part of the room, and ſtanding with your back to the light, you will find the book not at all legible; but on coming to the window, with your face to the light, you will be able to read with eaſe and diſtinctneſs. A perſon who has uſed ſpectacles for ſome years, will in the ſun-ſhine be able to read without them. When we have been for ſome time in a place much illuminated, or if the eye has been too long expoſed to a reſplendent object, and then views objects that are leſs ſo, or goes into a darker place, the ſight will for a little time be impaired, and the eye unable to perform it's proper ſunctions. The ſame vwill alſo happen from the contrary circumſtances, if we go from a faint light into one that is much brighter; ; in either caſe the pupil has not time to conform itſelſ to the ſudden, * but neceſſary change, for ſeeing diſtinctly under the new circumſtances. From hence we may infer, that very opake ſhades round a candle, inſtead of preſerving and protecting the eye, muſt be neceſſarily prejudicial to it. A moderate degree oſf opacity in the ſhade, as that of thick paper, may, by leſſening the degree of light, be uſeſul to eyes which are inflamed, or have a tendency to inflammation. There is a kind of ſvmpathy, or concord, in the motion of the pupils oſ both eyes, ſo that when one is contracted, the other contracts alſos when one is dilated, the other alſo dilates, though neither the dilatation nor contraction are equal. Many groſs * This is what Porterfield and ſome others ſay; but ſrom other experiments, the pupil is never ſo contracted as in the caſe oſ going ſuddenly ſrom a faint to a biight light: the contraction is inſtantaneous. The effects, therelore, ſpoken oſ above muſt be referred to the difſerent ſtates of the ſenſibility of the groſs overſights have ariſen, and ſome dangerous miſtakes have beeh made, by oculiſts, according to Porterſield, from their not attending to this fundamental law concerning the pupil. From this expanding and contracting power of the eye, we may learn, why the eye ſees beſt when ſurrounded with darkneſs; for the pupil, by dilating, accommodates itſclf as much as poſſible to the quantity of light, dilating conſiderably when the eye is in darkneſs, and, cæteris paribus, objects are ſceen moſt clearly when the pupil is moſt dilated. Beſides, when the eve is in the dark, the picture on the retina is neither conſuſed nor diſturbed by adventitious rays: hence, thoſe who are in a very bright light, when they want to diſtinguiſh accurately a diſtant object, either depreſs the eyebrows, or apply the hand to the forchead: hence alſo, a perſon, by placing himſelf in the dark, and employing a long tube, will form a ſpecies oſ teleſcope, producing a greater effect than might at firſt be conceived: it was on this principle that the ancients uſed a deep pit, in order to ſee the ſtars in the day-time. From hence we alſo learn, why a perſon from within a chamber can perceive the objects that are without, uhile thoſe that are out of doors cannot ſee the objects that are within: for when ue are out of doors, the pupil is contracted, and only a ſmall portion of the light that is reflected ſrom the objects within the chamber, can paſs to the retina; while on the contrary, thoſe within have the pupil more dilated, and the objects that are without are alſo more ſtrongly illuminated; beſides which, their view of objects is not ſo much obſtructed by the reflection of the window-glaſs. It is ſurprizving how far the eye can accommodate itſelf to darκneſs, and muke the beſt of a gloomy ſituation. When firſt taken from the light, and brought into a dark room, all things diſappear; or if any thing is ſeen, it is only the remaining radiations that ſtill continue in the eye; but aſter a very little time, the eye takes advantage of the ſmalleſt ray, which is confirmed by the ſollowing curious account, related by Mr. Boyle. In the time of Charles the firſt, there was a gentleman, who, ſharing in his worthy maſter's misfortunes, was forced abroad; at Madrid, in attempting to do his king a ſignal ſervice, he failed; in conſequence oſ this, he was confined in a dark and diſmal dungeon, into which the light never entered, and into which there was no opening but by a hole at the top, down which the keeper put his proviſions, preſently cloſing it again. The unfortunate loyaliſt continued for ſome weeks in this dark dungeon, quite diſconſolate; but, at laſt, began to think he ſaw ſome glimmering of light: this dawn of light increaſed from time to time, ſo that he could not only diſcover the parts of his bed, and ſuch other large objects, but, at length, he could perceive the mice that frequented his dungeon, to eat the crumbs that fell upon the ground. When ſet at liberty, he could not, for ſome days, venture to leave his cell, leſt the brightneſs of the light ſhould blind him; but was obliged to accuſtom his eyes, bv ſlow and gradual degrees, to the light of the day. OF IMPERFECT SICHT. There is no branch of ſcience, of which it is more important that a general knowledge ſhould be diffuſed, than that part which treats of the various imperfections of ſight, and the remedies ſor them. To relieve an organ which is the ſource of the moſt refined pleaſure, is certainly a deſirable object: to enable thoſe who are in vant ofſ aſſiſtance, vantageous or detrimental, and what Ekind will beſt ſuit their ſight; and ſo inſtruct thoſe who already uſe glaſſes. that they may diſcover uwhether thoſe they have choſen are adapted to the imperfection of their ſight, or are ſuch as will increaſe their complaint, and weaken their eyes; are ſubjects worthy the conſideration oſ every individual, and conſtitute the principal buſineſs of the remainder of this Lecture: to this end I ſhall, in the firſt place, explain what I mean by an imperfection of ſight. The ſight is relatively imperſect, when we cannot ſee an object diſtinctly in a common light, and at all the uſual diſtances at which it is obſerved by an eye in a perfect ſtate. In chis ſenſe, both the long and ſhort-ſighted are ſaid to have an imperfect ſight. The ſhortſighted ſee diſtant objects conſuſedly, thoſe that are near at hand diſtinctly; their ſight is therefore defective with reſpect to diſtant objects: on the other hand, the long-ſighted ſce diſtant objects diſtinctly, near objects confuſedly. An imperſect ſight is occaſioned by a confuſion in the image formed upon the retina; this happens vhenever all the rays that proceed from any one point of an object, are not united again in one, but fall on different points of the retina: or whenever ſeveral pencils oſ light, from different points of an object, terminate upon one point oſ the image. This ſpecies of confuſion takes place both in long and ſhort-ſighted eyes. OF OLD OR LONG-SICHTED Evis. To detail thoſe circumſtances which are, in general, marks oſ advancing age, and always ol partial infirmitv, muſt be ever unpleaſant, and would be equally unneceſſary, if it were not the mean of leſſening the inconveniences attendant or thoſe ſtages of e. By the long-ſighted, remote objects are ſeen diſtinctly, near ones confuſedly; and in proportion as this defect increaſes, the nearer objects become more indiſtinct, till at length it is found almoſt impoſſible to read a common-ſized print without aſſiſftance. An imperfect and confuſed image is formed upon the retina, becauſe the rays of light that come from the ſeveral points of an object, at an ordinary diſtance, are not ſufficiently refracted, and therefore do not meet upon the retina, but beyond it. Various are the cauſes which may occaſion this defect; if the convexity of the cornea be leſſened, or if either ſide of the cryſtalline becomes flatter, this effect will be produced; if the retina be not ſufficiently removed from the cornea or cryſtalline, or if the retina be too near the cornea or cryſtalline, it will give riſe to the ſame defect, as will alſo a leſs refractive power in the pellucid parts of the eye; in like manner, too great a proximity of the objects, vill prevent the rays from uniting till they are beyond the retina; but if all theſe cauſes concur together, the eiĩſect is greater. This defect is, houever, in general, attributed to a ſhrinking of the humours of the eye, which cauſes the cornea and cryſtalline to loſe their original convexity, and to become flatter the ſame cauſe will bring the retina too near the cornea. i By one or other of theſe cauſes, thoſe who were accuſtomed in their youth to rcud a common ſize print, at about twelve or fourteen inches diſtance from their eyes, are obliged to remove the book to two or three ſfect beforc they can ſee the letters diſtinctly, and read with comſort. But in proportion as the objcct is removed from the e; the image thereof on the retina becomes ſmallerand conſequently ſmall objects will not always be perceivable at that diſtance, to which thoſe in this ſtate find it neceſſary to remove them, in order to attain any degree of diſtinct viſion: the further alſo the object is remioved, the leſs light will enter the eye, and the image vill, of courſe, be fainter. Hence, thoſe who are long-ſighted require more light to enable them to read, than they did while their eyes were in their perfect ſtate; and this not only becauſe they are obliged to remove the book to a greater diſtance, but becauſe the pupil of their eye is ſmaller, and thereſore a greater intenſity of light is neceſſary to produce a ſufficient impreſſion on the retina, and compenſate ſor the defect by a greater ſplendor and illumination of the object. Increaſing years have a natural tendency to bring on this deſect, and earlier among thoſe who have made tle leaſt uſe of their eves in their youth; but whatever care be taken oſ the ſight, the decays of nature cannot be prevented: the humours of the eye will gradually waſte and decay, the refractive coats will become flatter, and the other parts of the eye more rigid and leſs pliable; thus the latitude of diſtinct viſion will become contracted: it is alſo highly probable, that the retina and optic nerve loſe a portion of their ſenſibility. hough it is in the general courſe of nature, rhat this defect ſhould augment with age, yet there are not wanting inſtances of thoſc who have recovered their ſight at an advanced period, and have been able to lay aſide their glaſſes, and read and write with pleaſure, without any artiſicial aſſiſante. Among many cauſes which may produce this eſfect, the moſt probable is, that it geVOL. nerally ariſes ſfrom a decay of the fat in the bottom of the orbit; the preſſure in this part ceaſing, the eve expands into ſomewhat of an oval form, and the retina is removed to a due focal diſtance ſrom the cryſtalline. It is a certain and very important ſact, that long-ſightedneſs may be acquired; for countrymen, ſailors, and thoſe that are habituated to look at remote objects, are generally long-ſighted, want ſpectacles ſooneſt, and uſe the deepeſt magnifiers: on the other hand, the far greater part of the ſhort-ſighted are to be found among ſtudents, and thoſe artiſts who are daily converſant with ſmall and near objects; every man becoming expert in that kind of viſion, which is moſt uſeful to him in his particular profeſſion and manner of liſe: thus the miniature painter, and engraver, ſee very near objects better than a ſailor; but the ſailor perceives diſtant objects better than they do; the eye in both caſes endeavouring to preſerve that configuration to which it is moſt accuſtomed. In the eyes, as well as other parts of the body, the muſcles, by conſtant exerciſe, are enabled to act with more eaſe and power, but are enfeebled by diſuſe; the elaſtic parts alſo, if they arc kept too long ſtretched, loſe part of their elaſticity while on the other hand, if they be ſeldom exerciſed, they grow ſtiff, and are not eaſily diſtended. From the conſideration of theſe facts, ue may learn, in a grcat meaſure, how to preſerve our eves; by habituating them oc caſionally to near as well as diſtant objects, we may maintain them longer in their perfect ſtate, and be able to poſtpone the uſe oſ ſpectacles for many years; hut we may alſo infer ſrom the ſame premiſes, that there is great danger, when the eyes are become long-ſighted, of deferring too long the uſe of ſpectacles, or uſing thoſe that niagnify too much, as we may by either method ſo ſlatten the eye, as to loſe entirely the beneſits of naked viſion. It may not be improper in this place to remark, that the long-ſighted eye is much more liable to be injured by too great a degree of light, than thoſe that are ſhort-ſighted. . Objects that appear confuſed to the longſighted, will be rendered more diſtinct, if they view them through a ſmall hole, ſuch as that made by a pin in a card, becauſe it excludes thoſc diverging rays which are the principal ſource of confuſion; but as it, at the ſame time, intercepts a conſiderable portion of the light, it is by no means an adequate remedy. The beſt relief they can obtain is from convex glaſſes, for by theſe the rays of light that proceed from the object, are ſo refracted, as to fall upon the retina, in the ſame manner as if they iſſued from a diſtant point. Spectacles aſford two advantages, for they not only render the picture of objects diſtinct upon the retina, but they alſo make it ſtrong and lively. OPF SPECTACLES. Spectacles reſtore and preſerve to us one of the moſt noble and valuable of our ſenſes; they enable the mechanic to continue his labour, and carn a ſubſiſtence by the work of his hand, till the extreme of old age. By their aid the ſcholar purſũes his ſtudies, and recreates his mird with intellectual pleaſures, and thus paſſes away days and years with delight and ſatisſaction, that might otherwiſe have been devoured by melancholy, or waſted by idleneſs. As ſpectacles are deſigned to remedy the deſects of ſight, it is natural to wiſh, that the materials of which they are formed ſhould be as perfect as the eye itſelf; but vain is the wiſſy for the materials we uſe, like every thing human, are imperfect, and yet we may deem ourſelves happy, to have in glaſs a ſubſtitute ſo analagous to the humours of the eye, a ſubſtance which gives new eyes to decrepid age, and enlarges the views of philoſophy. The tuo principal defects are, ſmall threads or veins in the glaſs, and minute ſpecks. The threads are moſt prejudicial to the purpoſes of viſion, becauſe they refract the rays oſ light irregularly, and thus diſtort the object, and fatiguc the eye; whereas the ſpecks only leſſen the quantity of light, and that in æ very ſmall degree. GENERAL RULES FOR THE CIIOICE OF SPECTACLESThe moſt general, and perhaps the beſt rule that can be given, to thoſe who are in want of aſſiſtance ſrom glaſles, in order ſo to chooſe their ſpectacles, that they may ſuit the ſtate oſ their eves, is to prefer thoſe u hich ſhew objects neareſt their natural ſtate, neither enlarged nor diminiſhed, the glaſſes being near the eye, and that give a blackneſs and diſtinctneſs to the letters of a book, neither ſtraining the eye, nor cauſing any unnatural exertion oſ the pupil. For no ſpectacles can be ſaid to be properly accommodated to the eyes, which do not procure them caſe and reſt; if theyv fatigue the eyes, we may ſaſely conclude, either that we have no occaſion for them, or that they are ill made, or not proportioned to our ſight. Though, in the choice of ſpectacles, every one muſt ſinally determine for himſelf, which are the glaſſes through which he obtains the moſt diſtinct viſion, yꝑyet ſome conlidence ſhould bce placed in the judgment of the artiſt, of whom cthey are purchaſed, and ſome attention paid to his directions. OF PRESERVERS, AND RULES FOR THE PRESERVATION OF THE SIGHT. Though it may be impoſſible to prevent the abſolute decay of ſight, whether ariſing from age, partial diſeaſe, or illneſs, yet by prudence and good management, it's natural failure may certainly be retarded, and the general habit of the eyes ſtrengthened, which good purpoſes will be promoted by a proper attention to the following maxims. I. Never to ſit for any length of time in abſolute gloom, or expoſed to a blaze of light. The reaſons on which this rule is founded, prove the impropriety of going haſtily from one extreme to the other, whether of darkneſs or of light, and ſhew us, that a ſouthern aſpect is improper for thoſe whoſe ſight is weak and tender. 2. To avoid reading a ſmall print. 3. Not to read in the duſ&; nor, if the eyes be diſordered, by candle-light. Happy thoſe who learn this leſſon betimes, and begin ro preſerve their ſight, before they are reminded, by pain, of the neceſſity of ſparing them; the frivolous attention to a quarter of an hour of the evening, has coſt numbers the perfect and comfortable uſe of their eyes for many years: the miſchieſ is efſected imperceptibly, the conſequences are inevitable. 4. The eye ſhould not be permitted to duwell on glaring objects, more particularly on firſt waking in a morning; the ſun ſliould not oſ courſe be ſuffered to ſhine in the room at that time, and a moderate quantity of light onl' be admitted. It is eaſy to ſee, that ſfor the ſunu reaſons, the ſurniture of a bed ſhould be neither altogether of a white or rcd colour; indeed, thoſe whoſe eyes are weak, would find conſiderable advantage in having green for the furniture of their bed-chamber. Nature conſirms the propricty of the advice given in this rule: for the light of the day coniss on by ſlow degrees, and green is the univerſal colour ſhe preſents to our eyes. 5. The long-ſighted ſhould accuſtom themſelves to read with rather leſs light, and ſomewhat nearer to the eye than what they naturally like; while thoſe that are ſhort-ſighted, ſhould rather uſe themſelves to read with the book as ſar oſſ as poſſible. By this means, both would improve and ſtrengthen their ſight; while a contrary courſe will increaſe it's natural imperfections. There is nothing which preſerves the ſight longer, than always uſing, both in reading and uriting, that moderate degree of light which is beſt ſuited to the eye; too little ſtrains them, too great a quantity dazææles and confounds them. The eyes are leſs hurt by the want of light, than by the exceſs of it; too little light never does any harm, unleſs they are ſtrained by efforts to ſee objects, to which the degree of light is inadequate; but too great a quantity has, by it's own power, deſtroyed the ſight. Thus many have brought on themſelves a cataract, by frequently looking at the ſun, or a fire; others have loſt rheir ſight, by being brought too ſuddenly from an extreme of darkneſs into the blaze of day. How dangerous the looking upon bright luminous ohjecls is to the ſight, is evident from it's ellects in thoſe countries which are covered the greater part oſ the year with ſnow, where blindneſs i;s exceeding ſrequent, and where the traveller is obliged to cover his eyes with crape, to prevent the dangerous, and oſten ſudden effects of too much light: even the untutored ſavage tries to avoid the danger, by framing a little wooden caſc for his eyes, with only two narrow ſlits. A momentary gaze at the ſun, will, for a time, unfit the eyes for viſion, and render them inſenſible ro impreſſions of a milder nature. The following caſes from a ſmall tract on the ec Fabric of the Eye, are ſo applicable to the preſent article, as to want no apology ſor their inſertion here; though if any were neceſſary, the uſe they will probably be of to thoſe whoſe complaints ariſe from the ſame or ſimilar cauſes, would, I preſume, be more than ſuſſicient. c Allady from the country, coming to reſide in St. James's-ſquare, was aſtlicted with a pain in the eye, and a decay of ſight. She could not Iook upon the ſtones, when the ſun ſhone upon them, without great pain. This, which ſhe thought was one of the ſymptoms of her diſorder, was the real cauſe of it. Her eyes, which had been accuſtomed to the verdure of the country, and the green of the paſture grounds before her houſe, could not bear the violent and unnatural glare of light reflected ſrom the ſtones; ſnc was adviſed to place a number of ſmall orange trees in the windows, ſo that their tops might hide the pavement, and be in a Iine with the graſs. She recovered by this ſimple change in the light, wirhout the aſſiſtance of any medicine; though her eyes were before on the verge of little leſs than blindneſs. c Agentleman of the law had his lodgings in Pall-mall, on the north-ſide, his front windous were expoſed to the full noon ſun, while the back room, having no opening, but into a ſmall cloſe yard, ſurrounded vwith high uwalls, was very dark; he urote in the back room, and uſed to come from that into the ſront to breakfaſt, &c. his ſight grew weak, and he had a conſtant pain in the balls of his cres; he tried viſcal glaſſes, and ſpoke with oculiſts, cqually in vain. Being ſoon convinced, that the coming ſuddenly out of his duſky ſtudy, into the full blaze of ſun-ſhine, and that very often in the day, had been the real cauſe oſ his diſorder; he took new lodgings, by which, and forbearing to uritc by candle-light, he was very ſoon cured. Blindneſs, or at leaſt miſerable weakneſſes of ſight, are oſten brought on by theſe unſuſpected cauſes. Thoſe who have weak eyes, ſhould therefore be particularly attentive to ſuch circumſtances, ſince prevention is eaſy, but the cure may be difficult, and ſometimes impracticable. Whatſoever care, however, be taken, and though every precaution be attended to with ſcrupulous exactneſs; yet as we advance in years, the pouers of our frame gradually decay; an effect which is generally firſt perceived in the organs of viſion. Agc i, however, by no means an abſolute criterion, by which we can decide upon the ſight, nor uill it prove the neceſſity of wearing ſpectacles. Ior, on the one hand, there are many whoſe ſight is preſerved in all it's vigour, to an advanced old age; while, on the other, it may be impaired in tuth by a variety of cauſes, or be vitiated by int.mal naladies. Nor is the defect either the ſame in different perſons of the ſame age, or in the ſame perſon at dilicrent ages; in ſome the failure is natural, in others it is acquired. Irom vuhatever cauſes this decay ariſes, an attentive conſideration cf the following rules will cnabl crery one to judge for himſelf, when his ſig ht may be aſſiſted or preſerved by the uſe ol ſpectacles. 1. When vwe are obliged to remove ſinall objects to a conſiderable diſtance ſrom nhe c36, in order to ſee them diſtinctly. 2. If we find it neceſſary to get more light than formerly; as for inſtance, to place the candle between the eye and the object. 3. If on looking at, and attentively conſiderĩing a near object, it becomes confuſed, and appears to have a kind of miſt before it. 4. When the letters oſ a book run one into the other, and hence appear double and treble. 5. If the eyes are ſo fatigued by a little exerciſe, that we are obliged to ſnut them from time to time, and relieve them by looking at diſferent objects. When all theſe circumſtances concur, or any of them ſeparately take place, it will be neceſſary to feek aſſiſtance from glaſſes, which will now eaſe the eyes, and in ſome degree check their tendency to grow flatter; whereas if they be not aſſiſted in time, the flatneſs will be conſiderably increaſed, and the eyes be weakened by the efforts they are compelled to exert. We are now able to decide upon a very important queſtion, and ſay how far ſpectacles may be ſaid to be preſervers of tbe ſight. It is plain they can only be recommended as ſuch, to thoſe whoſe eyes are beginning to fail; and it would be as abſurd to adviſe the uſe of ſpectacles to thoſe who fcel none oſ the foregoing inconveniences, as it would be for a man in health to uſe crutches to ſave his legs. But thoſe who feel thoſe inconveniences, ſhould immediately take to ſpectacles, which, by enabling them to ſee objects nearer, and by facilitating the union of the rays oſ light on the retina, will ſupport and preſerve the ſig ht. OFP COoucHeD Evrs. With the diſeaſes of the eye, theſe Lectures have no concern; they have been already well and ably conſidered by proſeſſional men; and it is ſcarce neceſſary to obſervc, that in anatomical know ledge, and in the practical operations of ſurgery, REngland now claims a juſt pre-eminence over other nations. But among the various diſcaſes of this organ, there is one in which, aſter the ſurgeon has quitted the patient, glaſſes arc neceſſary, to give eſfect to che operation, and a comfortable ſight of objects to che perſon relieved. This diſcaſe is the cataract, a diſorder affecting the cryſtalline humour of the eye; when the opacity is confirmed, this humour becomes ſo opake, as ſcarcely to admit any rays oſ light, and prevents their producing their ordinary effects, and conſequently no image of any object is formed, though the retina, and other organs of ſight, are in perfect order. There is no diſorder more deplorable in it's nature and conſequences; deſtructive of the ſight, oſten beyond the reach oſ remedy: the hand oſ the operator is the only hope, and his eſforts are ſometimes unſucceſsſſul. The cauſe of this diſorder is ſeldom known. Sometimes it has been thought to be brought on by frequent inſpection oſ the ſun, and ſometimes by looking too long and too oſten at a bright fire. In oarly ſtages of the diſeaſe it has been thought to be removed by medicine.  Of the various remedies a Baron de Wenzel, in his Treatiſe on the Cataract, denies that any medicine has power to diſſipate the opake cryſtalline. Nr. Ware, in his tranſſlation of this work, aſſents to the truth of the Barons obſervation, ſo far as is at preſent known; but adds, that many caſes have occurred, under his own inſpection, which prove rhat the powers oſ nature ate oſten ſuſficient ſor this purpoſe. ſhoſe opaces in particular, which are produced by exter medies that have been uſed for this purpoſe, the electrical ſtream is ſuppoſed by many to be the beſt, on account of it's powerful diſcutient properties. The aſſiſtance the eye receives from the ſurgeon is either by depreſſion of the cryſtalline below the pupil, or extracting the cataract. But as the denſity of the vitreous humour, which ſupplies the place of the cryſtalline, is leſs, the rays of light will be leſs refracted, and not meet at the retina, but at ſome diſtance behind it; the ſight will thereſore be imperfect, except the eye be aſſiſted with a proper convex glaſs. There is a circumſtance attending couched eyes, which fully evinces that the change made in our eyes, to accommodate them to the diſtances of objects, muſt be principally attributed to the cryſtalline humour; namely, that one focus is ſeldom ſufficient to enable thoſe who have undergone this operation, to ſee objects at different diſtances. They generally require two pair of ſpectacles, one for near, the other for more diſtant objects. The foci that are uſed lie between 6 and 13 inches. It nal violence, he has repeatedly ſeen diſſipated in a ſhort ſpace of time, when no other paris oſ the eye have been hurt; ind'in eneral, in caſes of this deſcription, the eryſtalline humour has been diſſolved; which has been demonſtrated, by the benefit the patient has aſterwards derived from adopting the uſe of deeply convex glaſſes. Mr. Warc adds, that inſtances are not wanting, in which cataracts, which were formed without any violence, have been ſuddenly diſſiputed, in conſequence of an accidental blow on the eye. For theſe reaſons he entertains a hope, that means may hereaſter be diſcovered, bv which an opake cryſtalline may be rendered tranſparent, without the performance oſ any operation whatever. Ihe remedies which have appeared to Mr. Ware more efſſectual than others, in theſe caſes, have been the application to the eye itſelf of one or iwo drops oſ æther, once or twice in the courſe oſ the day, and the occalional rubbing oſ the eye over the lid, with the point oſ the ſinger, ſirſt moiſtentd with a wrak volatlæ- or mercurial liniment. Sec Warc s tranilation o Wenael Ircatiſe on the Cataract, page :3. It is not adviſeable to uſe glaſſes too ſoon aſter the operation; for while the eyes are in a debilituted ſtate, all exertions are not only improper, but alſo very prejudicial. OF THE SHORT-SIGHTED. ſn this deſect oſ the eyes, the images of objects at an ordinary diſtance unite before they arrive at the retina, and conſequently the images formed thercon are conſuſed and indiſtinct. This effect is produced cither by too great a convexity in the cornca and cryſtalline, or too grear a refractive power in the humourss of the eye; or the retina may be placed too far; or it may ariſe from a concurrence oſ all theſe circumſtances. Thoſc who are ſhort-ſighted can diſtinguiſſi ſinaller ohjects, and ſee clearly a given ſmall object with lesſs light than other people: the reaſon is evident, for the nearcr the object is, the more light enters the pupil; being alſo more denſe, it's action is more povuerful on the retina; hence the ſhortſighted can read a ſmall print by moon-ſhine, or in the tuilight, when a common eye can ſcarce diſtinguiſh one letter ſrom another. In a ſtrong light they can ſce a little farther than they do uhen it is weak; the ſtrength of the light cauſes the pupil of their eves to contract, and thus removes in ſome degree the indiſtinctneſs oſ the objccts. Upon the ſame principle we may account for the ſhort-ſighted ſo often partly ſhutting their eyelids, ſrom whence they were formerly denominated myopes; by this means, they confine the baſes of the peneils of rays which iſſue from the points of an object, and thus contract the circle oſ diſſipation and leſſen the indiſtinctheſs of viſion: hence they alſo ſec objects more diſtinctly through a ſmall hole, as that mude hy a pin in a card. It is a common obſervation, that the ſlhortſighted do in general prefer a ſmall print to a large one, and that they uſually write a ſmall hand; for by the proximity the letters are magni ſicd, and, being ſmall, they take in a greater number at onc view; they hold the book they are reading in generally inclined to one ſide, in order to attain a greater degree of illumination. As they can only ſee diſtinctly objects that are near, they are obliged, by a ſtrong eſſort of the mind, to cauſe the axes of the eyes to converge; this eſiort being painful, forces them oſten to turn auay one of their eves, which producing double viſion, they are obliged to ſhut it. When they hold a book directly heſore their eyes, the picture will fall upon the middle of the retina; but if they hold it obliquely, it will fall upon the ſide of the retina; now the middle of the retina is further from the fore part oſ the eye than the ſide of it is. Therefore though the picture be ſo near to the fore part oſ the eyec as to be confuſed if it fall upon the middle, it maay be diſtinct when it ſalls upon the ſide. As thoſe who are very ſhort-ſighted do not perceive the motion oſ the eyes and ſcatures, theſeldom look atrentively at thoſe with whom the ae converſing: it is from this circumſtance that Pliny terms the prominent-eyed hebetiores; not that this defect in ſight impairs genius, or leſſent the powers of the mind; but as it deprives them of the rapid communications that are made by the eye, it apparently leſſens that vivacity oſ conception, which aluays accompanies a vigorou mind. Happily ſor the ſhort-ſighted, the principal inconveniences of their ſight may be remedied bv the uſe of concave glaſies; by their aſſiſtance thoſe whoſe ſphere ol diſtinct viſion ſcarce extended guiſh, very ſatisfactorily, objects at a conſiderablc diſtance; the concave lens produces diſtinct viſion, by cauſing the rays to diverge more, and unite at the retina, inſtead of meeting before they reach the bottom of the eye. In the choice of glaſſes for the ſhort-ſighted, no rules can be laid down; it is a defect that has no connection with age, no ſtated progreſſion that can be a foundation to guide the optician, or lead him to recommend one glaſs in preference to another; the whole muſt depend on the obſervation of the ſhort-ſighted themſelves, who, by trring glaſſes of different degrees of concavity, uill ſoon ſind vut that whoſe eſffects are moſt advantageous, producing diſtinct viſion at different diſtances. If the ſhort-ſighted perſon is ſo far removed from an optician, as not to have an opportunity oſ trying a variety of lenſes, he may be nearly ſuited, by ſending to him the greateſt diſtance at which, with his naked eye, he can ſee diſtinctly; he will, by the following rule, be enabled to ſuit him with tolerable exactneſſ. Multiply the diſtance at which the ſhortſighted perſon ſees diſtinctly with his naked eye, by the diſtance at which it is required he ſhould ſee diſtinctly by a concave glaſs, and divide the product by the diſference between the aforeſaid diſtances: if the required diſtance be very remote, the glaſſes muſt be of that radius at which they ſee diſtinctly with their naked eyes. The beneſit the ſhert-ſighted receive from concave glaſſes, is not ſo great as the long-ſighted find by a convex lens; for an object is not only magnified, but the eye receives alſo a larger pencil of light from cach viſible point, becauſe the rays enter leſs diverging: whereas the concave not only diminiſhes the object in ſize, but it leſſens alſo the quantity of light, as it renders the rays more diverging; conſequently the ſhortſighted do not ſee remote objects, unleſs they arc very large and bright, ſo well through a concave lens as theory promiſes: for the chief impediment to a diſtinct view of remote objects, is their want oſ light and magnitude, but both of theſe a concave lens increaſes. It is generally ſuppoſed, that the ſhort-ſighted become leſs ſo as they advance in years, as the natural ſhrinking and decay in the humours oſ the eye leſſen it's convexity, and thus adapt it better ſor viewing of diſtant objects; but among the great number of ſhort- ſighted that I have accommodated with glaſſes, I have ever found the reverſe of this theory to be truc, and the eyes of the myopes never required glaſſes leſs concave, but generally more concave as they grew older, to enable them to ſee at the ſame diſtance. Iurther, the effects of habit, which are in moſt caſes very powerful, but peculiarly ſo in the afſections of the eye, have a natural tendency to increaſe the deſect of the myopes; for by frequently looking cloſe to objects, in order to ſee them diſtinctly, they would make themſelves near-ſighted, though their eyes were naturally the reverſe: hence we find, that watch-makers, engravers, and ſtudious perſons, often bring on this defect. By reading or working at as great a diſtance as poſſible, and oſten looking at remote objects, the degree of ſhort-ſightedneſs may be much leſſened. As children in general read much nearer than grown perſons, ſi they are ſuſfered to indulge this propenſity, they become naturally ſhort- ſighted. I have ſound it neceſſary, in ſome inſtances, to give convex glaſſes to the ſhort-ſighted, when very far advanced in age, not becauſe their eycs were groun leſs convex, but to give them more light, and counteract an extreme contraction of the pupil. Great as are the diſadvantages of the ſhortſighted, they are leſs, perhaps, with reſpect to diſtant objects, than is generally imagined; they ſce the brighter ſtars and planets, nearly as well as other people. They are prevented indecd from diſtinguiſhing beyond a certain ſmall diſtance, the ſmall parts of an object which are very viſible to another; thus they cannot diſtinguiſh the features of a face acroſs a room, and as objects are generally diſcriminated by their minuter parts, their diſadvantage in viewing objects at a moderate diſtance is very evident. But though ſuch a perſon cannot diſcern the minutiæ of objects, unleſs they are very large and very near him; yet he can perceive any object in the groſs, at a conſiderable diſtance, if it be not too ſmall: thus he may perceive a man at the diſtance of ſeveral paces, but muſt advance within one or two, before he can determine who he is, or call him by his name; he vill ſce a large tree much further, and from experience in ſuch caſes, will perceive, that a large obſcure objec; at a great diſtance is an houſe, to the ſurprizve oſ friends who are acquainted with the nature of his ſight. On theſe principles, we may eaſily account for the apparent paradox of the pur-blind, or thoſe who can ſcarcely ſee a ſmall object at arm's length, yet diſcovering thoſe that are very remote. LECTURE XVIII. ON THE NATURE or VISION. OF THE DISTANCE, MAGNITUDE, AND APPARENT PLACE OF OBJeC 1S. ET us now conſider by what means the mind. aſſiſted by the eyes, is informed of the diſtance of objects. Diſtance, of itſelf and immediately, is imperceptible; for it is only a line directed endways to the eye. Thus, if I look endways at this piece of packthread, the length of it would be inviſible from its ſituation, and thereſore the image on the retina can only be a puint, which point will be invariably the ſame at all diſtances; whether the object be a thouſand miles, or only a foot from us, the point is ſtill the ſame. The chauge of conformation in the eye, is the firſt means cobe reby tbe eye judges of diſtance. If the figure oſ the eye and the ĩituation of all it's parts were to continue always the ſame at all diſtances oſ the objects we are looking at, the picture of ſome objects upon the retina would be confuſed, becauſe they are too far off, and others becauſe they are too ncar. In viewing objects at ſmall but different diſtances, the eye muſt change it's conformation for procuring diſtinct viſion. Young people have commonly the power of adapting their eyes to all diſtances of the object, from 6 or 7 inches to 15 or 16 feet, ſo as to have perfect and diſtinct viſion at any diſtance within theſe limits. The effort they uſe to adapt the eye to any particular diſtance of objects, within that diſtance, will become a ſign of that diſtance. This change in the conformation of the eye has its limits, beyond which it cannot go; it can therefore be of no uſe to us in judging oſ the diſtance oſ objects that are placed beyond the limits of diſtinct viſion. But as the object appears more or leſs confuſed, acccording as it is more or leſs removed from theſe diſtances, the degree of confuſion in the objects aſſiſts the mind in judging of diſtances, and becomes a ſign thereof conſiderably beyond the limits of diſtinct viſion. This confuſedneſs has alſo it's bounds, beyond which the image on the retina will not be ſenſibly more indiſtinct, though the object be removed to a much greater diſtance. If therefore we had no other means but this of perceiving the diſtance of viſible objects, the moſt diſtant would not appear to be above 20 or 30 feet from the eye; and the tops of houſes and trees would ſeem to touch the clouds, becauſe in that caſe the ſigns of all greater diſtances being the ſame, they have the ſame ſignification, and give the ſame perception oſ diſtance. We are therefore provided with another means, namely, the inclination of ihe optic axes. In viewing an object attentively with both eyes, we always direct both eves towards it, and the nearer the object is the more they vill be inclined to each other, and the more remote the leſs will be this inclination: and although we are not conſcious of this inclination, yet we are conſcious oſ the effort employed in it. By this means we percei ve ſmall diſtances more accurately than we could do by the conformation of the eye only; and thereſore we find that thoſe who have loſt the ſight oſ one eye, are apt, even within arm's length, to make miſtakes in the diſtance of objects, which are eaſily avoided by thoſe who ſee with both eyes: ſuch miſtakes are often diſcovered in ſnuffing a candle, threading a needle, and filling a tea-cup. A perſon who plays well at tennis, will ſind himſelſ ſubject to the ſame miſtakes the firſt time he plays with his eye hoodwinked. To be convinced of the truth oſ this obſervation, ſuſpend by a thread a ring, ſo that the edge may be towards you, and it's hole look right and left; take a ſtick which is crooked at the end, and retiring a or 3 paces from the ring, cover one eye with your hand, and endeavour with the other to paſs the crooked end of the rod through the ring: eaſy as the experiment may appear, you vill ſcarcely ſucceed once in a hundred times if you move the rod quickly. Although this ſecond mean of perceiving the diſtance of viſible objects be more exact and determinate than the firſt, yet it hath it's limits, beyond which it can be oſ no uſe. For when the optic axes directed to an object are ſo nearly parallel, that in directing them to an object yet more diſtant, we are not conſcious of any new effort, nor have any different ſenſation, our perception oſ diſtance ſtops; and as all more diſtant objects affect the eye in the ſame manner, we perceive them to be at the ſame diſtance. This ſhews why the ſun, moon, planets, and fixed ſtars, when not ſcen near the horizon, appear to be all at the ſame diſtance, as if they touched the concave ſurface of a great ſphere. The colours and degrees of brightneſs in objects is a cauſe of a difſerence of apparent diſtance. As objects become more and more remote, they gradualy appear more faint, languid, and obſcure; their minute parts become more indiſtinct; their outline leſs accurately defined; their colours not only loſe their luſtre, but degenerate from their natural hue, and are tinged with the azure oſ the intervening atmoſphere. It is by theſe means that painters can repreſent upon the ſame canvas objects at very different diſtances. The diminution of magnitude in an object would not be ſufficient to make it appear at a great diſtance without this degradation of colour, indiſtinctneſs of the outline, and of the minute parts. If a painter ſhould make a human figure, ten times leſs than other human figures that are in the ſame piece, having the colours as bright, and the outline and minute parts as accurately defined, it would not have the appearance of a man at a great diſtance, but oſ a pigmy or Lilliputian. Painters therefore, to give their figures a due degree of remoteneſs, are obliged to lay over each a thick colouring of air; for the more remote the object, the more do it's oun colours ſeem loſt in that of the intervening atmoſphere. This is called keeping, for by this means every object in a picture ſeems to keep it's proper diſtance from the reſt. Dr. Smith gives us a curious obſervation made by Biſhop Berkeley in his travels through Italy and Sicily. He obſerved, that in thoſe countries, cities and palaces, ſecen at a great diſtance, appeared nearer to him by ſeveral miles than they really were; and this he attributed to the purity of the Italian and Sicilian air, which gave to very diſtant objects that degree of brightneſs and diſtinctneſs, which in the groſſer air of England was only ſeen in thoſe that were near. Hence a chamber appears leſs when it's walls are whitened, and fields and hills appear leſs when covered with ſnow. It is alſo certain, that in air uncommonly pure we are apt to think viſible objects nearer and leſs than they really are, and in air uncommonly ſoggy we are apt to think them more diſtant and larger than the truth. A weſterly proſpect in a clear morning, with the ſun upon it, appears nearer than when the ſun is higher up and more weſterly. The diſpoſition of the clouds and innumerable other circumſtances affect the brightneſs of objects, and contribute their ſhare in forming our ideas of the diſtance of remote objects. Che length of the ground-plane, or number oſ intervening parts perceived in il, is another mean by which we perceive diſtance. We are ſo much accuſtomed to meaſure with our eye the ground we travel over, and to compare the judgment of diſtances formed by ſight with actual experience or information, that we by degrees in this way form a more accurate judgment of the diſtance oſ terreſtrial objects than we could do by any of the above-mentioned means. A given extent appears longer according as it contains a greater number of viſible parts; and hence 1wo remote and very unequal diſtances may appear very unequal, according to the diſfferent circumſtances of the intervening parts, and as the ſpectator is differently elevated. Thus a hedge having in it ſeveral grown trees, generally looks longer than a clipt hedge, or the ſame extent of ground in an open field. For the ſame reaſon a row of houſes, columns, or trees regularly planted, appear longer than a plain wall of the ſame extent; for in this caſe there are not only more viſible and remarkable parts in the one caſe, bur our pre- knowledge of the ſeveral intervening objects being equidiſtant, tends to protract the apparent length of the whole chain ſtill longer. A river at firſt does not look ſo broad as it does aſter you have had a ſide view of the bridge acroſs; and indeed a given extent of water does not appear ſo long as the ſame extent of land, it being more difficult to diſtinZ.3 guiſh parts in the ſurface of the one, than it is in the ſurface of the other. Hence a perſon unuſed to a ſea proſpect will be much miſtaken in his judgment of diſtances; a ſhip that is 8 or 10 miles from the ſhore, will ſcarce ſeem to him to be a mile off. When part of the intervening chain is inviſible, or obſcurely ſeen, the apparent diſtances of objects that are beyond that part will be accordingly leſs. Thus a certain extent of rough, uneven ground, appears ſhorter than the ſame extent of plain ground; the prominent parts hiding the cavities behind them, the apparent diſtance is ſo much the leſs by the loſs of thoſe inviſible parts. For the ſame rcaſon the brow of an hill ſeen over the top of another frequently looks nearer than it does aſter the vale between preſents itſelf to our view; and the banks of a river at ſome diſtance, will ſeem contiguous, if no part of the ſurface of the river is viſible. The known diſtance of the terreſtrial objects which terminate our view, makes that part of the ſky which is towards the horizon appear more diſtant than that which is towards the Zenith. And hence the apparent figure of the ſky is not that of a hemiſphere, but rather a leſs ſegment of a ſphere; and the diameter of the ſun or moon, and the diſtance between two ſixed ſtars, ſeen contiguous to a hill, or to any terreſtrial object, appear much greater than when no ſuch object ſtrikes the eye at the ſame time. When the viſible horiæon is terminated by very diſtant objects, the celeſtial vault is enlarged in all its dimenſions. When viewed from a confined ſtreet or lane, it bears ſome proportion to the buildings which ſurround it; but when viewed from a large plain, terminated on all ſides by hills riſing one above another to the diſtance of 20 or more miles from the eve, you ſee as it were another heaven, whoſe magniſicence declares the greatneſs of it's AuTHOR, and puts every human edifice out of countenance; ſor the lofty ſpires and gorgeous palaces ſhrink into nothing before it, and bear no more proportion to the celeſtial dome, than their maker to it's MAKER. Different degrees of apparent diſtances are ſuggeſted by the diminution of their appareut or viſible begnithde. We Eknov, by experience, what figure a man or any known object makes to our eyes at ten feet, and we perceive a gradual diminution of the viſible figure at ao, 40, 100 feet, and ſo on till it at laſt vanithes: hence a certain viſible magnitude of a known object becomes the ſign of a certain determinate diſtance, and carries with it the conception and belief of that diſtance. But when we are ignorant oſ the real magnictude of an object, we can never from the apparent magnitude form any judgment of it's diſtance. Hence we are ſo frequently deceived in our eſtimate of diſtance, by the extraordinary magnitude of any object ſcen at the end oſ it; as, in travelling towards a large city, or a caſtie, or a cathedral church, or a large mountain, we imagine them nearer than we ſind them to be. This is alſo the reaſon why animals and all ſmall objects, ſeen in vallies, contiguous to large mountains, appear exceedingly ſmall; for we think the mountain nearer to us than iſ it were ſmaller, and we ſhould be ſurpriſed at the apparent ſmallneſs oſ the neighbouring animals, if we thought them farther oſf. Hence alſo objects appear ſmaller ro the eye when ſeen from a high building, than they ſeem to be vhen viewed from the ſame diſtance on level ground. Let a boy, who has never been upon any high bullding, go to the top of the Monument, and look down into the ſtreet, and the objects ſeen there will appear to him ſo ſmall as to occaſion much ſurpriſe. But 10 or ao years after, if he has now and then uſed himſelf to look from that and other great heights, the object will not appear ſo ſmall. For this reaſon ſtatues placed upon very high buildings ought to be made of a larger ſize than thoſe which are ſeen at a nearer diſtance. OF APPARENT MAGNITUDE. The apparent magnitude of very diſtant objects is neither determined by the angle under which they are ſeen, nor in the exact proportion of that angle compared with their true diſtance, but is compounded with a deception concerning that diſtance, inſomuch that, if we had no idea of the difference in the diſtance of objects, each would appear in magnitude proportional to the angle under which it is ſeen; and if our apprehenſion of the diſtance was always juſt, our ideas of their magnitude would be in all diſtances unvaried; but in proportion as we err in our conception of diſtance, the greater angle ſuggeſts a greater magnitude. It is probable, tbat the apparent magnitudes are either exactly or very nearly in the compound ratio of the viſual angles and apparent diſtances. We are as frequently deceived in our notions of magnitude as thoſe of diſtance. A fly ſcipping before an unattentive ſpectator, will ſometimes excite the idea of a crow flying afar off; but as ſoon as the miſtake in the diſtance is found, the crow will dwindle into a fly. Thus alſo, as we have obſerved in foggy weather and in the duſk, objects appear further off than they really are, and in theſe caſes proportionably larger, as there is a greater miſtake in the diſtance. Thus a ſmall heap of ſtones has been miſtaken for the ruins of a large building, &c. The diminution of apparent magnitude is ſo very ſmall in proportion to the greater increaſe of diſtance, that in general the viſual angles ſubtended by objects can have but little ſhare in ſorming our judgment of their diſtances; and indeed if the caſe was otherwiſe, it would be almoſt impoſſible for us to gueſs aright, either as to diſtance or magnitude. For inſtance, if we did not judge independently of the viſual angle, how could we know a child from a grown perſon, or even a pin from a May-pole. For the largeſt object being removed to a greater diſtance may ſubtend an angle leſs than any aſſignable one; as objects generally appear nearer when the intervening chain is not perceived: and the ſame reaſon operates, as already obſerved, in making them appear proportionably ſmaller. Thus the diſtance of an object joined with it's viſible magnitude, is a ſign of it's real magnitude; and the diſtance of the ſeveral parts of an object joined with it's viſible figure, becomes a ſign of it's real figure. When you look at a globe ſtanding before you, by the original powers of ſight you perceive only ſomething of a circular form, variouſly coloured. The viſible ſigure hath no diſtance from the eye, no convexity, nor hath it three dimenſions; even its length and breadth are incapable of being meaſured by inches, feet, or other linear meaſures. But when you have learned to perceive the diſtance of every part of this object from the eye, this perception gives it convexity, and a ſpherical figure; and adds a third dimenſion to that which had but two before. The diſtance oſf the whole object enables you alſo to perceive how an inch or a foot ofſ length affects the eye at that diſtance: you perceive by your eye the dimenſions of the globe. s So numerous are the relations between the eye and the underſtanding, between light and know ledge, that there are very few parts oſ optics from which you may not deduce ſome practical advantages. Thus the judgment of the mind correſponds with the ſtrength and colour of the objects whereon they are paſſed: but the ſurther objects are removed, they grow more faint and indiſtinct, and of courſe our opinions concerning them will be leſs vivid and clear. Both pleaſures and pains at a diſtance appear ſcarce worth our regarding, or giving ourſelves any trouble about them; the preſent occupies our thoughts, and forcibly carries away the preference in our imagination from the future, againſt the cleareſt and ſureſt deciſions of our underſtanding. To rectify this imperſfection of our nature, is worthy of your utmoſt application; and you may eafily do it by gradually inuring the mental eye to diſcern objects at a diſtance. It is the quickneſs of this moral ſenſe, or an habitual full perſuaſion oſ certain good and evil, however remote, being equally valuable with the preſent, that conſtitutes the virtue of prudence. OF APPARENT MOTION. If two objects at different diſtances from the eye move in parallel lines, nearly at right angles to the optic axis, and with the ſame velocity, the moſt diſtant will appear to move ſloweſt, and the neareſt will appear to move quickeſt, becauſe the ſpace deſcribed by the moſt diſtant object will ſubtend a much ſmaller angle to the eye. Iſf the directions in which the bodies move are not parallel, the neareſt object may appear to move ſſower than the more diſstant, although it really moves quicker, if the ſpace deſcribed be ſituated ſo obliquely to the viſual rays, that they form at the eye much ſmaller angles, than ſmaller ſpaces deſcribed by the more diſtant object, which is expoſed more directly to the eye. If two objects unequally diſtant from the eye move with unequal velocities in the ſame direction, their apparent velocities are in a ratio compounded of the direct ratio of their true velocities, and the reciprocal one of their diſtances from the eye. As objects in motion will have different apparent velocities at different diſtances; ſo to a ſpectator in motion, objects at reſt will have different apparent velocities. Thus a paſſenger in a coach ſees the trees in the next hedge move ſwiftly bac kwards, while thoſe lin the field beyond move ſlower, and thoſe beyond theſe ſtill ſſower, and ſo on, thoſe that are very remote being ſcarce perceived to move at all. And if a ſpectator in motion keeps his eye fixed upon an object at ſome diſtance, objects that are pretty near to it will appear at reſt, whilſt nearer objects will appear to go backwards, and more remote ones progreſſively forward, the ſame way as the ſpectator. If two or more objects having the ſame apparent velocity move all the ſame way, an object at reſt, by which they paſs, may appear to move the contrary way, while the objects in motion may appear at reſt: for as their images keep the ſame diſtance upon the retina, no motion among them can be perceived. If the ſpectator inſenſibly moves his eye, ſo as to keep theſe images in the ſame place, the image of the object at reſt will paſs ſucceſſively over them, in the ſame manner as if that object had been in motion the contrary way. The ſame phenomenon may happen, if the ſingle object be in motion, either the ſame or the contrary way; only it's apparent motion will be quicker or ſlower, direct or retrograde, according to different circum4 ſtances. Thus when the clouds move ſucceſſively over the moon, ſhe ſeems to go with their velocity the contrary way, whether that be eaſtward or weſtward. PFrom hence you may ſee how diſficult it is to form a juſt eſtimate of the real velocities of objects from apparent ones, ſince we ought to know both the directions and diſtances oſ the moving objects, neither of which in many caſes can be gueſſed at with tolerable accuracy. Bodies in motion muſt move with a certain degree of velocity in order to become perceptible. Though it is difſicult to aſſign with accuracy the ſpace that muſt be paſſed over in a given time, in order to be ſenſible; yet in general we may ſay that it ſhould deſcribe, in a ſecond of time, a ſpace that will form at the eye an angle of 15 or 20 ſeconds of a degree. Hence we ſee why the heavenly bodies are not perceived to move, the ſpaces deſcribed by them in a minute not ſubtending an angle of above 1 degree, when their apparent motion is greateſt. For the ſame reaſon we do not perceive the motion of the hour, or even the minute hand of a watch. In the ſame manner a prodigious great velocity, as the diurnal motion of the heavenly bodies, may be yet too ſlow to be perceived; and an object may move with ſo great a velocity as not to be perceived, as the flight of a ball out of a gun. An object moving with great velocity is not ſeen unleſs it be very luminous. Thus a cannon ball is not ſeen, if it be viewed tranſverely; but if it be viewed according to the line it deſcribes, it may be ſeen, becauſe it's picture continues long on the ſame place oſ the retina, and therefore receives a ſtronger impreſſion. As we have all been children before we were men, we have all, I doubt not, at that ſeaſon amuſed ourſelves with many childiſh diverſions, one of which you may remember was burning a ſmall ſtick to a live coal, and whiſking it round to make gold lace, as we called it. We little thought then of making experiments in philoſophy; but we may turn this innocent amuſement to that uſe, in our riper years, by gathering from thence, that our organs can continue ſenſation after the impulſe of objects exciting it is over: for the coal is in one point only at one time, and can be ſeen only where it is; yet there appears an entire circle of fire, which could not happen unleſs the light coming from it, at every point, put the optic nerves into a motion that laſted until the object returned to the ſame point again; nor, unleſs this motion raiſed the ſame perception in the mind as it did upon the fſirſt ſtricing of the light. For if the ſtick be not twirled ſuiſtly enough, ſo that it cannot make a ſecond impreſſion from the ſame point, before the motion excited by the firſt be over, you vwill not ſce a whole fiery ring, but a lucid ſpot paſſing ſucceſſively through every part of the circle. On the principles we have laid down, are explained what are called fullacies in viſion. They depend principally on our miſtaking the diſtances of objects. Thus, parallel lincs, as long viſtas, conſiſting of parallel rous of trees, ſeem to converge more and more as they are ſarther extended from the eye; becauſe the lines which meaſure cheir intervals, and which are always equal, ſubtend ſmaller angles, the more remote they are, and ſo appear perpetually diminiſhing, while we, at the ſame time, miſtake the diſtance. For the ſame reaſon, the remote parts of a horizontal walk, or a long floor, will appear to aſcend gradually; and the more remote the objects are pear, till the laſt be ſeen on a level with the eye: whereas the ceiling of a long gallery appears to deſcend towards a horizvontal line, drawn from the eye to a ſpectator. And the ſurface of the ſea, ſeen ſrom an eminence, ſeems to riſe higher and higher, the farther we look: and the upward parts of high buildings incline forwards over the parts below; ſo that ſtatues on the top of ſuch buildings, in order to appear upright, muſt recline or bend backwards. There is another phenomenon, however, not ſo eaſily accounted for: if a perſon turns ſwiftly round, without changing his place, all objects about will ſeem to move round in a contrary way; and this deception continues not only while the perſon himſelf moves round, but which is more ſurpriſing, it continues alſo for ſome time after he ceaſes to move; i. e. when both the eye and the object are at reſt. The firſt is not ſo difficult to explain, for the motion of the object on the retina eaſily explains it: but why it continues when both the eye and the object are at reſt, has not yet been vwell underſtood. It appears to me, that the ſeat of ſenſe is not altogether paſſive in receiving images, but poſitively directs a ray from itſelſf to every object it perceives; the action and reaction between objects and the ſeat oſ ſenſe, is wholly reciprocal. Hence we ſee objects, or their image, aſter the eye is turned ſrom them. Hence, alſo, in a delirium, the objects of the imagination receive a real repreſentation in the organs of ſenſe: and hence we do not ſee an object the eye happens to be fixed on, if the attention be otherwiſe engaged It is, however, to be obſerved, with reſpect to what we call the fallacies in viſion, the appearance of things to the eye always correſponds to the fixed laws of nature; therefore, to ſpeak properly, there is no fallacy in the ſenſes. Rature always ſpeaks the ſame language, and uſes the ſame ſigns, in the ſame circumſtances: but we ſometimes miſtake the meaning oſf the ſigns, either through ignorance of the laws of nature, or through ignorance of the circumſtances which attend the ſigns. . To a man unacquainted with the principle of optics, almoſt every experiment that is made with the priſm, with the magic lanthorn, with the teleſcbpe and the microſcope, ſeem to produce ſome fallacy in viſion. Even the appearance of a common mirror, to one altogether unacquainted with the effects of it, would ſeem moſt remarkably fallacious: for how can a man be more impoſed upon, than in ſceing that before him which is really benind him? How can he be more impoſed upon, than in being made to ſee himſelf ſeveral yards removed ſrom himſelf? Yet children, even before they can ſpeak their mothertongue, learn not to be deceived by theſe appearances. Theſe, as well as all other ſurpriæing appearances produced by optical glaſſes, are a part of the viſual language; and to thoſe who underſtand the laws of nature concerning light and colours, are in no wiſe fullacious, but have a diſtinct and true meaning. OFP VISION BY IMAGES. The particular phenomena of viſion, in given caſes, by reflected and refracted light, have been the principal ſubject of the preceding optical Lectures: but, on account of their univerſality, it will be proper to make a few more obſervations on this ſubject. Viſion of real objects ſeen directly, and viſion by images, are both founded on the ſame principles: that is, ſimilar impreſſions, or the ſame kind of images upon the retina, excite ſimilar ideas in both caſes. Conſequently, objects, when ſeen by reflected or refracted rays, are ſeen in the places of their las images. If theſe images are at moderate diſtances before the eye, the ſeveral circumſtances by which we form the ideas of the apparent diſtances of objects ſeen by naked viſion, are alſo taken into the account. Univerſally, every viſible point of an object appears ſomewhere in the direction of the axis of the pencil of rays proceeding from it to the eye aſfter it's laſt reflection or refraction. In viſion by images, we are generally derived of many circumſtances by which we uſually judge of diſtances; and this makes it difficult, in moſt caſes, to determine the place of an image, particularly if it be further oſf than two or three yards. Theſe difficulties are frequently increaſed by ſome peculiarities appertaining to the images which we are not accuſtomed to, and for which we are at a loſs to make the proper allowances. But when the image is within the above-mentioned limits, we can, in moſt caſes, determine it's place with ſufficient accuracy: and here, as well as in naked viſion, the nearer we can determine the place from whence the rays converge to the eye, the more diſtinct will the image appear. The apparent magnitudes of objects, ſeen by reflection or refraction, are either accurately, or very nearly, as the reclangles under the viſual angles and apparent diſtances of ibeir laſt images. In all caſes, the apparent place, poſition, and figure of an object ſeen by refracted or reflected light, are as thoſe of it's laſt image. For the rays proceeding from the image to the eye, form a ſucceſſion of phyſical points after the ſame manner as iſ they came from a real object, and thereſore excite an idea of an object equal and ſimilar to the image. Hence, as you have ſeen, in viſion by images, we are liable to many deceptions, ſome of which are entertaining, as well as ſurpriſing; for not only the place of an image, but very often it's poſition, magnitude, and even figure, ſhall be quite different ſrom the real object. OF VISION BY IMAGES. * As this is a ſubject of the greateſt importance in optics, it will be worth while to conſider it when ſtated in different words, with ſome additional circumſtances. When the rays in a pencil diverge from a point, and either by reflection or refraction are brought all together again, they then form a luminous point correſponding to that from which they diverged. By this means a new viſible object is formed, called the image of the other; for the eye now receives the rays as coming from this latter point, and therefore judges the former point to be in the place of the latſer; and as this is true for every point of any object, every object may thus actually be formed a-new, ſo far as regards our viſible ideas. And the rays diverging to the eye from the image thus formed, in the ſame manner as if they came directly from the object, excite an idea of that image, or of an object ſimilar to it. Nov, if the pencils of rays, which diverge from all points of an object, be again reſpectively collected at the ſame diſtances, they then form a new viſible object equal to that from whence VOL. II. A a they they flowed: but if the points of this new object, called the image, correſponding to thoſe of the original object, be at à greater or leſs diſtance, they form a new viſible object greater or leſs than the original one. Thus, therefore, we are able to form a new viſible object, very near to us, exactly ſimilar to an object at a great diſtance. I call this a viſible object, becauſe at the place where it is ſformed there is nothing to excite correſponding tangible ideas, as in the object from whence the rays firſt floned. But in reſpect to our viſible ideas, which we are here only conſidering, it is as much an object as the other the eye may, therefore, be fo ſituated, in reſpect to this new object, that it may appear much nearer than the original object; every object appearing greater, the nearer it is to the eye. Now, vith reſpect to the brightneſs of this new viſible object, we are to conſider that when the eye looks directly at any object, it receives no more rays from any one point, than what can directly enter the pupil: but, when an image is formed by a lens, ſor inſtance, all the rays from any one point of the object which fulls upon the lens are collected together, and form a point of the image. Now if the diameter oſ the pupil of the eye æoO. I inch, and the diameter of the lens be 5 inches, their arcas uill be as o.O1I to 25;5 or, as I. to 2500: there are, therefore, cæteris paribus, 2500 times as many rays collected to form every point of the image by the lens, as enter the eye, and form the image, ſuppoſing all the rays to be refracted. Now, although the rays diverge from every point of this image, formed by the lens, and thercſore where the eye is ſituated it may not receive them all, yet, being ſituated near to it, it will receive a very conſiderable part, and more in proportion as it is nearer. Hence the number of rays which the eye receives from any point of this image, may be greater than that which it receives directly from the object; and thus rhe image may be brighter than the object. Theſe are ſome of the reaſons why any diſtant object may be made to appeatr larger and brighter: and the common expreſſion, chat the object is brought nearer, is not incorrect; for the viſible object is actually nearer, but not being accompanied with any tangihle ideas, we call it an image of the other; whereas it is a viſible object formed by the ſame rays as the original viſible object. Looking, therefore, at the viſible object thus formed, we get an idea of the original viſible object, ſeen under the ſame angle; and from thence, by aſſociation, we conclude; what are the correſponding tangible ideas. I ſhall conclude this Lecture on viſion, with ſome more reſlections on the eye. They are extracted from a ſermon of Mr. Nevlin's. Light is truly pleaſing in it's own natural ſimplicity, and is the ornament and glory of every other object. But the eye receives it always with a freſh and increaſing pleaſure, as it is varied and diverſified, by putting on ſo many ſorts of colours, like ſo many changes of raiment. Every time that the eye opens and expands itſelf, it draus as it were the whole viſible world into it's own narrow compaſs; and there is a new creation within itſelf. The ſun, that marvellous inſtrument of the Moſt High ; the moon, that ſbineth in the firmament of heaven; tbe ſtars, that numberleſs hiſt; the rainbow, that glorious circle, wbich is bent by the hands of tbe Moſt High; the virgin purity and unſullied whiteneſs of the ſnow; the beautiſul embroidery of flowers; the rich cloathing of the meadows, and tbe cattle upon a thouſand bilis, are preſented to the eye by the LOorRD our only loſe their luſtre, but degenerate from their natural hue, and are tinged with the azure of the intervening atmoſphere. It is by theſe means that painters can repreſent upon the ſame canvas objects at very different diſtances. The diminution of magnitude in an object would not be ſufficient to make it appear at a great diſtance without this degradation of colour, indiſtinctneſs of the outline, and of the minute parts. If a painter ſhould make a human figure, ten times leſs than other human figures that are in the ſame piece, having the colours as bright, and the outline and minute parts as accurately defined, it would not have the appearance of a man at a great diſtance, but of a pigmy or Lilliputian. Painters therefore, to give their figures a due degree of remoteneſs, are obliged to lay over each a thick colouring of air; for the more remote the object, the more do it's own colours ſeem loſt in that oſ the intervening atmoſphere. This is called keeping, for by this means every object in a picture ſeems to keep it's proper diſtance from the reſt. Dr. Smith gives us a curious obſervation made by Biſhop Berkeley in his travels through Italy and Sicily. He obſerved, that in thoſe countries, cities and palaces, ſcen at a great diſtance, appeared nearer to him by ſeverul miles than they really were; and this he attributed to the purity of the Italian and Sicilian air, which gave to very diſtant objects that degree of brightneſs and diſtinctneſs, which in the groſſer air of England was only ſceen in thoſe that were near. Hence a chamber appears leſs when it's walls are whitened, and fields and hills appear leſs when covered with ſnow. It is alſo certain, that in air uncommonly pure we are apt to think viſible objects nearer and leſs than they really are, and in air uncommonly foggy we are apt to think them more diſtant and larger than the truth. A weſterly proſpect in a clear morning, with the ſun upon it, appears nearer than when the ſun is higher up and more weſierly. The diſpoſition of the clouds and innumerable other circumſtances affect the brightneſs of objects, and contribute their ſhare in forming our ideas of the diſtance of remote objects. The length of the ground-plane, or number oſ intervening parts perceived in it, is another mean by which we perceive diſtance. We are ſo much accuſtomed to meaſure with our eye the ground we travel over, and to compare the judgment of diſtances formed by ſight with actual experience or information, that we by degrees in this way form a more accurate judęgment of the diſtance oſ terreſtrial objects than we could do by any of the above-mentioned means. A given extent appears longer according as it contains a greater number of viſible parts; and hence rwo remote and very unequal diſtances may appear very unequal, according to the diſferent circumſtances of the intervening parts, and as the ſpeccator is differently elevated. Thus a hedge having in it ſeveral grown trees, generally looks longer than a clipt hedge, or the ſame extent of ground in an open ſield. For the ſame reaſon a row of houſes, columns, or trees regularly planted, appear longer than a plain wall of the ſame extent; for in this caſe there are not only more viſible and remarkable parts in the one caſe, but our pre-knowledge of the ſeveral intervening objects being equidiſtant, tends to protract the apparent length of the whole chain ſtill longer. A river at firſt does not look ſo broad as it does aſter you have had a ſide view of the bridge acroſs; and indeed a given extent of water does not appear ſo long as the ſame extent of land, it being more difficult to diſtin4.3 guiſh parts in the ſurface of the one, than it is in the ſurface of the other. Hence a perſon unuſed to a ſea proſpect will be much miſtaken in his judgment of diſtances; a ſhip that is 8 or 10 miles from the ſhore, will ſcarce ſeem to him to be a mile off. When part of the intervening chain is inviſible, or obſcurely ſeen, the apparent diſtances of objects that are beyond that part will be accordingly leſs. Thus a certain extent of rough, uneven ground, appears ſhorter than the ſame extent of plain ground; the prominent parts hiding the cavities behind them, the apparent diſtance is ſo much the leſs by the loſs of thoſe inviſible parts. For the ſame rcaſon the brow of an hill ſeen over the top of another frequently looks nearer than it does after the vale between preſents itſelf to our view; and the banks of a river at ſome diſtance, will ſeem contiguous, if no part of the ſurface of the river is viſible. The known diſtance of the terreſtrial objects which terminate our view, makes that part of the ſ&y which is towards the horizon appear more diſtant than that which is towards the Zenith. And hence the apparent figure of the ſky is not that of a hemiſphere, but rather a leſs ſegment of a ſphere; and the diameter of the ſun or moon, and the diſtance between two ſixed ſtars, ſeen contiguous to a hill, or to any terreſtrial object, appear much greater than when no ſuch object ſtrikes the eye at the ſame time. When the viſible horizon is terminated by very diſtant objects, the celeſtial vault is enlarged in all it's dimenſions. When viewed from a confined ſtreet or lane, it bears ſome proportion to the buildings which ſurround it; but when viewed from a large plain, terminated on all ſides by hills riſing one above another to the diſtance of 20o or more miles from the eye, you ſee as it were another heaven, whoſe magnificence declares the greatneſs of it's AuTHOR, and puts every human edi fice out of countenance; for the lofty ſpires and gorgeous palaces ſhrink into nothing before it, and bear no more proportion to the celeſtial dome, than their maker to it's MAKER. Different degrees of apparent diſtances are ſuggeſted by the diminution of their apparent or viſible magnitude. We Eknow, by experience, what ſigure a man or any known object makes to our cyes at ten feet, and we perceive a gradual diminution of the viſible figure at 2o, 40, 100 feet, and ſo on till it at laſt vanithes: hence a certain viſible magnitude of a known object becomes the ſign of a certain determinate dñſtance, and carries with it the conception and belief of that diſtance. But when we are ignorant of the real magnitude of an object, we can never from the apparent magnitude form any judgment of it's diſtance. Hence we are ſo frequently deceived in our eſtimate of diſtance, by the extraordinary magnitude of any object ſcen at the end of it; as, in travelling towards a large city, or a caſtle, or a cathedral church, or a large mountain, we imagine them nearer than we find them to be., This is alſo the reaſon why animals and all ſmall objects, ſeen in allies, contiguous to large mountains, appear exceedingly ſmall; for we think the mountain nearer to us than if it were ſmaller, and we ſhould be ſurpriſed at the apparent ſmallneſs of the neighbouring animals, if we thought them farther oſff. Hence alſo objects appear ſmaller to the eye when ſeen from a high building, than they ſeem to be vhen viewed from the ſame diſtance on level ground. Let a hoy, who has never been upon any high bullding, go to the top of the Monument, and look down into the ſtreet, and the objects ſeen there will appear to him ſo ſmall as to occaſion much ſurpriſe. But 10 or ao years after, if he has now and then uſed himſelf to look from that and other great heights, the object will not appear ſo ſmall. For this reaſon ſtatues placed upon very high buildings ought to be made of a larger ſize than thoſe which are ſeen at a nearer diſtance. OF APPARENT MAGNITUDE. The apparent magnitude of very diſtant objects is neither determined by the angle under which they are ſeen, nor in the exact proportion of that angle compared with their true diſtance, but is compounded with a deception concerning that diſtance, inſomuch that, if we had no idea of the difference in the diſtance of objects, each would appear in magnitude proportional to the angle under which it is ſeen; and if our apprehenſion of the diſtance was always juſt, our ideas of their magnitude would be in all diſtances unvaried; but in proportion as we err in our conception of diſtance, the greater angle ſuggeſts a greater magnitude. It is probable, that the apparent magnitudes are either exactly or very nearly in tbe compound ratio of the viſual angles and apparent diſtances. We are as frequently deceived in our notions of magnitude as thoſe of diſtance. A fly ſcipping before an unattentive ſpectator, will ſometimes excite the idea of a crow flying afar off; but as ſoon as the miſtake in the diſtance is found, the crow vill dwindle into a fly. Thus alſo, as we have obſerved in foggy weather and in the duſk, objects appear further off than they really are, and in theſe caſes proportionably larger, as there is a greater miſtake in the diſtance. Thus a ſmall heap of ſtones has been miſtaken for the ruins of a large building, &c. The diminution of apparent magnitude is ſo very ſmall in proportion to the greater increaſe of diſtance, that in general the viſual angles ſubtended by objects can have but little ſhare in ſorming our judgment of their diſtances; and indeed if the caſe was otherwiſe, it would be almoſt impoſſible for us to gueſs aright, either as to diſtance or magnitude. For inſtance, if we did not judge independently of the viſual angle, how could we know a child from a grown perſon, or even a pin from a May-pole. For the largeſt object being removed to a greater diſtance may ſubtend an angle leſs than any aſſignable one; as objects generally appear nearer when the intervening chain is not perceived: and the ſame reaſon operates, as already obſerved, in making them appear proportionably ſmaller. Thus the diſtance of an object joined with it's viſible magnitude, is a ſign of it's real magnitude; and the diſtance of the ſeveral parts of an object joined with it's viſible figure, becomes a ſign of it's real figure. When you look at a globe ſtanding before you, by the original powers ofſ ſight you perceive only ſomething of a circular form, variouſly coloured. The viſible ſigure hath no diſtance from the eye, no convexity, nor hath it three dimenſions; even its length and breadth are incapable of being meaſured by inches, feet, or other linear meaſures. But when you have lecarned to perceive the diſtance of every part of this object from the eye, this perception gives it convexity, and a ſpherical figure; and adds a third dimenſion to that which had but two before. The diſtance of the whole object enables you alſo to perceive how an inch or a foot oſ length affects the eye at that diſtance: you perceive by your eye the dimenſions of the globe. S So numerous are the relations between the eye and the underſtanding, between light and knowledge, that there are very few parts oſ optics from which you may not deduce ſome practical advantages. Thus the judgment of the mind correſponds with the ſtrength and colour of the objects whereon they are paſſed: but the further objects are removed, they grow more faint and indiſtinct, and of courſe our. opinions concerning them vill be leſs vivid and clear. Both pleaſures and pains at a diſtance appear ſcarce worth our regarding, or giving ourſelves any trouble about them; the preſent occupies our thoughts, and forcibly carries away the preference in our imagination from the future, againſt the cleareſt and ſureſt deciſions of our underſtanding. To rectify this imperfection of our nature, is worthy of your utmoſt application; and you may eafily do it by gradually inuring the mental eye to diſcern objects at a diſtance. It is the quickneſs of this moral ſenſe, or an habitual full perſuaſion oſ certain good and evil, however remote, being equally valuable with the preſent, that conſtitutes the virtue of prudence. OF APPARENT MOTION. If two objects at different diſtances from the eye move in parallel lines, nearly at right angles to the optic axis, and with the ſame velocity, the moſt diſtant will appear to move ſloweſt, and the neareſt will appear to move quickeſt, becauſe the ſpace deſcribed by the moſt diſtant object will ſubtend a much ſmaller angle to the eye. If the directions in which the bodies move are not parallel, the neareſt object may appear to move ſſower than the more diſtant, although it really moves quicker, if the ſpace deſcribed be ſituated ſo obliquely to the viſual rays, that they form at the eye much ſmaller angles, than ſmaller ſpaces deſcribed by the more diſtant object, which is expoſed more directly to the eye. If two objects unequally diſtant from the eye move with uncqual velocities in the ſame direction, their apparent velocities are in a ratio compounded of the direct ratio of their true velocities, and the reciprocal one of their diſtances from the eye. As objects in motion will have different apparent velocities at different diſtances: ſo to a ſpectator in motion, objects at reſt will have different apparent velocities. Thus a paſſenger in a coach ſees the trees in the next hedge move ſwiftly bac kwards, while thoſe lin the field beyond move ſlower, and thoſe beyond theſe ſtill ſlower, and ſo on, thoſe that are very remote being ſcarce perceived to move at all. And if a ſpectator in motion keeps his eye fixed upon an object at ſome diſtance, objects that are pretty near to it will appear at reſt, whilſt nearer objects will appear to go backwards, and more remote ones progreſſively forward, the ſame way as the ſpectator. If two or more objects having the ſame apparent velocity move all the ſame way, an object at reſt, by which they paſs, may appear to move the contrary way, while the objects in motion may appear at reſt: for as their images keep the ſame diſtance upon the retina, no motion among them can be perceived. If the ſpectator inſenſibly moves his eye, ſo as to keep theſe images in the ſame place, the image of the object at reſt will paſs ſucceſſively over them, in the ſame manner as if that object had becn in motion the contrary way. The ſame phenomenon may happen, if the ſingle object be in motion, either the ſame or the contrary way; only it's apparent motion will be quicker or ſlower, direct or retrograde, according to dilferent circum4 ſtances. Thus when the clouds move ſucceſſively over the moon, ſhe ſeems to go with their velocity the contrary way, whether that be eaſtward or weſtward. PFrom hence you may ſee how diſficult it is to form a juſt eſtimate of the real velocities of objects from apparent ones, ſince we ought to know both the directions and diſtances oſ the moving objects, neither of which in many caſes can be gueſſed at with tolerable accuracy. Bodies in motion muſt move with a certain degree of velocity in order to become perceptible. Though it is difſicult to aſſign with accuracy the ſpace that muſt be paſſed over in a given time, in order to be ſenſible; yet in general we may ſay that it ſhould deſcribe, in a ſecond of time, a ſpace that vill form at the eye an angle of 15 or a2o ſeconds of a degree. Hence we ſec w hy the heavenly bodies are not perceived to move, the ſpaces deſcribed by them in a minute not ſubtending an angle of above 1 degree, when their apparent motion is greateſt. For the ſame reaſon we do not perceive the motion of the hour, or even the minute hand of a watch. In the ſame manner a prodigious great velocity, as the diurnal motion of the heavenly bodies, may be yet too ſlow to be perceived; and an object may move with ſo great a velocity as not to be perceived, as the flight oſ a ball out of a gun. An object moving with great velocity is not ſeen unleſs it be very luminous. Thus a cannon ball is not ſcen, if it be viewed tranſverely; but if it be viewed according to the line it deſcribes, it may be ſeen, becauſe it's picture continues long on the ſame place oſ the retina, and therefore receives a ſtronger impreſſion. As we have all been children before we were men, we have all, I doubt not, at that ſcaſon amuſed ourſelves with muny childiſh diverſions, one of which you may remember was burning a ſmall ſtick to a live coal, and whiſking it round to make gold lace, as we called it. We little thought then of making experiments in philoſophy; but we may turn this innocent amuſement to that uſe, in our riper years, by gathering from thence, that our organs can continue ſenſation after the impulſe of objects exciting it is over: for the coal is in one point only at one time, and can be ſeen only where it is; yet there appears an entire circle of fire, which could not happen unleſs the light coming from it, at every point, put the optic nerves into a motion that laſted until the object returned to the ſame point again; nor, unleſs this motion raiſed the ſame perception in the mind as it did upon the firſt ſtriking of the light. For iſ the ſtick be not twirled ſuiſtly enough, ſo that it cannot make a ſecond impreſſion from the ſame point, before the motion excited by the firſt be over, you vwill not ſce a whole fiery ring, but a lucid ſpot paſſing ſucceſſively through every part of the circle. On the principles we have laid down, are explained what are called fullacies in viſion. They depend principally on our miſtaking the diſtances of objects. Thus, parallel lincs, as long viſtas, conſiſting of parallel rous of trees, ſeem to converge more and more as they are farther extended frum the eye; becauſe the lines which meaſure their intervals, and which are always equal, ſubtend ſmaller angles, the more remote they are, and ſo appear perpetually diminiſhing, while we, at the ſame time, miſtake the diſtance. For the ſame reaſon, the remote parts of a horizvontal walk, or a long floor, will appear to aſcend gradually; and the more remote the objects are pear, till the laſt be ſeen on a level with the eyes whereas the ceiling of a long gallery appears to deſcend towards a horivontal line, drawn from the eye to a ſpectator. And the ſurface of the ſea, ſeen ſrom an eminence, ſeems to riſe higher and higher, the farther we look: and the upward parts of high buildings incline forwards over the parts below; ſo that ſtatues on the top of ſuch buildings, in order to appear upright, muſt recline or bend backwards. There is another phenomenon, however, not ſo eaſily accounted for: if a perſon turns ſwiftly round, vwithout changing his place, all objects about will ſeem to move round in a contrary way; and this deception continues not only while the perſon himſelf moves round, but which is more ſurpriſing, it continues alſo for ſome time after he ceaſes to move; i. e. when both the eye and the object are at reſt. The firſt is not ſo difficult to explain, for the motion of the object on the retina eaſily explains it: but why it continues when both the eye and the object are at reſt, has not yet been well underſtood. It appears to me, that the ſcat of ſenſe is not altogether paſſive in receiving images, but poſitively directs a ray from itſelf to every object it perceives; the action and reaction between objects and the ſeat of ſenſe, is wholly reciprocal. Hence we ſee objects, or their image, aſter the eye is turned ſrom them. Hence, alſo, in a delirium, the objects of the imagination receive a real repreſentation in the organs of ſenſe: and hence we do not ſee an object the eye happens to be fixed on, if the attention be otherwiſe engaged. It is, however, to be obſerved, with reſpect to what we call the fallacies in viſion, the appearance of things to the eye always correſponds to the fixed laws of nature; therefore, to ſpeak properly, there is no fallacy in the ſenſes. Nature always ſpeaks the ſame language, and uſes the ſame ſigns, in the ſame circumſtances: but we ſometimes miſtake the meaning of the ſigns, either through ignorance of the laws of nature, or through ignorance of the circumſtances which attend the ſigns. . To a man unacquainted with the principle of optics, almoſt every experiment that is made with the priſm, with the magic lanthorn, with the teleſchbpe and the microſcope, ſeem to produce ſome fallacy in viſion. Even the appearance of a common mirror, to one altogether unacquainted with the effects of it, would ſeem moſt remarkably fallacious: for how can a man be more impoſed upon, than in ſeeing that before him which is really behind him? How can he be more impoſed upon, than in being made to ſee himſelf ſeveral yards removed ſrom himſelf? Yet children, even before they can ſpeak their mothertongue, learn not to be deceived by theſe appearances. Theſe, as well as all other ſurprizing appearances produced by optical glaſſes, are a part of the viſual language; and to thoſe who underſtand the laws of nature concerning light and colours, are in no wiſe fallacious, but have a diſtinct and true meaning. OF VISION BY IMAGES. The particular phenomena of viſion, in given caſes, by reflected and refracted light, have been the principal ſubject of the preceding optical Lectures: but, on account of their univerſality, it will be proper to make a few more obſervations on this ſubject. Viſion of real objects ſeen directly, and viſion by images, are both founded on the ſame principles: that is, ſimilar impreſſions, or the ſame kind of images upon the retina, excite ſimilar ideas in both caſes. Conſequently, objects, when ſeen by reflected or refracted rays, are ſeen in the places oſ their laſt images. If theſe images are at moderate diſtances before the eye, the ſeveral circumſtances by which we form the ideas of the apparent diſtances of objects ſeen by naked viſion, are alſo taken into the account. Univerſally, every viſible point of an object appears ſomewhere in the direction of the axis of the pencil of rays proceeding from it to the eye after it's laſt reflection or refraction. In viſion by images, we are generally derived of many circumſtances by which we uſually Judge of diſtances; and this makes it difficult, in moſt caſes, to determine the place of an image, particularly if it be further oſf than two or three yards. Theſe difficulties are frequently increaſed by ſome peculiarities appertaining to the images which we are not accuſtomed to, and for which we are at a loſs to make the proper allowances. But when the image is within the above-mentioned limits, we can, in moſt caſes, determine it's place with ſufficient accuracy: and here, as well as in naked viſion, the nearer we can determine the place from whence the rays converge to the eye, the more diſtinct will the image appear. The apparent magnitudes of objects, ſeen by reflection or refraction, are either accurately, or very nearly, as the rectangles under the viſual angles and apparent diſtances of iheir laſt images. In all caſes, the apparent place, poſition, and figure of an object ſeen by refracted or reflected light, are as thoſe of it's laſt image. For the rays proceeding from the image to the eye, form a ſucceſſion of phyſical points after the ſame manner as il they came from a real object, and therefore excite an idea of an object equal and ſimilar to the image. THence, as you have ſeen, in viſion by images, we are liable to many deceptions, ſome of which are entertaining, as well as ſurpriſing; for not only the place of an image, but very oſten it's poſition, magnitude, and even figure, ſhall be quite different ſrom the real object. OPF VISION BY IMAGES. * As this is a ſubject of the greateſt importance in optics, it will be worth while to conſider it when ſtated in different words, with ſome additional circumſtances. When the rays in a pencil diverge from a point, and either by reflection or refraction are brought all together again, they then form a luminous point correſponding to that from which they diverged. By this means a new viſible object is formed, called the image of the other for the eye now receives the rays as coming from this latter point, and therefore judges the former point to be in the place of the latſer; and as this is true for every point of any object, every object may thus actually be formed a-new, ſo far as regards our viſible ideas. And the rays diverging to the eye from the image thus formed, in the ſame manner as if they came directly from the object, excite an idea of that image, or of an object ſimilar to it. Novw, if the pencils of rays, which diverge from all points of an object, be again reſpectively collected at the ſame diſtances, they then form a new viſible object equal to that from whence VOL. II. A a they they floved: but if the points of this new object, called the image, correſponding to thoſe of the original object, be at à greater or leſs diſtance, they form a new viſible object greater or leſs than the original one. Thus, therefore, we are able to form a new viſible object, very near to us, exactly ſimilar to an object at a great diſtance. I call this a viſible object, becauſe at the place where it is ſformed there is nothing to excite correſponding tangible ideas, as in the object from whence the rays firſt flowved. But in reſpect to our viſible ideas, which we are here only conſidering, it is as much an object as the other; the eye may, therefore, be fo ſituated, in reſpect to this new object, that it may appear much nearer than the original object; every object appearing greater, the nearer it is to the eye. Now, vith reſpect to the brightneſs of this new viſible object, we are to conſider that when the eye looks directly at any object, it receives no more ravs from any one point, than what can directly enter the pupil: but, when an image is formed by a lens, for inſtance, all the rays from any one point of the object uwhich falls upon the lens are collected together, and form a point of the image. Novw if the diameter oſ the pupil of the eye æoO. I inch, and the diameter of the lens be 5 inches, their arcas uwill be as o.OI to 2535 or, as I. to 2500: there are, thercfore, cæteris paribus, 2500 times as many rays collected to form every point of the image by the lens, as enter the eye, and form the image, ſuppoſing all the rays to be refracted. Nouw, although the rays diverge from every point of this image, formed by the lens, and rthereſore where the eye is ſituate it may not receive them all, yet, being ſituated near to it, it will receive a very conſiderable part, and more in proportion as it is nearer. Hence the number of rays which the eye receives from any point of this image, may be greater than that which it receives directly from the object; and thus the image may be brighter than the object. Theſe are ſome of the reaſons why any diſtant object may be made to appeai larger and brighter: and the common expreſſion, that the object is brought nearer, is not incorrect; for the viſible object is actually nearer, but not being accompanied with any tangible ideas, we call it an image of the other; whereas it is a viſible object formed by the ſame rays as the oriinal viſible object. Looking, therefore, at the viſible object thus formed, we get an idea of the original viſible object, ſeen under the ſame angle; and from thence, by aſſociation, we conclude; what are the correſponding tangible ideas. I ſhall conclude this Lecture on viſion, with ſome more reflections on the eye. They are extracted from a ſermon of Mr. Nevlin's. Light is truly pleaſing in it's own natural ſimplicity, and is the ornament and glory of every other object. But the eye receives it always with a freſh and increaſing pleaſure, as it is varied and diverſified, by putting on ſo many ſorts of colours, like ſo many changes of raiment. Every time that the eye opens and expands itſelf, it draus as it were the whole viſible world into it's own narrow compaſs; and there is a new creation within itſelf. The ſun, that marvellous inſtrument of the Moſt High ; the moon, that ſbineth in the ſirmament of heaven; the ſtars, ihat numberleſs byſt; the rainbow, that glorious circle, whbich is bent by the hands of ibe Moſt High; the virgin purity and unſullied whiteneſs of the ſnow; the beautiſul embroidery of flowers; the rich cloathing of the meadows, and the cattle upon a thouſand hills, are preſented to the eye by the LOorDp our MAaKER, and ſet before it, as on a ſpacious theatre. The great ſource of light, which ſhews every thing to the eye, caſts forth ſo bright and da⸗zzling a luſtre, that it would bear too hard upon it, and injure our viſual faculty, if it were placed too near the ſight; but it is fixed at ſo remote a diſtance from us, that we look upon it with pleaſure, and enjoy it's glory. When the eye is wearied with it's daily ſervice, and the night ſpreads a veil of darkneſs over this lower world, the curtain that is hung before the eye falls down, and the eye-lids are ſhut with a cloſe ſeal, till we have renewed our ſtrength, and the morning reſtores the world to our view: the eye lid not only affſording refreſument and eaſe to the eye, but defending it from the ſecret perils and inviſible dangers of the night. And when day breaks, it does not ſhine forth at once, in ſull perſection, but gradually manifeſts itſelf, that the eye may not be overpowered, by a ſudden iſſuing out, and too mighty a ſtream oſ light. The ſun ſends a harbinger before him, to give notice of his appearance, that the dawning of the day may prepare us to receive him. Though every colour has a peculiar beauty, yet they are not all equally agrecable and refreſhing to the eye: but the verdure oſ the ſields is moſt partic ularly pleaſing to it, ond we can bear to dwell the longeſt upon it: Gob has appointed it for the common dreſs of nature, and made this colour the moſt familiar to our ſight. He leads us through the green paſiures, and adorns the herbs and plants with many varieties, even in the ſame colour, and changes it every dav. Time would fail me eren in attempting to deſcribe all the pleaſures and advantages of nght. I cannat, however, leave the ſubject without one or two obſervations. The eyes are a fait to the whole man, and are placed as in watch-tower, to diſcern his danger, and friendly warning, while it is yet afar off The eye is inſtrumental in prom happineſs of converſation. It is the meets our friend with joy, and kindles parts the heavenly flame of friendſhip. eye that pities, and ſpares, and yearns miſerable object, with generous compa was with the eye that our SavIOUR rep Peter. O Lord, how marvellous are thy wiſdom haſt thou made them all  The eyc gives witneſs of thee; and the eur tl confirms it's teſtimony. LECTURE XIX. Or CoLouns. NO philoſophical ſubject is more worthy of your attention than lighbt; it is the means by which all the beauties and glories of the creation are laid open to view; with ſome o it's curious properties you are well acquainted; a new ſcene will now riſe before you equally admirable with thoſe that have preceded. I have hitherto conſidered light as a body uncompounded, and of parts reſembling each other; but we are going to examine it's texture more cloſely. You will now ſee that this fluid, ſo ſimple in appearance, is made up of very different particles; that it is compoſed of very different coloured tints; and that from the nature of this compoſition ariſes that charming variety oſ ſhades which paints the face of nature. Whatever pleaſures we derive from the beauty of colouring, we owe it to the different rays of light, each object ſending back to our eyes thoſe rays, which it's ſurface is beſt adapted to reflect: in this ſenſe the bluſhing beauties oſfthe roſe, and the modeſt blue of the violet, may be conſidered as not in the objects themſelves, but in the light that adorns them. Ocdour, ſoftneſs, and beauty of figure, are their own; but it is light which dreſſes them up in thoſe robes which ſhame the monarch's lory. s QNatural philoſophers were formerly of opinion, that the ſolar light was ſimple and uniform, without any difference or variety in it's parts, and that the different colours of ohjects were made by refraction, reflection, or ſhadows. But Newton taughi them the errors of their former opinions; he ſhewed them to diſſect a ſingle ray of light with the minuteſt preciſion, and demonſtrated that every ray was itſelf a compoſition of ſeveral rays all of different colours, each of which when ſeparate held to it's own nature, ſimple and unchanged by every experiment that could be tried upon it. Or to be more particular, light is not all ſimilar and homogenial, but compounded of heterogenial and diſſimilar rays, ſome of which in like inſtances being more refrangible, and others leſs reſrangible, and thoſe which are moſt refrangible are alſo moſt reflexible; and according as they differ in reſrangibility and reflexibility, they are endowed with the power of exciting in us ſenſations oſ different colours. Neuton's theory of light and colours is ſtriking and beautiful in itſelf, and deduced from clear and deciſive experiments, and may be almoſt ſaid to demonſtrate clearly, 1ſt, That lights which differ in colour, differ alſo in degrees of refrangibility. 2d, That the light of the ſun, notwithſtanding its uniform appearance, conſiſts of rays differently refrangible. 3d, That thoſe rays which are more refrangible than others, are alſo more reflexible. 4th, That as the rays ofſ light differ in degrees of reſrangibility and reflexibility, ſo they alſo differ in their diſpoſition to exhibit this or that particular colour; and that colours are not qualifications oſ light derived from refractions or reflections of natural bodies, as was generally believed, but original and connate properties, which are different in different rays, ſome rays being diſpoſed to exhibit a red colour and no other, and ſome a green and no other, and ſo oſ the reſt oſ the priſmatic colours. sth, That the light oſ the ſun conſiſts oſ violet making, indigo making, hlue making, green making, elloꝶ o making, orange making, and red making rays, and all of theſe are different in their degrees of refrangibility and reflexibility; for the rays which produce red colours are the leaſt refrangible, and thoſe that make the violet the moſt; and the reſt are more or leſs refrangible as they approach either of theſe extremes, in the order already mentioned: that is, orange is leaſt refrangible next to red, yellow next to orange, and ſo on; ſo that tosthe ſame degree of refrangibility there ever belongs the ſame colour, and to the ſame colour the ſame degree of refrangibility. 6th, Every homogenial ray, conſidered apart, is refracted according to one and the ſame rule, ſo that it's ſine of incidence is to it's ſine of refraction in a given ratio; that is, every different coloured ray has a different ratio belonging to it. 7th, The ſpecies of colour, and degree of reſrangibility and reflexibility, proper to any particular ſort of rays, is not mutable by reflection or refraction from natural bodies, nor by any other cauſe that has been yct obſerved. When any one kind of rays has been ſeparated from thoſe of other kinds, it has obſtinately retained it's colours, notwithſtanding all endeavours to bring about a change. Sth, Yet ſeeming tranſmutations of colours may be made, where there is any mixture of divers ſorts of rays; ſor, in ſuch mixtures, the component colours appear not, but by their mutually alloying each ocrer, conſtitute an intermediate colour. 9th, I here are therefore two ſorts of colour,. the one original and ſimple, the other compounded oſ theſe; and all the colours in the univerſe are either the colours of homogenial, ſimple light, or compounded of theſe mixed together in certain proportions. The colours of ſimple light are, as we obſerved before, violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, and red, together with an indefinite variety of intermediate gradations. The colours of compounded light are diſferently compounded of theſe ſimple rays, mixed in various proportions: thus a mixture oſ yellow-making and blue-making rays exhibit a green colour, and a mixture of red and yello makes an orange; and in any colour the ſame in ſpecie with the primary ones, may be produced by the compoſition of the two colours next adjacent in the ſeries of colours generated by the priſm, whereof the one is next moſt refrangible, and the other next leaſt reſrangible. But this is not the caſe with thoſe which are ſituated at too great a diſtance; orange and indigo do not produce the intermediate green, nor ſcarlet and green the intermediate yellow. 1oth, The moſt ſurpriſing and wonderful compoſition of light, is that of whiteneſs; there is no one ſort of rays which can alone exhibit the colour, it is ever compounded, and to it's compoſition all the aſoreſaid primary colours are requiſite. 1th, As whiteneſs is produced by a copious reflection oſ rays of all ſorts of colours, when there is a due proportion in the mixture; ſo on the contrary, blackneſs is produced by a ſuſfocation and abſorption of the incident light, which being ſtopped and ſuppreſſed in the black body, is not reflected outuard, but reflected and refracted within the body till it be ſtifled and loſt. Having thus endeavoured to give you a general idea of the theory oſ colours, Iſhall proceed to explain the ſubject more fully, illuſtrating it by the experiments ſo admirably deviſcd by Neu ton. The ſun ſhines favourably for our purpoſe, we will therefore go into the dark room; I have been you ſee, particularly careful to exclude all light from the room, but what enters through the tube I have fixed in the window-ſhutters. I admit a beam of light through a hole in this tube of about 3 of an inch diameter, the beam darts through the hole, and forms on the fſloor an image of the ſun nearly circular. I now place my glaſs priſm ſo as to receive the beam of light, and you obſerve how beautifully that beam is reſracted into different coloured rays. The cylindric beam of light paſſes into the priſm, is there dilated, and by refraction thrown into an oblong form, exhibiting on the oppoſite ſide of the room an amaxing ſpectrum of colours. The priſm is triangular at each end, about 6 inches long, and is poliſhed on the three ſides. I have placed it parallel to the horizon, with it's axis perpendicular to the beam of light. On turning the priſm ſlowly about it's axis, you fee that the refracted light on the wall, or the coloured image of the ſun, firſt deſcends, and then aſcends; between the aſcent and deſcont, that is, where the image is ſtationary, the priſm is to be fixed, becauſe in that ſituation the refractions of the light on the two ſides are equal to one another. Whenever you would have the refractions on both ſides of the priſm to be equal, you muſt note rhe place on the wall where the image ſtands ſtill, or the mean point between two contrary motions, and there fix the priſm. I ſhall make all the following experiments with the priſm in this ſituation, unleſs ſome other poſition be mentioned. The refracted light falls perpendicularly upon a ſheet of white paper, placed on the oppoſite wall of the chamber, where an oblong (not an oval) image of the ſolar ſpot is formed; it is terminated by two rectilineal and parallel ſides, and two ſemicircular ends; the ſides are better deſined than the ends, which are confuſed and indiſtinct, becauſe the light at the ends decays and vaniſhes by degrees. The lower extremity is red, above this is placed the orange, afſterwards the yellow, then the green, the blue, the indigo, and laſtly the violet, which is placed in the upper part of the image. There are, you ſec, innumerable gradations connecting and uniting the primary ones, each colour gradually degenerating as it were into rhe ſucceedi one. You vill not alwuays be able to diſtinguiſh clearly the whole ſeven colours, as it requires a very excellent priſm, and great attention and accuracy in performing the experiment, to prevent ſome of thoſe which moſt nearly reſemble each other, from being confounded together: you will, hou ever, ſcarce ever ſall in ſeeing five diſtinctly marked, the lower rcd gradually declining into a yellow, the yellow ſucceeded by an intenſe green, above this a bright and lovely blue, and then a ſoſt but glorious mazarine or violet colour. The breadth of the ſpectrum anſwers to the breadth of the ſun's circular image. If the priſm had a ſmaller angle, the length of the image would be leſs. If I turn the priſm ſo that the rays emerge more obliquely, the image ſoon becomes an inch or two longer; but if I turn it about the contrary way, ſo as to make the rays fall more obliquely on the ſide neareſt the hole, it ſoon becomes an inch or two ſhorter: therefore in repeating this experiment, you ſhould be careful ſo to place the priſm that the refraction on both ſides may be alike. This experiment is repreſented ſig. 9, pl. 6. T the tube through which the beam of light enters the room, proceeding in the direction Iol, but is turned out of this direction by a priſm S PD, whoſe axis is perpendicular to the beam; by this loured ſpectrum MN vupon the ſcreen K L. Thce moſt refrangible rays being thrown to M furtheſt from I, but the leaſt refrangible being turned leſs out oſ their courſe, fall upon a part of the ſcreen N, and neareſt I, while thoſe that are refrangible in the intermediate degrees will fall berween M andN, forming, inſtead oſ a circular ſpace, a long ſpectrum bounded by right lined ſides and circulai ends, and whoſe length is at right angles to the direction oſ the axis oſ the priſm. The ſize of the hole in the window-ſhutter, the different thickneſs of the priſm through which the rays paſs, the different inclinations of the priſm to the horion, and the various altitudes of the ſun, make no ſenſible change in the length of the image, nor is it aſſected by the difſerent matter of which the priſm is ſformed. With a priſm, whoſe refracting angle is 624 at 1§31 feet ſrom the pr riſm, the length of the image is about 923 or 1oO inches.* If tbe rays were equal ly refrangible, that is, equally inclined to the surſacè of ihe priſm in tbe ingreſs and egreſs, tbeir direction tould be only chauged ; the image would be a circle, which will appear ſufficiently clear by your conſidering theſe diagrams. Let ABC, ſig. 8, pl. 6, be a ſection of a triangular priſm at right angles to it's axis. Suppoſe JN to be a ray incident at N, and thence refracted at E on the ſurface CB, where it is again refracted into the ſituation EM. Let i n be another ray, parallel to the former, and conſequently incident at n with the ſame angle. Nov if the ray i n have exactly the ſame capability or diſpoſition to be refracted by the priſm, as the ray JN, the angles of refraction will be alſo equal, * As the light of the ſun is not always to be obtained, I havo prepared a ſmall model with coloured ĩilk ſtrings, to mew the nature and proportion of the coloured rays iſſuing from a equal, and i n will, when refracted into the directions ne and me, ſtill continue parallel to the ray JN, which is refracted into N E and EM. But if it be more refrangible, it will be refracted into other directions, as nf, and ſ g, verging more towards the baſe AC; or ifſ it be leſs refrangible, it will be refracted into directions, as nh, and hxk, that verge leſs towards the baſe AC. Whence it appears, that if a collection or pencil oſ rays fall parallel to cach other on one of the ſides of a priſm, and do not procecd parallel to cach other on their emergence, it muſt be becauſe ſome of the rays are more reſrangible than others. The preceding experiment therefore with the priſm proves, ibat the ſuus light is conpoſed oſ rays whoſe refraugibilities are not all the ſame; for aſter emerging ſrom the priſm, inſtead oſ illuminating a circular ſpace, they arc ſpread into a long ſpectrum, bounded by right-lined ſides, and circular ends, and whoſc length is at right angles to the axis of the priſm. Turn the priſm, which is ſo placed that the axis is perpendicular to the beam oſ light, that the image may be ſlationary, and there ſix it; this being done, look through the priſin at the hole, the length of the image uill appear to be many times greater than the breadth; : the moſt reſracted part being violet, and the lcaſt reſtacted red; the middle parts blue, green, yellow, in order. Now remove the priſin out of the ſun-beam, and look through it at the hole, and you will have the ſarme appearance; if all the ra;s vwere equally refracted, the hole would appear round uhen refracted through the priſm. This therefore, like the preceding experiment, proves that at equal incidences there is a conſiderable inequality oſ refraction. Beſides the different refrangibility, the foregoing experiments ſhew alſo another remarkable difference between the rays; namely, that the different refrangibility of ibe rays is joined with a difference in colour; and all the rays, as lbey are more or leſs bent by refraction, have a colour peculiar to themſelves. To render this ſubject clearer, and to ſhew that theſe appearances are not accidental, but inherent properties oſ light, Sir I. Newton tried what would be the effect of refracting the rays of light a ſecond time: for this purpoſe he let the light refracted by the firſt priſm fall upon a ſecond priſm, placed at about one foot from the firſt: the firſt priſm was in an horizontal, the ſecond in a vertical ſituatiom. An image was formed by the ſecond priſm, ſimilar both in the arrangement of colours, and it's dimenſions to that in the firſt experiment, with this only difference, that it was not now in a vertical, but in an inclined poſition. Now if the effects were only cauſed by a modification of light produced by the priſm, the ſecond ought to form in breadth the image that the former made in length, and thus produce a ſquare ſpectrum, which is contrary to the fact. The inclination of the ſpectrum is ſolely occaſioned by the unequal refrangibility; thoſe rays that were moſt bent by the firſt priſm, being alſo by the ſecond; the upper part in both priſms ſuffering a greater refraction, and the lower part a leſs refraction; likewiſe, as before, the upper part appears violet, and the lower part red. At ſig. 10, pl. 6, is a diagram to illuſtrate this experiment. AB repreſents the ſecond priſm in a vertical direction, that it may again reſract the rays which come from the firſt. By the firſt prifm the rays are reſracted upwards, by the ſecond ſideways; by the firſt it is refracted to m n while MN is the image formed by the refraction of the two croſs priſms. The breadth of the image is not increaſed, the upper part ſuffers a greater refraction, and the lower a leſs one in both priſms. If a third, and even a fourth priſm, be placed in the ſame manner aſter the ſecond, the reſult will be the ſame; and the moſt refrangible rays will ſtill be moſt refracted, and the leaſt the leaſt refracted, whilſt their colours remain unchanged. Let us now proceed to another experiment. Here, as in the firſt, the light is tranſmitted through a priſm, but the coloured image is received on a ſcreen which I have placed in the middie of the room; there is a hole in the ſcreen, through which the rays of any ſingle colour may be ſuffered to paſs alone, by raiſing or lowering the ſoreen. Thus for inſtance, I place the hole againſt the blue part of the image, ſo that none but the blue rays go through it; theſe are again refracted by a priſm: now you ſee that the blue rays, aſter having paſſed through the priſm, continue the ſame as before, without any manner of alteration, forming a blue image on the oppoſite ſide of the wall, and the figure of this image is circular. The direction oſ the beam is altered, but the rays are not dilated or sſeparated into different ſorts, as the common beam of light was by the firſt priſm. I now move the ſcreen to the yellow rays, and you obſerve that theſe rays falling on the ſecond priſm are refracted to the ſide of the room, and there form only a yellow ſpot, and the ſame with the reſt of the colours; ſo that none of theſe colours are changed by refraction. Further, if you place any ſmall bodies in theſe circular images, they will appear of the ſame colour with the image, red in the red light, green in the green light, &c. ſo that the colours are no ways changed by reflection. Again, if you look at any of theſe ſpots through a priſm, they ſtill preſerve their colour, and are not expanded or dilated in length; ſo that homogenial light ſuffers no manner of alteration in any caſe. In all the trials that have been made, it appears, that thoſe rays which are moſt refracted at firſt, are always moſt reſracted; and thoſe that are leaſt at firſt, are always leaſt afterwards. It is therefore plain, that every ray of light bas a peculiar degree of refrangibility, which cannot be changed by any reflections or refractions, but remains conſtantly and invariably the ſuame. The different refrangibility of the rays of light is a cauſe of confuſion in bodies ſeen through a refracting medium ; for this will occaſion the different rays flowing from the ſame point, to be refracted to different points on the retina. Thus, ſmall objects, placed in a ſun-beam, and viewed through a priſm, will be ſeen but confuſedly; but if they are placed in a beam of homogeneous light, ſeparated by a priſm, they will appear as diſtinct through a priſm as when viewed by the naked eye. As the light reflected from all terreſtrial bodies is the ſolar light, we may fairly conclude from the foregoing experiments, that rhe light reflected or emitted from all bodies, conſijis of rays differently refrangible : and this may be further proved, for if you look at any object through a priſm, that object will appear tinged with colours. Take a ſmall part of a body, illuminate it ſtrongly, and look at it through a priſm, and you will have an oblong image with all the colours; a ſtar, a lamp, a candle, a burning coal, a red-hot iron, or any burning matter ſeen through a priſm, will preſent you with the ſame appearances. If you are deiĩirous oſ ſecing a complete ſpecimen of analytical reaſoning, you, ſuould rend SIR I. NewrOν's Oprics, where you will ſind him purſuing this ſubject in a variety of ways; putting nature to a thouſand proofs, in order to eſtabliſh his deductions on a ſure foundation. It is impoſſible for me to give you even an imperfect idea ofſ this method, in theſe Lectures; it will be ſufficient if you here attain ſo much knowledge as will awaken your attention to a fuller and cloſer inveſtigation of the ſubject. Having ſhewn you by the preceding experiments, that the light of the ſun conſiſts of rays digferently refrangible, I ſhall now endeavour to prove to you, that the rays of light, which differ in colour, differ alſo in refrangibility. It is not indeed always neceſſary that judgment ſhould be founded on demonſtration, in order to obtain your confidence, for demonſtration is rarely to be found. It is expedient, therefore, to ſtudy the art of judging accurately upon probabilities, which, where they can be clearly diſcerned, are a ſufficient ground for conſidence, until new light break in, or circumſtances change, whereon a new judgment may be formed with ſimilar accuracy. It is the vain expectation oſ aèſolute certainty that keeps many continually wavering and irreſolute; for being aſraid of truſting to any thing that has not ſuch certainty, and being able to find it no where, they live in a round of doubts, without being able to ſettle on any one point. You may be aſſured that ſome courage, as well as caution, is requiſite, either to ſecure freedom of thought, or open a paſſage to proficiency in any ſcience. Here is an oblong piece of paper, one half of which is coloured ſtrongly with red, the other with blue; place it upon this piece of black cloth near the window, where it will be ſtrongly illuminated; now Iook at it through a glaſs priſm, held parallel to it, and to the horivon, wich the refracting angle upwards, the paper wil appear broken and divided into two parts, the blue half is lifted higher by reſraction than the red. Iſ you turn the reſracting angle of the priſm downwards, ſo that the paper may be carried lower by refraction, the blue half will be carried lower than the red half. This experiment ſhews clearly, that the light from the blue is more refracted, and is therefore more refrangible, than the light from tbe red. I ſhall now vrap a thread of black ſilk ſeveral times round a piece of paper, one half of which is coloured like that we uſed in the preceding experiment, and the thread appears as if it were ſo many black lines drawn upon the colours. Darken the room, and ſet the paper up perpendicularly againſt the wall, ſo that one of the colours may ſtand to the right, the other to the left; now illuminate it ſtrongly with a candle, while with a lens of a long focus, I collect the rays, ſo as to form an image of the coloured paper upon the white ſcreen, the ſcreen being at about the ſame diſtance from the lens as the Iens is from the coloured paper. Move the ſcreen backwards and ſorwards to ſind where the images of the blue and red parts oſ the paper are moſt diſtinct; this is caſily known by the images oſ the black threads of ſilk, and you uill ſind that where the red half appears diſtinct, the blue half is conſuſed; and on the contrary, when the blue half appears diſtinct, the red is ſo conſuſed that the black lines are ſcarcely viſible: the ſpace betw een theſe tuo ſituations of the paper is about 1 linch, the diſtance of the paper from the lens being about 6 ſcet. The focal diſtance oſ the red rajs being longer than that of the blue, is a prooſ that the blue rays are more refrangible than the red; and ve obtain a new demonſtration of the diſference in the refrangibility from the diſſerent focal diſtances, at which the rays proceed ſrom diſferent colours; ſor thoſe uhoſe rays are moſt reſrangiblc muſt be collected and united at the ſhorteſt diſtance. Therefore rays that diſfer in their colour difer alſo in their degrees of refrangibility. The different reſrangibility of the rays of light is a great olſlacle to the perſection ef teleſcopes and microſcopes. This is a clear inference from our laſt experiment, for no rays iſſuing from a point can be refracted by a lens to a ſingle ; point. From what has been ſaid it is alſo plain, that if che ſolar light conſiſted but of one Kind of rays, there would be but one colour in the world; or, in other words, all things would be of the ſame colour. From one experiment to another, Sir I. Newton was led to what he juſtly calls the experimentum crucis, which I ſuall relate to you ſo as to enable you to repeat it at your leiſure, as we have already employed as nruch of our time as can be uell ipared on this ſubject. He took two thin bourds, and placed one of them cloſe behind the priſm at the windoæ, in ſuch a manner that the middle of the refracted light might paſs through the hole made in it, and the reſt be intercepted by the board, and be reſracted on the other board which he placed at about the diſtance of 12 feet; having made a ſmull hole in the ſecond board alſo, and placed it in ſuch manner that the middle of the refracted light, which came through the hole in the firſt, might paſs through that of the ſecond, the reſt belng intercepted by the board might paint upon it the coloured ſpectrum oſ the ſun. He then placed another priſm behind the ſecond board, ſo that the light which was tranſmitted through both the boards might paſs through that alſo, and be again reſracted before it arrived at the wall. This being done, he took the firſt priſm in his hand, and turned it about it's axis, ſo as to make the ſeveral parts of the image caſt on the ſecond board ſucceſſively to paſs through the hole therein, and fall upon the priſm behind it, that he might obſerve to what places on the wall they would be refracted by the ſecond priſm; and it appeared, that the light which was moſt refracted by the firſt priſm was alſo moſt refracted by the ſecond, and went to the higher part of the wall; and the light which was leaſt refracted by the firſt, was alſo leaſt reſracted by the ſecond; and that the moſt refrangible was violet, and the leaſt ſo red. During the experiment the two boards and the ſecond priſm remained unmoved, by which means the incidence thereon was always the ſame; ſo that without any difference in the medium ſome of them ſhall be more refracted than others; and that according to their different degrees of refrangibility they will be tranſmitted through the priſm to different parts of the wall. Ilg. 11, pl. 6. VS T is the priſm that firſt receives the ſolar light; this is refracted and falls upon the middle of the board PXO, the middle part oſ which ſalls upon the ſ ond board pxq. By turning the priſm VS I ſlouly to and fro about it's axis, the image will be made to move up and down, ſo that all the parts ſfrom one end to the other may be made to paſs ſucceſſively through the hole g. as t another priſm to refract the light paſſing through the hole g on the ſcereen Y7.y. The poſition of the holes remaining conſtantly the ſame, the incidence of the rays on the ſecond priſm was the ſame in all caſes; yet with that common incidence ſome rays are more refracted, and others leſs. The rays of light that fall on a reflecting ſurface in the ſame angle, if reſlected at all, are reflecied in the ſame augles; conſequently there will be no ſuch ſeparation in degree of the rays oſ light by refiection as ihere is by refraciion. This poſition is readily proved. I ſhall place this plane mirror in an horizontal poſition, ſo as to receive this beam from the hole in the window-ſhutter, and it is thereby, you ſee, reflected to the oppoſite wall; the figure of the reflected light is circular like the hole, but there is no ſeparation oſ the rays as in refraction, nor any colours produced by reflection; the rays, which have the ſame incidence, running parallel to one another after reflection, being refiected at equal angles: though the moſt refrangible will be the ſooneſt reflected, if they move out of a denſe into a rare medium; a circumſtance which does not in the leaſt aſfect the preſent propoſition. The rays oſ the ſun's light, however, which are refrangible, are alſo more reflexible than others. KLI, ſig. 13, pl. 6, repreſents a priſm; the angle is a right angle; the other angles L, I, are equal to each other; TM a beam ofſf light that paſſes through the ſurſacc KI, and is incident at N upon L I. It will emerge in the direction MS; but when the angle of incidence at M is ſuch that the ſine of the angle of refraction is equal to the radius, the angle of refraction becoming a right one, the ray cannot emerge, but will be totally reflected. By turning the priſm ſiowly about it's axis until all the light which went through one of it's angles, and was refracted by it, began to be reſflected by it's baſe, Sir I. Newton found, that thoſe rays which had ſuffered the greateſt refraction were ſooner reflected than the reſt; he therefore conceived that thoſe rays ofſ reflected light, which were moſt reſrangible, did firſt of all, by a total reflection, become more copious in that light than the reſt; and that afterwards the reſt alſo, by a total reflecjion, became as copious as theſe. To try this, he mude the reflected ray, ſig. 13, pl. 6, paſi through another priſm IT VX, ſo placed as to ſeB parate it's component colours by refraction; O àſ, the reflected beam, then the light, which firſt begins to be reflected, conſiſting almoſt entirelv oſ violet light, were by the ſecond priſm ſo refracted as to fall on q, and paint a violet colour. As the fiiſt priſm continues to be turned on it's axis, the light is more and more copiouſly reſlected, and the colours between q and r appear in ſucceſſion till the red appears, when the reflection becoming total, the colours ſormed by refraction at QRS diſappear, as thoſe at qꝗ s appear. ſn the beginning oſ this Lecture I obſerved to you, that no one kind of rays would exhibit whiteneſs; it is the moſt ſurpriſing and wonderful compoſition, an aſſemblage of all the colours ofſ the priſm in union. ſthiteneſs, or the ſolar light, is always compounded; and all ibe primary colours mixed in due proportion, are requiſite to it's formation. I ſhall illuſtrate this by one of the moſt cclebrated, and moſt ſimple of Sir I. Newton's experiments. I darken again our room, and, as in the firſt experiment, refract a beam of light by a priſm, and receive it's image on the ſcreen. Let us remove the ſcreen, and hold this lens, ſo that the refracted rays ma, fall upon it; this you perceive has occaſioned the coloured light, which diverged ſrom the priſm, to unite and meet again at it's focus; and you have upon a piece of paper held behind the ſolar image intenſcly coloured: the rays have no ſooner, vou ſce, paſſed through the lens, than they begin to mix and efface each other, and loſe the fine harmonious proportion that was beſore exhibited in the ſpaces of the coloured image. As you remove the paper from the lens, the colours will approach more and more to cach other, and by mixing together will be more and more diluted. You are now at the focus, and, you ſee, they are perſfectly mixed together, the colours wholly vaniſh, and are converted into whiteneſs, thev forming a ſmall circular image totally white; the red no longer diſplays it's lively flame, the green boaſts no more the livery of the ſpring, nor the blue the lucid robe of heaven, but all blended together exhibit the whiteneſs of the ſun, ſrom whence they proceceded. Remove the paper ſt ll further back, ſo as to receive the rays after having croſſed at the focus, and as they diverge you ſee they again renew their ſplendor and colour, but in a contrary order, the red being now above, and the violet below. IThis reappearance of the colours beyond the place where they were blended, is a further proof of the immutability of the primary colours, as it ſhews that they neither loſe their colour or quality by being Dlended or interſecting each other, and that the whiteneſs which appears is produced only by their InIXTUP?.. The whitencſs is made up of all the colours oſ the image, for if any oſ the rays be intercepted in their paſſuge, the whiteneſs ceaſes, and degenerates into that colour which ariſes from the compoſition of thoſe which were not intercepted, but ſuffered to paſs through the lens; and iſf the intercepted colour be again let paſs, and fall upon the compound, it will immediately reſtore it's whiteneſs. . That in forming the white the rays do not ſufſer change by acting on each other, is clear; for if you hold the paper beyond the focus of the lens, and ſtop the red colour, the violet ſuffers no change; nor will the red be changed by ſtopping the red, and letting the violet paſs. . When the paper is held at the focus, if you look through a priſm at the white circular image, you will have a coloured ſpectrum; let any ray be intercepted while the image is thus examined, and then let it paſs again, and the colour will appear and diſappear as often as you repeat the experiment, the remaining colours not ſuffering any change; clearly ſheuwing, that one colour depends on one kind of rays, and another colour on another kind. So replete and deciſive are- the experiments of Sir I. NrwTONν, that they not only prove tle propoſition they were primarily invented to illuſlrate, but at the ſame time they alſo ſirengthen the truth of other propoſitions. Convincing as were theſe experiments, the fertile imagination of NitwrON invented new ones, uhich, though diſlerent from each other, all concurred to prove the ſame thing; they ſeemed to riſe under his hands, as the poets make flowers ſpring under the fect of their beauties. He cauſed an inſtrument to be made in form of a comh, with tecth 1 2 inch broad, and at two inches diſtance from cach other; by paſſing this comb over the lens placed as in the laſt experiment, part of the colours were intercepted by the teeth, while the reſt proceeded on to the paper placed at the focus of the lens. This image appeared white when the comb was taken away, but when this was interpoſed the whiteneſs was changed into the colour paſſing through the comb. When the motion of the comb is ſlow, the colours red,  ellow, green, blue, purple, always ſucceed one unother but when the comb is moved quickly, the colours following one another with extreme rapidity, cannot be diſtinguiſhed, and from the confuſion of the uhole there ariſes one uniform colour; the impreſſion of all the colours is at once in the ſame part of the eye, and they jointly excite the ſenſation oſ whiteneſs. Herc is a top, ſuch as we were uſed to ſpin in ou our younger days; the ſurface is divided into certain proportions, to accord with the coloured ſpectrum of the priſm: by pulling this ſtring I ſhall make the top revolve rapidly on it's axis; while it is ſo revolving you can diſtinguiſh none of the colours ſingly, but the whole appears white, and this whiteneſs will be greater in proportion as the particular colours are brighter. The colours produced by the priſm are not only the moſt beautiful in nature, but each in itſelf continues ſeparate and unalterable. When one of theſe primitive rays has been ſeparated from the reſt, nothing can change it's colour; ſend it through other priſms, refract or reflect it, ſtill it remains unalterable, the red ray preſerves it's crimſon, and the violet it's purple beauty. Whatever object falls under any of them ſoon gives up it's own colour, though ever ſo vivid, to aſſume the homogenial light of the priſmatic ray. Take a bit of paper, and place it in the red-making ray, and it will appear red; place it in the other coloured rays, and you vwill always find it aſſume the radial colour. Take a piece of coloured paper, and put it in the red light, and it will appear red; hold it in the yellow, orange, &c. and it will appear orange, yellow, &c. reſpectively. In ſhort, no art can alter the colour of a ſeparated ray; it gives it's tint to every object, but will aſſume none from any; neither reflection, refraction, nor any other means, can make it forego it's native hue; like gold, it inay be tried by every experiment, but will ſtill come forth the ſame. It will be neccſſary hure to explain the method uſed by Sir I. Newton, to define the boundaries of each colour in the priſmatic ſpectrum. You obſerved in the image, that though there was a manifeſt dilſerence of colour not only betweer the two extremes, but alſo im the intermediate parts, yet the exact place at which any one colour ended and another began was far from being ſufficiently diſtinguiſhable; this indiſtinctneſs was occaſioned by rays of every kind, procecding from all parts oſ the ſun's diſc; an entire image of the ſun is projected on the paper, conſiſting of a circle of each particular colour; and as the rays diſfer in kind by infiniteſimal degrees, from the extreme red to the extreme violet, there muſt, in ſact, be thouſands of theſe circles in the oblong image, the centers of which are infinitely ncar to each other, ſo that the light is intimately mixed, eſpecially in the middle of the image, wherc it is brighteſt. He therefore coniidered, that if theſe circles could be made lesſs, while their centers kept the ſame diſtances and poſitions, their interſerence and mixture with each other would be proportionably diminiſhed, and that they would be ſo diminiſhed, if without the room at a great diſtance from the priſm towards the ſun, an opake body was interpoſed, having a round hole in the middle of it, to intercept all the ſun's light, except as much as coming from the middle of it's diſc could paſs through that hole to the priſm; for then the ſeparate circles vould no longer anſwer to the whole diſk of the ſun, but only to that part of it which can be ſeen from the priſm through that hole. But to make theſe circles anſwer more diſtinctly to the hole, a lens is to be placed by the priſin, to caſt the imagc oſ the hole, that is, oſ each ſcparate circle diſtinctly on the paper. At about 10 or 12 fect ſrom the window Sir I. Nev ton placed a lens, by which the image of the hole might be diſtinctly caſt upon a ſheet of paper at 6, 8, 10, or 12 feet from the lens. Immediately after the lens he placed a priſm, by which the reſracted light might be thrown upuwards or ſideways; moving the paper that received the image nearer to or further from the priſm, till he ſound the ſituation, where the ſides of the image were, moſt diſtinct. Fig. 13, pl. 6. F is the hole in the windowſhutter; MN a lens vhereby the image of that hole is caſt diſtinctly on the paper at I; ABC a priſm to refract the rays, emerging from the lens to another paper at pt; the round image at I is thereby turned into an oblong image pt falling on the other paper. This image pt coniiſts of circles placed one after another in rectilincar order, the circles are equal in magnitude to the circle I; conſequently by diminiſhing the hole I, they may be at plecaſure diminiſhed, whilſt their centers remain in their places. By this means the breadth of the image pt may be made forty times, and ſometimes ſixty or ſeventy times leſs than it's length, and thereby the mixture of the rays as much or as lictle as you pleaſe. By this means he obtained a diſtinct termination of the images of the hole without any penumbra, and thereſore only extending the leaſt degree into each other, and conſequently there was very little mixture of heterogenial rays. By enlarging or diminiſhing the hole in the windowſhutter, he made the circular images greater or leſs at pleaſure, and thereby the mixture of rays in the oblong image was as much or as little as he choſe; ſometimes making the image 40 times, and ſometimes 6o or 70 times leſs than it's length. Thus the light was rendered ſufſiciently ſimple for trying any of his experiments about homogenial light, the heterogeneous rays being ſo few as hardly to be perceived, excepting in the indigo and violet, which being dark colours eaſily ſuffer an allay, even by the little ſcattering light refracted irregularly by the inequalities of the riſm. When he had thus got the ſides of the coloured image diſtinctly defined, he delineated the outlines of it on paper, holding the paper ſo that the image might fall on the paper, and coincide with it exactly; while an aſſiſtant marked the confines of each colour, by lines drawn acroſs the image. This was frequently repeated, both on the ſame and different papers; the obſervations were found to agree well enough with each other, and the ſides were divided like a muſical chord, and were in proportion to one another, as the numbers 1, 8, 3., &, and 1, and ſo repreſented the chords of the kev, and of a tone, a third minor, a fourth, a ſfth. a ſixth major, a ſeventh, and an Cighth above that key. The length of the ſpaces, which the 7 primary colours poſſeſs in the ſpectrum, exactly correſponds to thoſe of the chords that ſound the ſeven notes in the diatonic ſcale of muſic. Forom this reaſoning, colours and ſounds have been thought to be, in ſome reſpect, ſimilar. There are 7 notes in muſic; there are alſo ſo many primary colours: the diſtan-e between each note is aſcertained; a ſimilar diſtance is alſo found between each coloured ray. But the diverſities between them are moére numerous than the ſimilitudes. The combination of tones increaſes their beauty; but the combination of colours deadens their effect. The ſucceſſion of ſounds have a wonderful influence on the mind; the ſucceſſion oſ colours has ſcarce any. Notuwithſtanding this, Pere Caſtel has written a treatiſe, to prove that as the ear ſinds pleaſure in the ſucceſſion oſ ſounds; ſo the eye may have a ſimilar one from rhe ſucceſſion of colours. For this purpoſe, he conſtructed an ocular harpſichord, which, inſtead oſ ſ rounaiu to the ecar, preſented colours to the  the priſmatic rays ſurniſhed the notes, and the ſhades between were ſubſtituted ſor the ſemitones. Sounds ſurniſh the ear with all it's pleaſures, but colours furnifh the eye but with half it's pleaſure: therefore, little is to be expected from the muſic of colours. To make ſuch an inſtrument ſarisfy the ſenſe of ſight, the beauty ol figure muſt be united to that of colour. The ſoregoing principles account for ſeveral phenomena, that were inexplicable before Sir Iſaac Newton had inveſtigated the theory of colours. Among others, why, upon looking at any object through a priſm, the edges only appear tinged with colours, and that in a certain order. Thus, when you look throucgh a priſm, at any ohject, (if not too ſmall (particularly if it be white), the edges only oſ the object are coloured; one edge red. orange, and yellow; the other blue, indigo, and violet. Theſe colours are the extremities of ſo many images oſ the object, as there are rays of light differently refrangible. This uill be beſt explained by a diagram. Let A BCD ji. 17, pl. 6, he a white ſigure, viewed through a priſcm HIK; CE, DE, are rays procecding irom the extremities, which, if the priſin werc not interpoſed, would meet at E; but by means of the priſin, are unequally refractcd; the red uniting in G, the violet at F; the intermediate one between G and F, into as many points as there are rays differently refrangibIc. The eye being ſituated ſo as to receive theſe rays, ſces, in this refracted direction, the image a os p augmented in height, by the quantity b o, which is that of the rays, ſeparated by refraction. The edges of this image are coloured; the lower edge red, from a to e; orange, from c to d; and ycllow, between d and e. At the upper edge, blue, from I to m; indigo, from m to n; violet, from n to o. From what we have ſaid, it is eaſy for you to perceive, that theſe colours are the extremities of ſo many images of the object; each colour occupying a ſpace, equal in extent to that of the card A BCD, which receives the light of the ſun, vhich light is compoſed oſ all the rays. The red image, thereſore, extends from a to b; the orange, from c to 13 the yellow, from d to k; the green, ſrom a to l; the blue, from f to m; the indigo, from g to n; the violet, ſrom h to o. This explains clearlv, why the extremities only are coloured, while the middle remains white; the colours anticipate one on the other, ſo that they are all mixed together in the ſpace between h and b; in the ſmall intervals between e and h, and b and l, it is nearly white. It is only from a to e, and ſrom I to o, that the colours are ſuſficiently pure and unmixtd, to be apparent. If the object you look at through the priſm is ſmall, and viewed at a diſtance, the whole ſurface is coloured; for when the object is ſmall, each object occupies leſs ſpace; whilſt the quantity that the rays are ſeparated from each other, is the ſame, they are conſequently leſs mixed, and more apparent. If a black object be ſurrounded with a white one, the colours which are perceived, are to be derived from the light oſ the illuminated object ſpreading into the regions of the black; and therefore they appear in a contrary order to what they do when a white object is ſurrounded with a black one. It is the ſame when an object is viewed, the parts oſ uhich are leſs Iuminous than others; for, in the borders of the more and leſs luminous parts, colours ought always to ariſe from the ſume prinCiple, vi⸗. from the exceſs of light of the more Iuminous object, and to be oſ the ſame kind as if the darker parts were black, but yet to be more faint and dilute. What is ſaid of colours mae by priſms, may be eaſily applied to the colours made by the glaſſes of teleſcopes and microſcopes, or by the humours of the eye; for if the object-glaſs of a teleſcope be thicker on one ſide than the other, or if one half of the glaſs, or one half of the pupil of the eye, be covered with any opake ſubſtance, the object-glaſs, or that part of it or of the eye which is not covered, may be conſidered as a wedge vith crooked ſides: and every other pellucid ſubſtance has the eſfect of a priſm, in refracting the light that paſſes through it's ſubſtance. Though the foregoing theory of light and colour was ſirſt ſully and clearly inveſtigated by Sir Iſaac Newton, yet ſome traces thercoſ are to be ſound among the ancients. Plato does not ſcem to have been altogether ignorant of the Neu tonian ſyſtem of colours; for he calls them the eſſcct of light tranſmitted from bodies, the particles oſ which were adapted to the organs oſ ſight. Now this is preciſely the ſame with uhat Sir Iſaac teaches,  that the different ſenſations of each particular colour are excited in us by the diſſcrence of ſiæe in thoſt ſmall particles of light which form the ſeveral rays; thoſe ſmull particles of light occaſioning diſſerent images of colour, as the vibration is more or leſs Iively with which they ſtrike our ſenſes. Plato hach gone further: he has entered into a detail of the compoſition of colours, and inquired into the viſible eſfects that muſt ariſe from a mnixture of the different rays of which light itſels is ccmpoſed. Ie thought certain rules might be laid down on this ſubject, if, in following and imitating nature, we could arrive at the art of forming mixture of others; adding aſterwàrds what may be conſidered as the nobleſt eulogium ever made on Sir Iaac Newton. Should ever any one, exclaim: this ſublime philoſopher of antiquity, attempt, b curious reſcarch, to account for this admirable mechaniſm, be will, in doing ſo, but manifeſt how entirely ignorant he is of ibe difference between divine and buman power. It is true, God can intermingle thoſe ihings one with another, and then ſever them at his pleaſure; becauſe he is, at the ſame time, all knowing and all powerful: but there is no man now exiſts, nor ever will, perbaps, who ſball ever be able to accompliſb tbings ſo very difficult. What an eulogium are theſe words, in the mouth oſ ſuch a philoſopher as Plato, and how glorious is He who hath ſucceſsſully accompliſhed what appeared impracticable to that prince of philoſophers And what elevation oſ genius, what piercing penetration into the moſt intimate ſecrets of nature, diſplays itſelf even in the paſſages recited from Plato, when we conſider that philoſophy was then but in it's infancy. LECTURE XX. OF THE RAINBOW. VIMHEN we look back upon the knowledge oſ the ſeveral periods of time with which hiſtory has left us any acquaintance, and compare it with the preſent, reviewing at the ſame time the improvements of the two laſt centuries, and comparing them with the whole ſeries of what preceded, we can ſcarce avoid regarding the later period with a reſpect that approaches to veneration. It is not to be doubted but that men have at all times the ſame natural abilities. That many of the ſages of antiquity were men of the greateſt ability, and moſt extenſive genius, they have leſt ſufficient evidence in the records of their works. The glory of the preſent period is, that genius and application have been directed into a proper courſe, that men have ſtudied rhings inſtead of words, and have built their ſyſtems upon ſacts, not like their predeceſſors on theories. I would not be underſtood as deſirous of taking from the venerable fathers of erudition, all claim to uſeful diſcoveries; for their writings give us teſtimony of inventions which the moſt enterprizing geniuſes of theſe ages have found it impoſſible to equal; but theſe are ſev. With us knowledge is the offspring of experiment, and we advance nothing as a principle, but what is in a degree demonſtrable, and what can be in ſome way put to the teſt of experience. On this ſtable foundation ſcience has riſen to it's preſent height, a ſituation in which the moſt ſanguine of the writers in the obſcurer ages could never have expected to ſee it; and yet far below that degree of perfection to which I think it poſſible it may arrive, and to which by theſe very means it may be carried. It is not eaſy to ſay what will be the triumphs of modern application joined to modern genius, nor to ſay where it will ſtop, while there is the ſame ardour in the purſuit, the ſame principles to work upon, and an inſfinite number of facts aſcertained. The colours of the rainbow, which ſtruck anriquity with amazement, no longer now create the philoſophers ſurpriſe. To Pliny and Plutarch it appeared as an object which we might admire, but could never explain. Kepler ſeems to have been the firſt who ſuppoſed that it might ariſe ſrom the refraction of the ſunts rays upon entering the rain drops. Antonio de Dominis enlarged a theory juſt hinted at by Kepler. Each ſucceeding philoſopher went on in improving a theory, the truth of which ſecmed to carry great probability; but as they were ignorant of the true cauſes of colour, they leſt the taſk unfiniſhed for NEWTON to complete. You vill find that the theory of the rainbow, as explained by him, is full, clear, and will impreſs your mind with perſect conviction. Oſ the various meteors the rainbow is one oſ the moſt pleaſing; it's colours not only delight the eye with the mildneſs of their luſtre, but encourage the ſpectator with the proſpect of ſucceeding ſerenity. It is almoſt needleſs to deſcribe this meteor, as there are very few but muſt have ſurveyed it with pleaſure and ſurpriſe. You know that it is only ſeen when the ſpectator turns his back to the ſun, and when it rains on the oppoſite ſide. It's colours, beginning from the under part, are violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, red, ſo that it contains all the beautiful and ſimple ſhades of the priſm; without the firſt, there is oſten an external rainbow, whoſe colours are leſs vivid and ranged in an oppoſite order, beginning from the under part, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. Sometimes we ſee half, ſometimes an whole bow; frequently one, very often two, nay three have been ſeen. Though the rainbow is generally formed by the reflection of the rays of the ſun's light, from the drops of falling rain, it frequently appears among the waves of the ſea, whoſe heads or tops are blown by the wind into ſmall drops; it is alſo ſometimes to be ſeen on the ground, when the ſun ſhines on a very thick dew. Caſcades and fountains, whoſe waters in their fall are divided into drops, will exhibit rainbows to a ſpectator, properly ſituated, during the time of the ſun's ſhining. This appearance is alſo ſeen by moon-light, though ſeldom vivid enough to render the colours diſtinguiſhable; and an artificial rainbow may even be produced by candle-light on the water, which is ejected by a ſmall fountain, or jet d'eau. All theſe are of the ſame nature, and dependent on the ſame cauſes, ſome idea of which may be formed by conſidering theſe diagrams. Let the circle StD, ſig. 12, pl. 7, and G ds, ſig. 13, pl. 7, repreſent two drops of water; Sss, ſig. 12, a ray of light falling obliquely on the drop of water at s, inſtcad of continuing in it's direction towards F, is reſracted to t, whence it will be in part reflected to e, making the angle of incidence equal to the angle oſ reflection, where, inſtead of going on directly to f, it will be again refracted by paſſing obliquely out of the water into the air. But as this ray oſ light conſiſts oſ a pencil of rays, ſome of which are more refrangible than the others, the violet which is moſt ſo will proceed towards B, and the red, which is the leaſt, towards O. If then the eye of the ſpectator be ſo placed at O, that the ray of light falling upon it from the drop of water has been once reflected and twice reſracted, ſo that e o ſhall make with the ſolar ray s S an angle S F O of 420 2, he vill ſee the red ray in the direction or; for it has been ſound by computation, that the greateſt angle, under which the moſt refrangible rays, after one reflection, can come to the eye of a ſpectator, is 400 17; and that the greateſt angle under which the leaſt refrangible rays come to the eye is 420 2If the eye be aſterwards raiſed to B, ſo that the ray e b forms with the ſolar ray only an angle of 400 17, he vill ſee the violet ray in the direction b B, and the intermediate colours at intermediate directions. The ſame thing takes place if the eye of the ſpectator remaining in the ſame ſpace O, the drop of water deſcends from D to E; or if you ſuppoſe this ſpace filled with drops of water, you will then ſee at the ſame time all the priſmatic colours. The rays which have the intermediate degrees of reſrangibility will come moſt copiouſly from drops between D and E, and exhibit the intermediate colours in the order which their degree of refrangibility requires. Now what has been ſaid of one globe or drop of water, is true of millions of drops. Let us now imagine a number of ſuch drops of rain, placed in the circumference of a ſemicircle, in the center of uwhich is the eye of the ſpectator, and we ſhall have a ſemicircular band, adorned with the ſeven primitive colours, and whoſe breadth will be equal to DE, that is, in proportion to the difference between the moſt and leaſt reſrangible rays. To explain the exterior bow, let us ſuppoſc a ray of light Ss, ſig. 13, ſrom the ſun falling obliquely on a drop of water repreſcnted by the circle Gds; inſtead of continug in it's original direction to a, it is rcũacted to , ſrom whence it will be in part reflected to e; falling again on the concave ſurface, a part will be again reflected towards g, inſtead of g o. where it will paſs into the air again, and be refracted a ſecond time. This ray of light, like the preceding, will be now decompoſed; the red, which is the leaſt refrangible, will proceed to O, and the violet, which is the moſt ſo, to. B. Now an eye ſituated at O, ſo as to receive the ray of light, which having been twice refracted and twice reflected by the drops of water, makes with the ſolar ray an angle S h O of 50c 55', will ſee the red in the direction Or; if the eye is lowered to B, ſo that the angle Sh B is 549 7, it will perceive the violet ray; and in procceding from O to B, all the priſmatic colours ſucceſſively. It has been found, that the ſmalleſt angle under which the leaſt refrangible rays can come to the eye aſter two reflections is 50c7, and that the ſmalleſt angle under which the moſt reſrangible can come is 540 7. Hence, if the ſun were a point, the diameter of the exterior bow would be o 10, and that of the interior bow 10 45, and the dicſance between them 8o 55'; but as his body ſubtends an angle of 32, 5', each bow will be increaſed by that quantity, and their reciprocal diſtance dinintſhed The ſame effects would take place if the eye of the obſerver was fixed at O, and the drop of water aſcended from G to H; or if you ſuppoſe this ſpace filled up with drops of water, all the priſmatic colours will be ſeen at the ſame time, the drops between G H ſtriking the ſenſe with the intermediate colours, in the order of their refrangibility. If, as in the preceding caſe, you imagine a ſeries of ſuch drops ſituated in the circumference oſ a ſemicircle, in whoſe center is the eye oſ the ſpectator, you will have a ſecond ſemicircle, enriched with ſeven primitive colours, but in contrary order to the ſirſt bow. Thus there will be formed two bows of colours, an interior and ſtronger by one reflection in the drops, and an exterior and fainter by two reflections, the light becoming fainter by every reflection: their colours will be in a contrary order to each other, the red of both bows bordering upon the ſpace which is between the bous. What has been here only ſuppoſed, really takes place when rain ſalls; ſo that when the rain and the ſun (with regard to the ſpectator's horizon) are in oppoſite parts of the heaven, there is a ſufficient number of drops in a proper ſituation for the emergent rays to form with the incident rays the angles neceſſary to produce a rainbow. Let E, F, G, H, ſig. i4, pl. 7, repreſent drops of rain, on which the ſolar rays SE, SF, SG, SH, are incident; theſe rays, afſter having been twice rerdcted at E and F, and once reflected, fall upon the eye at O. The angle S E O formed by the incident ray S E, and the emergent ray E O being 400 17, the violet colour will be perceived at E; the angle S F O, formed in the ſame manner by the incident ray SF, and the emergent ray FO, being 420 2, the red is perceived at F; the drops of rain between T and F ſending to the eye the neceſſary emergent ray for producing the intermediate colours. Thus alſo the rays SG, S H, after two refractions and two reflections, are alſo directed towards the eye placed at O. The angle S GO, ſormed by the incident ray SG, and the emergent ray G O, being 50c 57, the red is ſeen at G; the angle S H O, formed by the incident ray S H, and the emergent ray H O being 540 7, the violet is ſeen at H; the other drops oſ rain which are between G and H furniſh the intermediate colours. The ſame may be ſaid of the reſt of the drops conſtituting the two ſemicircular bands AF B E. C H DG. This may be illuſtrated by experiment, for iſ the rays of light fall on the ſurface of a glaſi ſphere filled with water, they will be refracted to the other ſide, and there exhibit a coloured ſpot of refracted light; from this part the rays will be reflected to another part oſf the lower ſurface, and there be refracted a ſecond time into the air, and dilated into all the different coloured rays, ſo that if a perſon's eye was placed under ſuch à globe, he would obſerve all the different colours appear in that globe. For this purpoſe here is a globe filled with water, which I ſhall ſuſpend in a ſun-beam, at ſuch a height that you may eaſily obſerve this phenomenon. You ſee it now receives the light on the upper part, refracts it from the lower into all it's different coloured rays, forming thereby a circle of coloured light on the floor much reſembling the rainbow. Now if you place yourſelf in ſuch manner, reſpecting the globe, that she rays of light of different colours may ſucceſſi vely fall upon the eye, then you vwill ſee all thoſe colours in the globe which before formed the variegated arch upon the floor. This is a caſe exactly ſimilar to the rainbow; for if this globe of water was placed in the heavens, it is evident that the ſun-beams would be refracted through it as they are here. DTo illuſtrate the nature of the ſecond bow, we muſt let the ſun-beam fall upon the lower part to the globe; you ſee plainly the coloured ſpot behind to which it is refracted; caſt your eye on the upper part, and you perceive the point to which it is reflected, from whence it is a ſecond time reflected to the fore part of the globe; and from thence you ſee it a ſecond time refracted out of the globe into the air, and the beam. thereby diſſipated into all it's different coloured rays; and you ſee by the colours on the fioor, that the ſeveral rays in the beam lie in a different order from what they did when refracted from the globe before: and alſo you will perceive, that the colours of the beam are more dilute and faint than they were in the firſt experiment. It was by this experiment that Antonio de Dominis undertook to explain the cauſe of the rainbow. Filling a glaſs globe with water, hung at a certain height, oppoſite to the ſun, and ſtanding himſelf with his back to the ſun, and his face to the globe, he found that when this was in ſuch a ſituation that a ray darting from the ſun to the lobe made an angle with another ray going from fiis eye to the globe of 420 3, he found the glohe appeared red. If the poſition of the globe was aſeered. ſo as to make the angle between the ſolar and viſual ray leſs, then the other colours of the rainbow aroſe from red down to violet, which appeared at an angle of 4017. You vwill now be able to account for all the phenomena of the rainbow; it appears always of the ſame breadth, becauſe the degrees oſ refrangibility of the red and violet rays which form the extreme rays are always the ſame. The rainbow forms a greater or ſmaller portion of a circle. Our eye is a point of a cone, and the rays that proc eed from it at the above-mentioned angles form the ſurface of the cone; the coloured circle is the baſe, part of which is viſible, while the earth cuts off the part which lies above the horizon. The portion in view is of courſe greater or ſmaller, as the line of ſight is more or leſs inclined to the horizon; this obliquity increaſes in proportion to the elevation of the ſun; conſequently the ſize ofſ the bow diminiſhes as the altitude of the ſun increaſes. To make this plainer, ſuppoſe the ſpectator on the top of a very high mountain, and the rain falling at fome little diſtance from him, inſtead of a ſemicircular rainbow he would then ſee a complete ring of that beautiful meteor; a circle not like our common bow, cut off by the earth, but complete and beautiful; and ſuch is uſually ſeen from the American Andes. From hence we ſee why there is no rainbow, when the ſun is above a certain altitude; the conical ſurface under which it becomes viſible being below the horivon, when the altitude of the ſun is more than 42 degrees; if the altitude is more than 42, but leſs than 54, the exterior bow may be viſible, though the interior bow is inviſible. Sometimes the rain does not occupy a ſpace extenſive enough to complete the bow, only a gortion of an arch will in ſuch caſes be viſible; and the appearance ofſ this portion, and even the bow itſelf, will be various, according to the nature of the ſituation and the ſpace occupied by the rain. OPF THE SEPARATION OF THE ORIGINAL RAYS Or LIGHT, BY REFPLECTION OR TRANSMISSION, BUT DEPENDING ON THE I HICKNESS OF THE MEDIUM UPON WHICH THEY ARE INCIDENT. The foundation of a rational theory being laid, it next became natural to inquire by what peculiar mechaniſm in the ſtructure oſ each particular body, it was fitted to reflect one kind of rays more than another. This Sir I. NEWTON attributes to the denſity of theſe bodies. This ſubject is not ſo clear as the preceding; the preſent theory ſuggeſts many doubts to every inquiſitive mind, and is allowed by all to be attended with difficulties. There are no optical experiments, however, in which Sir I. NEWTON ſeems to have taken more pains, than thoſe relating to the rings oſ colours which appear in ibin plates, and which I am going to explain to you; in all his obſervations and inveſtigations concerning them, he diſcovers the greateſt ſagacity, both as a philoſopher and a mathematician. ture of ſoap and water, were obſerved by Dr. Hooke to exhibit various colours according to their thinneſs, and that when they have a conſiderable degree of thickneſs they appear colourleſs; from this the preſent theory has taken it's riſe. It is thus that things overlooked by the reſt of mankind, are often the moſt fertile in ſuggeſting hints to thoſe who are habituated to reflection. SIR I. NEWTON blew up a large bubble from a ſtrong mixture of ſoap and water, and ſet himſelſ attentively to conſider the diſferent changes oſ colour it underwent, from it's enlargement to it's diſſolution. He in general perceived that the thinner the plate of water which compoſed the ſides of the bubble, the more it reflected the violet colour ray; and that in proportion as the ſides of the bubble were more thick and denſe, the more they reflected the red: he therefore was induced to believe, that the colours of all bodies proceeded from the thickneſs and denſity of the little tranſparent plates of which they are compoſed. To bring this opinion nearer to certainty, it was neceſſary to meaſure the thickneſs of the plate of water which compoſed the bubble, but this was a matter of great difficulty, as the bubble was oſ itſelf of too tranſient a nature to undergo the neceſſary experiments. Sir Iſaac, who was ever fertile in expedients, recollected having obſerved, that as two priſms were compreſſed fiard together, in order to make their ſides (which happened to be a little convex) touch one another, they were both as perfectly tranſparent in the place of contact as if they had been but one piece of glaſs; but that round the point of contact, where the glaſſes were a little ſeparated from each other, rings of different colours appeared. To obſerve more accurately the order of the colours produced in this manner, he placed a glaſs lens, whoſe convexity was very ſmall, upon a plain glaſs. Nov it is evident, that thole would only touch a; one particular point; and therefore, at all other places between the adjacent ſurfaces, a thin plate of air was interpoſed, whoſe thic kneſs increaſed in a certain ratio, according to the diſtance from the point of contact. He preſſed theſe glaſſes ſſowly together, by which means the colours very ſoon emerged, and appeared diſtinct to a conſiderable diſtance; next to the pellucid central ſpot made by the contact of the glaſſes, ſucceeded blue, yellow, white, yellow und red. The blue was very little in quantity, nor could he diſcern any violet in it; but the yellow and red were very copious, extending about as far as the white, and four or five times as far as the blue. The next circuit immediately ſurrounding theſe conſiſted of violet, blue, green, yellow, and red; all theſe were very copious except the green, which was very little in quantity, and ſeemed more faint and dilute than the other colours. The third circle of colours was purple, blue, green, yellow, and red; in this the purple was more reddiſh than the violet in the former circuit, and the green was more conſpicuous, being as bright and copious as any of the other colours, except the yellow; the red was alſo ſomewhat faded. The fourth circle conſiſted of green and red; the green was copious and lively, inclining on one ſide to blu; on the other to yellow, but there was neither violet, blue, nor yellow; and the red was very imperfect and dirty. Each outer circuit or ring was more obſcure than thoſe within, like the circular waves upon a diſturbed ſheet of water, till they at laſt ended in perfect whiteneſs. As the colours were thus found to vary according to the different diſtances of the glaſo plates from each other, Sir Iſaac judged that they proceeded from the different thickneſs of the plate ofſ air, intercepted between the glaſſes; and that this plare was by the mere circumſtance of thinneſs or thickneſs diſpoſed to reflect or tranſmit this or that particular colour; from whence he concluded, as before obſerved, that the colours of all natural bodies depended on their component particles. He alſo conſtructed a table, wherein the thickneſs of a plate, neceſſary to reflect any particular colour, was expreſſed in parts of an inch, divided into 1,0000, 0c0 parts. The appearance of theſe circles, when the glaſſes were moſt compreſſed, ſo as to make the black ſpot appear in the center, is delineated ſig. 15, pl. 7, where a, b, c, q, e; f, g, h, i, k; I, m, n, o, p; q.1 Ss, t; u, X; 79, 2, denote the colours reckoned in order from the center, viz. black, blue, green, yellow, red, purple, blue, green, yellow, red; green, red; greeniſh blue, red; greeniſh blue, reddiſh white. I have already obſerved to you, that the thin plates, made uſe of in the ſormer experiments, reflected ſome kinds of rays in particular parts, and tranſmitted others in the ſame parts. Hence the coloured rings appeared variouſly diſpoſed, according as they were viewed by reflected or tranſmitted light; that is, according as the plates were or were not held up between the eye and the window. That you may underſtand this better, here is a table, on one ſide of which are mentioned the colours appearing on the plates by reflected light, and on the other thoſe which were perceived when the glaſſes were held between the eye and the window. The center, when the glaſſes were in full contact, was perfſectly tranſparent; this ſpot therefore, when viewed by reflected light, appeared black, becauſe it tranſmitted all the rays; and for the ſame reaſon it appeared white, when viewed by tranſmitted light. Colours by reſlected light. sColours by tranſmitted light Blac k Waite Blue Yellowiſh Red White Black Yellow Violet Red Blue Violet White Blue Yellow Green Red Yellow Violet Red Blue Purple Green Blue Yellow Green Red xellow ; Bluiſh Green Green Red Red Bluiſh-green Greeniſh-blue Red Red In comparing the rings produced by tranſmitted with thoſe produced by reflected light, the white was found oppoſed to the black, the red to the blue, the yellow to the violet, and the green to a colour compoſed of red and violet; in other words, the parts of the glaſs, that when looked at were white, appeared black on looking through the glaſs; and on the contrary, thoſe which appeared black in the firſt inſtance, appeared white in the ſecond; and ſo of the other colours, which you will more readily comprehend by conſidering this figure, where AB, CD, ſig. 17, pl. 7, repreſent che glaſſes which touch at E; the black lines traced between them are the diſtances between the two ſurfaces, at diſſerent diſtances from the center, each diſtance anſwering to a coloured ring; the colours wrinten above are thoſe ſeen by reflected light; thoſe underneath, are the colours exhibited by tranſmitted light. Newton has ſhewn, that the rays of any particular colour are diſpoſed to be reſlected, when the thickneſſes of the plate oſ air are as the numbers 1, 3, S, 7, 9, II, &c. and that the ſame rays are diſpoſed to be tranſmitted at the intermediate thickneſſes, which are as the numbers o, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, &c. The places of reflection or tranſmiſſion oſ the ſeveral colours in a ſeries, are ſo near each other, that the colours dilute each other by mixture; whence the number of ſeries, in the open day-light, ſeldom exceeds 7 or 8. But if the ſyſtem be viewed through a priſm, by which means the rings of various colours are ſeparated, according to their reſrangibility, they may be ſeen on that ſide towards which the refraction is made, ſo numerous that it is impoſſible to count them. Or, if in a dark chamber the ſun's light be ſeparated into it's original rays, by a priſm, and a ray of one uncompounded colour be received upon the two glaſſes, the number of circles will become very numerous, and both the reflected and tranſmitted light will remain of the ſame colour as the original incident ray. This experiment ſhews, that in any ſeries, the circles formed by the leſs reſrangible rays exceed, in magnitude, thoſe which are formed by the more refrangible; and, conſequently, that in any ſeries, the more refrangible rays are reflected at leſs thickneſſes than thoſe which are leſs reſrangible. Water applied to the edges oſ the glaſs, is attracted between them; and, ſilling all the intercedent ſpace, becomes a thin plate of the ſame dimenſions as that which before was conſtitutcd of air: in this caſe, the circular rings grew leſs, and the colours were ſainter, but not varied in ſpecies. They were contracted in diameter, nearly in proportion of 7 to 8, and conſequently, the intervals of the glaſſes, at ſimilar circles, as cauſed by theſe two mediums, are as about 3 to 43 that is, as the ſines of refraction out of water into air. I have already mentioned to you the variety of colours produced by bubbles blown in ſoapwater: but, as theſe colours are commonly too much agitated by the external air to admit of any certain obſervation, it is neceſſary to cover the bubble with a clear glaſs, * in which ſituation you will find the following appearances: the colours emerge from the top of the bubble, and as it grous thinner, by the ſubſidence of the water, they dilate into rings parallel to the horizvon, which deſcend ſlowly, and vaniſh ſucceſſively, at the bottom. This emergence continues till the water at the upper part of the bubble becomes toò thin to reflect the light, at which time, a circle of an intenſe blackneſs appears at the top, which ſlowly dilates, ſometimes to three quarters of an inch in breadth, before the bubble breaks. Reckoning from the black central ſpot, the reflected colours are the ſame, in ſucceſſion and quality, as thoſe produced by the aforementioned plate of air; and the appearance of the bubble, if viewed by tranſmitted light, is ſimilar to that of the plate of air, in like circumſtances. . Take very thin plates of talc, or Muſcovy glaſs, that exhibit theſe colours; then, by wetting the plates, the colours remain as before, but become more faint and languid, eſpeciallg when wetted on the under ſide. So that the thickneſs of any plate, requiſite to produce any colour, ſeems ſeems to depend only on the denſity oſf the plate, not on the denſity of the incloſing medium. But the colours are more vivid, as their denſities are difſerent. If two pieces of plate-glaſs, or even common glaſs, be previouſſy wiped, and then rubbed together, they will ſoon adhere, with a confiderable degree of force, and exhibit various ranges of colours, much broader than thoſe obtained by lenſes. One of the moſt remarkable circumſtances attending this method of making the experiment, is the facility with which the colours may be removed, or even made to diſappear, by heats too low to ſeparate the glaſſes. A touch of the finger immediately cauſes the irregular rings of colours to contract towards their center, in the part touched. From theſe experiments it appears plain, that the colours of bodies depend, in ſome degree, upon the thickneſs and denſity of the particles that compoſe them. Hence, if the denſity, or ſiZe of the particles, in the ſurface of a body, be changed, the colour is likewiſe changed. When the thickneſs of the particles of a body is ſuch, that one ſort of light, or one ſort of colour, is reflected; another light, or other colours, will be tranſmitted; and therefore, the body will appear of the firſt colour. A certain determinate thickneſs ſeems to he neceſſary in a plate of water; for example, in order to reflect a particular colour, and a different thickneſs, to make it reflect any other colour; and, in general, that a leſs thickneſs is neceſſary, to reflect the moſt refrangible rays, as violet and indigo, than thoſe which are leaſt refrangible, as red and orange. The particles of bodies reſlect rays of one colour, and tranſmit thoſe of another: and this is the ground oſ all their colours. OPF THE TRANSIENT STATE INTO Wntci A RAY OF LIGUT IS PUT, IN IT'S PASSAGE THROUGH ANY REFRACTING SURFACE, WHICI, INTHE PROGRESS OF THE RAY, RETURNS AT EQUAL INTERVALS; AXD DISPOSES THE RAV, AT EVERY RETURN, TO BE TRANSMITTED, AND LETWEEN THE RETURNS, TO BE REFLECTED TO IT. In order to account for the intervals of the coloured rings in theſe thin plates, and alſo all other caſes of the reflection or tranſmiſſion of light, Sir Iſaac Newton advances an hypotheſis; but, like a wiſe man, and cautious philoſopher. he profeſſes not to lay much ſtreſs upon it, though he ſeems not to entertain any fuſpicion of ir's truth. Indeed, it ſeems to be a &kind of ſair inference ſrom the preceding experiments. The hypotheſis is this: that every ray of light is, at it's ſirſt emiſſion from the luminous body, put into a tranſient ſtate or conſtitution, which, in it's progreſs, returns at equal intervals, diſpoſing it, at every return, to be eaſily tranſmitted into any refracting ſurface it may meet with; whereas in the intervals between theſe returns, it is difpoſed to be eaſily reflected; ſo that, upon the arrival oſ a number of rays of light at the ſirrace of every medium, thoſe of them in which they were diſpoſed to be tranſmitted eaſily, would paſs the interval between the two mediums; and thoſe which were in a contrary ſtate, would be reflected; on which account, ſome light ĩ is generally reflected, and ſome tranſmitted, at every different ſurface on which it falls. Tnoſe ſtates, intę which the rays of light are put, he calls ſits of ji reflection and tranſmiſſion. This hypotheſis is not without difficulties, and muſt, therefore, be received with cautiom as it was propoſed, till it ſhall be either confirmed or confuted by experiment, and a new theory ſubſtituted in it's place. When arrived, as it were, at the conſines of material nature, you muſt expect to meet with ſome confuſion and darkneſs im our explanations. There are barriers to our knowledge, which cannot be paſſed by any force of human faculties. Sir Iſaac Newton, the legiſlator of philoſophers, expreſſed, under the form of conjectures or queſtions, thoſe things which he was unable ſatisfactorily to reſolve; avoiding raſh aſſertions, uhich are ſo ſondly taken up by thoſe who wiſh to ſcduc e mankind. He conjectured, that thefe ſits of eaſy reflecrion and tranſmiſſion may be occaſioned by the vibrations of a ſubtil ſluid, in which the ray paſſes; any ray being diſpoſed to be tranſmitted when the vibration coincides with it, and to be reflected when it is thereby counteracted. He alſo thought that theſe vibrations might be excited by the mutual action and re-action ot light of bodies, and of this medium, at the inſtant of refraction and reflection. Sir Iſuac, thercfore, ſuppoſed Iœwo cauſes oſ this diſpoſition to be reflected or tranſmitted, uwhen raj s of light arrive at any new ſurface. One of them is the regular vibration oſ the etherial medium, aliſecting them through the whole od their progreſs from the luminous body; and the other rhe tremulous motion, or irregular vibration of che ſame medium, at the ſurfaces oſ bodies, occaſioned by the action and re-action between thoſe bodics and light. Thus, as ſtones, by falling into water, put the water into an undulating motion; and all bodies, by percuſſon, excite vibrations in the air; fo the ravs oſ light, by impinging on any refracting o reriecting ſurface, excite vibrations in the refra ting or reflccting medium, and by exciting theſe, agitate the ſolid parts of the refracting or reflecting body; and that the vibrations thus excited in this ſubtil refracting or reflecting medium are propagated much aſter the manner that vibrations are propagated in the air, cauſing ſound, and moving faſter than the rays, ſo as to overtake them; and that when any ray is in that part of the vibration which conſpires with it's motion, it eaſily breaks through a refracting ſurface; but when it is in the contrary part of the vibration which impedes it's motion, it is eaſily reflected; and, by conſequence, that every ray is ſucceſſively diſpoſed to be caſily reflected, or eaſily tranſmitted by every vibration by which it is overtaken. OPF TIE PERMANENT COLOURS OF NATURAL BoDIES, ANDOF THE ANALOGY BETWEEN THEM AND THE COLOURS OF THIN TRANSPARENT PLATES. You have already ſeen, that the colours of natural bodies conſiſt in a diſpoſition to reſlect one ſort of rays more copiouſly than another; and that other bodies are of a different colour, becauſe they reflect rays of a different kind. So that iſf light conſiſted only of one Kind of rays, there could be only one colour in the world; nor would it be poſſible, by refractions and reflections, to produce a new one. Thus, in ſome bodies, all the rays are extinguiſhed but the redmaking, and when they are reſtected to our eyes, they excite in us the idea of red; and thence we ſay, that ſuch a piece of cloth, &c. is red; attributing that only to the cloth or wood, which more particularly ariſes from the light whiclſr dreſſes them in their various beauty. Thus the ruby abſorbs the green, the blue, and the violet; but reflects the red-making rays to our eye, with all their priſmatic luſtre. The amethyſt imbibes the ſtronger rays, and gives back the violet with milder brightneſs. The jonquil gives us only yellow, and the hyacinth it's vivid blue. Every coloured object may be thus regarded as a partial divider of the rays, feparating one or more colours, and confounding all the reſt. Thoſe ſurfaces of tranſparent bodies, which have the greateſt refracting power, reflect the greateſt quantity of light. In other words, bodies, by which the light is more refracted, do likewiſe more ſtrongly reflect it. Diamonds, hich refract the light very ſtrongly, give it, in proportion, a ſtronger reflection: hence proceed the vivacity of their colours, and their ſparkling Iluſtre. The amlogy between reſractiom emd reflectioh will appear, by conſidering that the moſt refractive medium totally reflects the rays of light, at certain degrees oſ incidence. But the truth of the propoſition ſurther appears, by obſerving the tranſparent bodies, ſuch as air, water, oil, glaſc. Iſſand cryſtal, white tranſparent arſenic, and diamond, have a ſtronger or weaker renection, according to the greater or leſs refractive powers of the mediums that are contiguous to them. Thus at che conſine oſ air and ſal gem, it is ſtronger than at the confine of air and water; and ſtill ſtronger between common air and glaſs; ſtill niore ſo between air and a diamond. If any of theſe be immerſced im water, it's reflection becomes veaker than before; and it is weaker ſtill, ſ it be immerſed in liquors of a greater refractive power. Iſ water be divided into two parts, by any imaginary ſurface, there is no reflection at the confines of thoſe two parts; and for the ſame reaſon, there can be no ſenſible reflection in the confine of two glaſſes of equal denſity. The reaſon, thereſore, why all pellucid mediums have no ſenſible reflection but at their external ſurfaces, where they are contiguous to mediums oſ diſferent denſities, is, that their contiguous parts have preciſely the ſame degree of denſityThe least parts of all bodies, though ſeemingly void of tranſparency, when viewed in the groſs, wiſl be found, if taken ſeparately, to be, in ſome meaſure, tranſparent: and the opacity ariſes from the multitude of reflections cauſed in their internal parts. This obſervation will be caſily granted by thoſe who have been converſant with microſcopes; for there they are found to be, for the moſt part, tranſparent. Nothing ſeems more opake, and free from tranſparency, than the cloaths you wear. Yet let us only examine one of the woollen hairs that go into its compoſition, with a microſcope, and you vill find it to be nearly tranſparent. Gold, in the maſis, lets no light paſs through it; but if beaten out extremely thin, we ſhall then ſee that it's parts are tranſparent, like other bodies. If held over a hole, in a darkened window, it will appear of a greeniſh hue. If gold be compoſed of tranſparent parts, we may ſurely conclude the ſame of other bodies: and, indecd, you will find very few which, if reduced to ſuſſicient thinneſs, and applicd to the hole, but what arc manifeſtly tranſparent. Since light finds a free paſſage through the leaſt particles, we are to inquire what renders them opake; and this, by Sir Iſaac Neuton, is attributed to the multitude of reflections and refractions which take place in it's interior parts; there being, betueen the parts of opake or coloured bodies, a number of ſpaces, filled with mediums of a different denſity from that of the body, as water between the tinging corpuſcles with vhich any liquor is impregnated; air between the aqueous globules that conſtitute clouds and miſts, &c. Theſe ſpaces cannot be traverſed by light, without refractùing or refiecting it in various ways, by which it is prevented ſrom paſſing on in a ſtrait line, which it would do if the parts were continuous, without any ſuch interſtices betu een them; for you have already lcarned, that reflections are only made at the ſuperficies of mediums of diſſerent denſities. The opacity of bodies ariſes, therefore, ſrom the diſcontinuity of it's particles, and the different denſity of the intervening mediums, and their particles. This notion of opacity is greatly confirmed by conſidering, that opake bodies become tranſparent by ſilling up the pores with any ſubſtance of nearly the ſume denſity with their parts. Thus when paper is wet with oil or water, or when linen cloth is dipped in water, oiled, or varniſhed, or the oculus mundi ſteeped in water, &c. they become more tranſparent than they were before: as filling the pores of an opake body makes it tranſparent, ſo, on the other hand, evacuating the pores of a tranſparent body, or ſeparating it's parts, renders it opake; as ſalts, or wet paper, by being dried; horn, by being ſcraped; glaſs, by being reduced to pouder, or otherwiſe ſlawed; turpentine, by being ſtirred about with water, till they mix imperſectly; and water, by being formed into many hnall bubbles, either in the form oſ froth, or, by ſhaking it together with oil of turpentine, or ſome other convenient liquor, with uhich it will not incorporate. Hence, then, it is in homogeneity you are to ſce& ſor the cauſc of tranſparency. If there be many pores in a body, and theſe be ſilled with a matter differing much in denſity from the hody itſelt, the light will meet with a thouſand refractions and reflections in the internal parts, and will thus be utterly extinguiſhed. The parts of bodies, and their interſtices, muſt not be leſs than ſome deſiniie ſiæe, to become opake and coloured. . For the moſt opake hodies, if their parts be ſufficiently divided, as metals, by being diſſlved in acid menſtrua, &c. become perfectly tranſparent. And you may remember, that the black ſpot, near the point of contact of the tuo plates of glaſs, tranſmitted the whole light where the glaſſes did not abſolutely touch; and the reflection at the thinneſt part of the ſonp was ſo inſenſible as to make that part appear intenſely black, by the want of reflected light. On theſe grounds it is, that water, ſalt, glaſs, ſtones, &c. are tranſparent, for, from many conſiderations, they ſeem to be as full of pores as other bodies are, yet their particles and pores are too ſmall to cauſe reflection in their common ſurfaces. The tranſparent parts oſ bodies, according to their ſeveral ſizes, muſt reſlect rays of one colour, and tranſmit thoſe of others, on the ſame principles that thin plates or bubbles do reflect or tranſmit theſe rays; and this ſeems to be the ground of all their colours. That they do ſo, is plain ſrom various obſervations; and it is on theſe principles you may explain the variety of colours ſecn in ſome ſilks, on pigeons necks, peacocks' tails, and the feathers of other finely coloured birds. If you fix your eye upon a pigeon's neck, and both be kept at reſt, only one colour is obſervable: but if either moves, eſpecially the latter, a dilſerent eolour may be ſeen. Shady ſilks are woven, with threads of different colours; one arranged longitudinally, the other tranſverſcly; and as the greater or leſs proportion of either oſ theſe appears, ſo one or the other of the colours will prevail. Wet theſe double coloured objects, dip the variegated feather in water, or the changeable ſilk in oil, their reſlections will be leſs vivid, and they will return but one uniform ſhade of colouring. The ſkin of the camelion is tranſparent, it's ground being between a pale red and yellow, coloured with a number of ſmall, ſmooth protuberances of cold, bluiſh colour. It is endowed with a faculty of blowing up or contracting its ſkin at will. This cauſes the different colours, in appearance, to vary: it, thereſore, ſometimes appears reddiſh, at others, blue: the yellow rays of the ground, occaſionally mixing uwith the blue of the protuberances, produces the idea of green; and when placed on a red or ycllow ſubſtance, it's natural colours are unavoidably heightened. It is evident, ſrom various phenomena, that a great proportion of the ſainter coloured rays are ſtopped in their paſſage through the atmoſphere, and are thence reflected upon other bodies; uhile the red and orange rays are tranſmitted to greater diſtances. This circumſtance explains the blue ſhadows of bodies, the blue colour of the ſcy, and the red colour of the clouds, when the ſun is near the horizon. At certain times, when the ſky is clear and ſerene, in the morning and the evening, the ſhadows caſt from opake bodies have been obſerved to be tinged with blue and green. This circumftance naturally reſults ſrom the minute particles of the atmoſphere reflecting the delicate and moſt refrangible ravs, the blue and violet, ſor inſtance; uhich occaſions a predominance of theſe colours. The blue colour of the ſky is accounted for on the ſame principles; namely, the copious reflection of the blue rays, by the atmoſphere, which produces the effect of an arch of that colour, all around us. This is occaſionally diverſified by the vapours' greater denſity, which reflect the ſtronger rays. The coloured clouds, in particular, which appear towards the morning and evening, when the ſun is in or near the horizron, are to be attributed to the ſame cauſe. The rays of light traverſing a vaſt extent of atmoſphere; the fainter and more delicate rays, as the blue and violet, are detached by repeated reflections of the atmoſpheric particles; and the ſtronger rays, as the red, the orange, &c. are permitted to proceed, and reach the clouds, from whence they are reflected. Agreeable to this theory, you may obſerve, that the ſun's horizvontal light is ſometimes ſo deeply tinctured with the red, that objects illuminated by it frequently appear of a bright orange, and even red. It is obſervable, that the clouds do not, in common, aſſume their brighter dyes till the ſun is ſome minutes ſet, and that they paſs from yellow to a flaming gold colour; and thence, by degrees, to red, which becomes deeper and deeper, till the ſun leaves them altogether, till at length the diſappearance oſ the ſun leaves them of a leaden hue, by the reflection of the blue light ſrom the air. A ſimilar change of colour is obſerved on the ſnowy tops of the Alps; and the ſame may be ſeen, though leſs ſtrongly, on the eaſtern and weſtern fronts of white buildings: St. Paul's church, London, is a good object of this kind, and is oſten, at ſun-ſet, tinged with a conſiderable degree of redneſs. What makes the ſame colours more rich and copi ious in the clouds, is cheir ſemi-rranſparency, joined with the obliquity oſ their ſituation. It is probably the ſame coloured light, which being thrown, by the refraction of the atmoſphere, into the ſhadow of the earth, ſometimes gives the moon, in a total eclipſe, the obſcure, reddiſh colour oſ brick. For the ſame reaſon, the colour of the moon vill vary in eclipſes, according to che extent of the atmoſphere the rays have to traverſe. MBR. DELAVAL'S ACCOUNT OF THE PERMANENT COLOURS OF OPAKE BODIES. I ſhould leave this ſubject very incomplete, iſ I did not give you ſome account of the ingenious obſcrvations of Mr. DerUAVaL, extracted from a paper communicated by him to the Literary and Philoſophical Society of Mancheſter, and  publifhed in the ſecond volume of their memoirs. * Mr. Delaval was led to this ſuhject, from a perſuaſion of its utility to thoſe intereſting and elegant arts, u hoſe object is the preparation and uſe of colouring ſubſtances: juſtly obſerving, that our vieus oſ experimental philoſophy ſhould not he confined to theory alone, but directed alſo te it's practical application. ſor, in proportion as the principles of any ſcience are unknoun or miſconceived, the advancement of the arts, and manufactures which depend on them, muſt, of courſe, be impeded; for, without theſe guides, neither much addition, nor any improvement, is to be expected. But wvhen icientine principles are diſcloſed to the artiſt, he is * There is another work oſ Mr. Delaval, written previous to this p. per, uhich is well worth the reader's attention: it is entitlſed,  An Experimental Inquirv into the Cauſes andChanges is enabled to draw, from thoſe original ſources, an ample ſtore of uſeful inventions, by which this art is enriched; and thus, the ſpeculative ſciences, by their extenſion to practical purpoſes, become objects of great public utility. The arts of colour-making and dyeing were, in very remote ages, carried to the height of perfection, in the countries of Phœnicia, Egypt, Paleſtine, India; &c. The inhabitants of thoſe countries excelled, alſo, in the art of imitating gems, and tinging glaſs and enamel of various colours. The colours uſed in very ancient paintings, were as various as thoſe now in uſe, and greatly ſuperior both in beauty and durability. The paints uſed by Apelles uere ſo bright, that he was obliged to glaze his pictures with a dark coloured varniſh, leſt the eye ſhould be offended by their brightneſs: and even theſe were inferior to what had been uſed among the ancient Egyptians. Notwithſtanding this perfection in dyeing and colours, we find the Grecians and Romans continually degrading the uſeful arts. You may conſider this as one of the moſt ſtriking characters that diſtinguiſh the philoſophy of the ancients from that of the moderns. The uncients being chieſly engaged in ſpeculations, that might procure them reſpect, and attract applauſe, thought the uſeful arts unworthv their uctention: whereas the moderns have cultivated and promoted the uſeful arts; and we find, the Academy of Sciences of Paris, attempting to ſhed the light of ſcience upon the arts, by publiſhing a deſcription of them, grounded on the elevated idea, that the induſtry of a nation cannot fail to be enlightened and increaſed by a free communication of all the proceſſes it uſes; and that the ſacrifices it makes, by this publicity, will ever be amply compenſated by the advantages it procures. * . 1ut But why need we go to academies, when we have a fairer and better example in our Loꝶrb and SavrovRr? an example which ſhould teach you to avoid the philoſophical pride of the gentile, and the phariſaical ſelf-ſuſiciency of the modern infidel. Oſ our SAVIOUR we read, that having increaſed in wiſùom, he went about doing good. His Icarning produced not a moroſe ſelf-complacency, but a lovely aſſability, and a deſire to teach others the glad tidings of joy. The treaſures oſ wiſdom were not ſuſfſered to ruſt and cancker, locked up from the public by a ſupercilious reſervedneſs; but out of them he continually diſperſed abroad, and gave to the poor in ſpirit. The ſun, at it's riſing, found him engaged in this great work; and aſter it was ſet, his time was engaged in praying for thoſc whom his days were employed in teaching. The changes of colour, in permanently coloured bodies, are produced by the ſame laws which take place in tranſparent colourleſs ſubſtances; and rhe experiments, by which they can be inveſtigated, conſiſt of various methods of uniting the colouring particles into larger, or dividing them into ſmaller maſies. Sir I. Nexton made his experiments chiefly on tranſparent ſubſtances; and in the few places vhere he treats oſ others, acknowledges his deſiciency of experiments. IIe makes the following remar& on thoſe bodies which reflect onc Kind of lięght, and tranſmit another; vi⸗r. e that if theſe glaſſes or liquors were ſo thick ec and maſſy, that no light could get through e them, he queſtions whether rhey would not, e like other opake bodies, appear of one and the ſame colour, in all politions of the eye, ethotigh he could not vet aſſirm it from expꝑeriene. LI uas an opinion of this great philoſopher, that all coloured matter reflects the rays of light; ſome reflecting copiouſly the more, others the leſs refrangible rays. He was, likewiſe, of opinion, that opake bodies reflect the light from their anterior ſurface, by ſome pouwer of the body, evenly diffuſed over, and external to it. With reſpect to tranſparent coloured liquors, he ſays, that a tranſparent body, which looks of any colour by tranſmitted light, may alſo look ofſ the ſame colour by reſlected light; the light of that colour being reſiected by the farther ſurface of that body, or by the air beyond it; and then the reflected colour will be diminiſhed, and perhaps ceaſe, by making the body very thick, and pitching it on the back ſide, to diminiſh the refſlections of it's farther ſurſace, ſo that the light reflected from the tinging particles may predominate. In ſuch caſe, the reflected light will be apt to vary from that which was tranſmitted. To inveſtigate the truth of theſe opinions, Mr. Delaval entered upon a courſe oſ experiments, with tranſparent coloured liquors and glaſſes, as well as with opake and ſemi-tranſparent ſubſtances. Irom theſe he found, that in tranſparent coloured ſubſtances, the colouring matter does not reflect any light; und when, by intercepting the light which was tranſmitted; it is hindered from paſſing through ſuch ſubſtances, they do not vary from their former colour to any other, but become entirely black. As this incapacity of the colouring particles of tranſparent bodies to reſlect light, was deduced from very numerous experiments, it may be conſidered as a general law. It will appear the more extenſive, if you conſider that, for the moſt part, the tinging particles of tranſparent ſubſtances are extracted from opake bodies; that the opake bodies owe their colour to theſe particles, as well as the tranſparent; and that by the loſs of them they are deprived of their colours. For making his experiments, Mr. Delaval uſed ſmall vials of flint-glaſs, ſimilar to that in my hand; the form is that of a parallelopiped, the height excluſive of the neck is about 2 inches, the baſe about an inch ſquare, the neck 2 inches long. The bottom and three ſides of each of theſe vials was covered with a black varniſh; the cylindrical neck, and the anterior ſide, except at the edges, being left uncovered. He was careful to avoid any crevices in the varniſh, that no light might be admitted, except through the neck or anterior ſide of the vials. The vials ſhould be perfectly clean, and thoſe liquors that depoſit a ſediment ſhould not be put into the vials, but at the time when the experiments are to be made. The uncovered ſide of the vials ſhould not be placed oppoſite to the window where the light is admitted, becauſe in that ſituation the light would be reflected from the fartheſt ſide of the vial; ſmooth black ſubſtances, reflecting light powerſully, are beſt ſituated when the uncovered ſide forms a right angle with the window. Taking all theſe precautions, he viewed a great number of ſolutions both of coloured metallic ſalt, and of the tinging matter of vegetables, obſerving that the colour by reflection was black, whatever it might be when viewed by tranſmitted light. If theſe colours were, however, ſpread thin upon a white ground, they appear of the ſame colour as when viewed by tranſmitted light; but on a black ground they afford no colour, unleſs the black body be poliſhed, in which caſe the reflection of light through it produces the ſame effect as tranſmiſſion. The experiments made with coloured glaſſes. were in many reſpects analagous to thoſe with tranſparent coloured liquors. For theſe he made ſeveral parcels of colourleſs glaſs, compoſced of borax and white ſand. The glaſs was reduced to powder, and afterwards ground together with the ingredients, by which the colour was to be imparted; a method he found preferable to the uſual mode of tinging glaſſes, as they became little inſerior in luſtre to real gems. The reſult of all his experiments was, thar vhen matter is of ſuch thinness, and the tinge ſo dilute, that light can be tranſmitted through it, the glaſſes then appear vividly coloured; but when they are in large maſſes, and the tinging matter is more denſely diffuſed through them, they appear black, ſor theſe as well as the tranſparent liquors ſhew their colour only by tranſmiſſion. Having in this manner formed pieces of fuch glaſs, two inches thick, he incloſed them in black cloth on all ſides, except their anterior and farther ſurfaces. Inthis ſituation each of them ſhewed a vivid colour when light was tranſmitted through them, but when the poſterior ſurſace was likewiſe covered with the cloth to prevent the tranſmiſſion, no other colour but black was exhibited. From theſe phenomena he drew the ſollowing inſerences: I. That tbe colouring particles do not reſlect any light. 2. That a medium, ſuch as is deſcribed by Sir I. Newton, is diffuſed over both the anterior and poſterior ſurfaces of ibe plates, whereby objects are equally and regularly reflected as by a mirror. Our author next conſiders the colouring particles themſelves, pure and unmixed with other media. To procure maſſes made up of ſuch particles, duced to a ſolid conſiſtence by evaporation; by employing a gentle heat the colouring matter will not be injured, and may have it's particles again ſeparated by water or other fluids, and tinging them as before. In this ſtate alſo the colouring partic les reflect no light, and therefore appear uniformly black, whatever be the ſubſtance from which they may have been extracted. He endeavours to prove by experiments on the colouring particles of opake bodies, that theſe colours are produced on the above-mentioned principles; that they ſeem black when very denſe, but ſhew their proper tinge when ſpread thin upon a white ground. The green of graſs, and leaves of plants being obtained by digeſting them in rectiſied ſpirits of wine, and placed in one of the above-mentioned vials, the part in the neck tranſmitted the vivid green, but that contiguous to the uncovered ſide of the vial was black. After the colour had been totally extracted, the leaves remained apparently unaltered as to figure or texture, but were entirely white, or of a white tinged with brown: red, blue, and purple flowers were alſo digeſted with ſpirits of wine, all of which yielded their colouring matter to the ſpirit, and became white when deprived of it. From moſt of theſe flowers the ſpirit, however, either acquired no tinge at all, or only a very faint one; but when acidulated it became red, and by the addition of an alkali became blue, purple, or green, according to the quantity of the alkali and che nature of the infuſion. In theſe ſtates all of them, when viewed by tranſmitted light, or poured upon a white paper, ſhewed their colours, but univerſally appeared black by reflection. Other experiments were tried with other flowers, but the final reſult was the ſame, no colour hy reflection. White paper, linen, &c. may be tinged oſ any of theſe colours, by dipping them in the infuſions; and the conſideration of the manner in which the colours are imparted to linen, affords much inſight into the manner in which natural colours are produced. It has been already obſerved, that when the colouring matter of plants is extracted from them, the ſolid fibrous parts, thus diveſted of their covering, diſplay their natural whiteneſs. White linen, paper, &c. are formed of ſuch fibrous vegetable matter, which is bleached by diſſolving and detaching the heterogeneous colouring particles: when theſe therefore are dyed or painted with vegetable colours, it is evident that they do not diſfer in their manner of acting on the rays of light from natural vegetable bodies; both yield their colours by tranſmitting through the tranſparent coloured matter the light which is reflected from the white ground. This cohite matter ever exiſts without any conſiderable mixture in plants while they are in a ſtate of vegetation, as cotton, white flowers, the pith, wood, ſeeds, roots, and other parts of ſeveral kinds of vegetables. When decayed leaves of trees have been long expoſed to the atmoſphere, their coloured juices are ſometimes ſo perfectly extracted that their fibres appear white. Mr. Delaval has rendered aſhes intenſely white, by carefully calcining them, and afterwards grinding with a ſmall proportion of nitre, and expoſing them to ſuch a degree of heat as would cauſe the nitre to deflagrate with the remaining quantity of phlogiſton. Laſtly, the aſhes were digeſted with the marine acid, in order to diſſolve the ferruginous matter diffuſed through them, and repeatedly waſhing the remainder in water. Hence it would appear, that the earth which forms the ſubſtance of plants is white, and ſeparaVou. ble from that ſubſtance which gives to each it's peculiar colour; that whenever it is pure and unmixed, or diffuſed through colourleſs media, it ſhews it's native whiteneſs, and is the only vegetable matter endowed with a native whiteneſs. This white matter may be diſcovered by other means beſides burning; thus roſes may be whitened by expoſing them to burning ſulphur, and the colour may be again reſtored by the addition of an acid either mineral or vegetable. Thus it appears that the colouring matter of the flowers is not diſcharged or removed, but onlv diſſolved by the phlogiſton, and thereby divided into particles too minute to exhibit any colour. in this ſtate, together with the vegetable juice in which they are diffuſed, they form a colourleſs tranſparent covering, through which the white matter of the flowers is ſeen untinged. The colouring matter of plants conſiſts, according to Mr. Delaval, principally of inflammable matter, and their ſolubility in and union with phlogiſton. Colour is deſtroyed by the rays of the ſum. Thus dyed ſilk and other ſubſtances of that kind, when expoſed to the ſun's light, are deprived of thęir colour in every part on which the rays are allowed to act; whilſt thoſe preſerve their colours which are defended from the light. The colours, thus impaired, may be reſtored, if acids are employed while the injury is recent. In a word, all Mr. Delaval's experiments ſhew, that the colouring matter oſ plants does not exhibit any colour by reflection, but by tranſmiſſion only; that their ſolid earthy ſubſtance is a white matter, and that it is this part that has the property oſ reſlection; that the colours of vegetables are produced by the light reflected from this white, and tranſmitted from thence through the coloured coat or covering which is formed on it's ſurface by the colouring particles; that whenever the colouring matter is either diſcharged or divided by ſolution into particles too minute to exhibit any colour, the ſolid earthy ſubſtance is expoſed to view, and diſplays that whiteneſs which is it's diſtinguiſhing characteriſtic. Mr. Delaval having ſettled this point, next proceeded to examine the coloured parts of animal ſubſtances, and found them exactly ſimilar with regard to the manner in which the colour was produced, to the vegetable ſubſtances already treated of. The tinctures and infuſions of cochineal and kermes yield their colours when light is tranſmitted through them, but ſhew none by reflection: on diluting ſreſh ox-gall with water, and examining it in the above-mentioned phials, the part of it viewed by tranſinitted light was yellow; but the anterior ſurſace in the lower part of the phial was black, and reflected no colour. Fleſh derives it's colour entirely from the blood, and when deprived oſ it the ſibres and veſſels are perfectly white; as are likeuiſe rhe membranes, ſinews, and bones, when freed from their aqueous and volatile parts. The florid red colour of the floſh ariſes from the light which is reflected from the white fibrous ſubſtance, and tranſmitted back through the red tranſparent covering, formed by the blood on every part. In lice manner the red colour of the ſhells of lobſters aſter boiling, is no more than a mere ſuper ficial covering, ſpread over the white calcareo earth of which the ſhells are compoſed, and be removed from the ſurface by ſcraping or filing. Before the application of heat this ſuperficial covering is much denſer, inſomuch that in ſome parts of the ſhell it appears quite black, being too thick to admit the paſiage of the light to the ſhell and back again; but where this tranſparent blue colour of the unboiled lobſter is thinner, it conſtantly appears like a blue film. In like manner the colours of the eggs of certain birds are entirely ſuperficial, and may be ſcraped off, leaving the white calcareous carth expoſed to view. The caſe is the ſame with feathers, which owe their colours entirely to a very thin layer of ſome tranſparent matter upon a white ground; this was aſcertained by ſcraping off the ſuperficial colours from certain feathers, which were ſtrong enough to bear the operation, and which ſeparated the coloured layers from the white ground on which they have been naturally ſpread. The lateral fibres cannot have their colours ſeparated in this manner; but their texture, when viewed by a microſcope. ſeems to indicate that their colours are produced on them by no other means than thoſe already related. In a word, he found that in all the animal ſubjects he examined, the colours were produced by the tranſmiſſion oſ light from a white ground through a tranſparent coloured medium. The coloured ſubſtances of the mineral kingdom are very numerous, and belong principally to tuo claſſes, earths and metals; the former, when pure, are all white, and their colour ariſes from phlogiſtic or metallic mixtures. Calcareous earths, when indurated, conſtitute marble, and may be tinged with various colours by means of metallic ſolutions, all which are ſimilar in their nature to the dyes put upon ſilk, cotton, or linen, and invariably proceed from the ſame cauſe, the tranſmiſſion of light through a very thin and tranſparent medium. Filints are formed from ſiliceous earths, and owe their colour to the ſtate of fire within them; when ſufficiently heated, they are rendered white by the loſs of the inflammable matter which produced their colour; when impregnated with metals, they form agates, cornelians, jaſper, and coloured cryſtals. The coloured gems alſo receive their different hues from metals, and may be imitated by glaſſes tinged with ſuch inflammable or metallic matter as entered into the original ſubſtances, all exhibiting their various tints in the ſame manner, by the tranſmiſſion of light from a reflected white ground. Even the colours of metals, according to Mr. D. are produced in the ſame manner. Gold exhibits a white light tinged with yellow; this is grounded on an experiment of Sir I. Newton, who ſays, that gold in a white light appears of the ſame colour as in the day-light, but that on intercepting a due quantity of yellow-making rays, it will appear white like ſilver, which ſheus that it's yellowneſs ariſes from an exceſs of the intercepted rays, tinging that whiteneſs with their colour when they are let paſs. A ſolution of ſilver is pellucid and colourleſs; a ſolution of gold tranſmits yellow, but reflects no colour. This metal, when united to glaſs, yields no colour by reflection, but only by tranſmiſſion. All theſe circumſtances ſeem to indicate, that the yellow colour of gold ariſes from a yellow tranſparent matter, which is a conſtituent part oſ that metal, and that is equally mixed with the white particles of the gold, and tranſmits the light reflected by them; in like manner as when ſilver is gilt, or foils are made by covering white metals with tranſparent colours. But theſe factitious coverings are only ſuperficial, whereas the yellow matter of gold is diffuſed throughout the whole ſubſtance of the metal, and appears to envelope and cover each of the uhite particles; the yellow matter bears to the white about the ſame proportion that the yellow-making rays, which were intercepted, bear to all the other rays compriſcd in the white light oſ the ſun. . Sir Iſaac Newton has ſhewn, that when the ſpaces or interſtices of bodies are repleniſhed with media of different denſities, the bodies are opake; that thoſe ſuperficies of tranſparent bodies reflect the greateſt quantity of light, which intercede media, that differ moſt in their refractive denſities; and that the reflection of thin tranſparent ſubſtances are conſiderably ſtronger than thoſe made by the ſame ſubſtances of a greater thickneſs. Hence the minute portion of air, or of the rarer medium, which occupies the pores or interſtices of denſe bodies, is a minute white ſubſtance. This is manifeſt in the whiteneſs of froth, and of all pellucid colourleſs ſubſtances, ſuch as glaſs, cryſtal, or ſalts reduced to powder, or otherwiſe flawed; for in all theſe inſtances a white light is reflected from the air or rarer medium, which intercede the particles of the denſer ſubſtance, whoſe interſtices they occupy. Hence alſo we ſee why white opake ſubſtances are rendered pellucid by being reduced to uniform maſſes, whoſe component parts are every where nearly of the ſame denſity; for as all pellucid ſubſtances are rendered opake and white by the admixture of pellucid colourleſs media, of conſiderably different denſities, they are again deprived of their opacity, by extracting theſe media, which keep their particles at a diſtance from each other: thus froth or ſnow, when reſolved into water, loſe their whiteneſs, and aſſume their former pellucid appearance. In like manner the opake white earths are by proper fluxes reduced to pellucid colourleſs glaſs; becauſe all reflections are made at the ſurfaces of bodies differing in denſity from the ambient medium, and in the confines of equally denſe media there is no reflection. As the calces of metal are capable of reflecting their colours by the intervention oſ air, ſo, when mixed with oil in making paints, they always aſſume a darker colour, becauſe the exceſs of the denſity of oil over air forms a ſenſible difference, when comparatively conſidered with reſpect to the ſpecific gravity of the rarer metals. From this cauſe perceptibly leſs light is reflected from the moleculæ of oil than from thoſe of air, and conſequently the maſs appears darker. The caſe is however different with ſuch paints as are formed of the denſer metals, as vermillion, minium, &c. for though oil differs very conſiderably from air in it's ſpecific denſity, yet it alſo diſfers very much in this reſpect from the denſer metallic powders; and the moleculæ of oil, which divide their parucles, act upon the light ſo ſtrongly, that the reflection of light occaſioned by them cannot be diſtinguiſhed from thoſe which are cauſed by rarer media. Hence, when we mix vermillion or mimnium with oil, the colour is not ſenſibly altered. All the earths, which in their natural ſtate are of a pure white, conſtitute tranſparent colourleſs media when vitrified with proper fluxes, or when diſſolved in colourleſs menſtrua; and the ſaline maſſes, obtainable from their ſolutions, are tranſparent and colourleſs, while they retain the water which is neceſſary to their cryſtallization, and are not flawed or reduced to powder: but after their pores and interſtices are opened in ſuch a manner as to admit the air, they become white and opake by the admittance oſ that rare medium. The carthy particles, which form the ſolid parts of bodies, generally exceed each other in denſity; conſequently theſe particles, when contiguous to the rare media already mentioned, muſt reflect the rays of light with a force proportionate to their denſity. The reflective power of bodies does not depend merely upon their exceſs of denſity, but upon their difference oſ denſity with reſpect to the ſurE rounding media. Tranſparent colourleſs particles, whoſe denſity is greatly inferior to that of the media they come between, alſo powerfully reflect all ſorts oſ rays, and thereby become white; of this kind are the air, or other rare fluids, which occupy the interſtices of liquors, and in general of all denſer media, where ſuch rare particles are admitted. Hence ue may conclude, that white opake bodies are conſtituted by the union or contiguity of two or more tranſparent colourleſs media, differing conſiderably from cach other in their reflective powers. OF theſe ſubſtances we have examples in frothy emulſions, or other imperfect combinations oſ pellucid liquors, as milk, ſnow, calcined or pulverized ſalts, glaſs or eryſtal reduced to powder, white carths, paper, linen, and even thoſe metals which are called white by mineralogiſts: for thoſe metals do not appear white unleſs their ſurfaces be rough; as in that caſe only there are interſtices on their ſurſace ſufficient to admit the air, and thus make a reflection of a white and vivid light. The poliſhed ſurſaces of metallic mirrors reflect the incident rays equably and regularly according to their ſeveral angles oſ incidence, ſo that the reflected rays do not interfere with each other, but remain ſeparate and unmixed, and therefore diſtinctly exhibit their ſeveral colours. Hence it is evident, that uwhite ſurſaces cannot act upon the light as mirrors, becauſe all the rays which are reflected from them are blended in a diſorderly and promiſcuous manner. The foregoing phenomena give us ſome inſight into the nature and cauſe of opacity, as they clearly ſhew, that even the rareſt tranſparent colourleſs ſubſtances, when their ſurfaces are adjacent to media differing greatly ſrom them in OF PERMANENT COLOURS. 425 refractive power, may thereby acquire a perfect opacity, and may aſſume a hue and reſplendence ſimilar to that of white metals; that the rarer pellucid ſubſtances cannot by the ſight be diſtinguiſhed from the denſe opake metals; and this ſimilarity to the ſurface of metals not only occurs, when from the roughneſs of their ſurſaces they reſemble poliſhed metals in whiteneſs, but alſo when from their ſmoothneſs they reſemble the poliſhed ſurface of metals. Metals ſeem to conſiſt entirely of tranſparent matter, and to derive their apparent opacity and luſtre ſolely from the copious reflection of light from their ſurfaces. The analogy between metals and tranſparent media, as far as concerns their optical properties, will appear to you from the following conſiderations: 1. All metals diſſolved in their proper menſtrua are tranſparent. 2. By the union of two or more tranſparent media, ſubſtances are conſtituted which are ſimilar to metals in their opacity and luſtre, as plumbago and marcaſites. 3. The tranſparent ſubſtances of metals, as well as thoſe of minerals, by their union with inflammable matter, acquire the ſtrong reflective powers from which their luſtre and opacity ariſe. 4. The ſurfaces of pellucid media, ſuch as glaſs or water, aſſume a metallic appearance, when by their ſmoothneſs, difference of denſity with reſpect to the contiguous media, or any other, they are diſpoſed copiouſly to reflect the light. From theſe conſiderations it is evident, that opake ſubſtances are conſtituted by the union or contiguity of tranſparent colourleſs media, differing from one another in their reflective powers; and that when the common ſurface, which comes between ſuch media, is plane, equal, and ſmooth, Il  For further particulars, &c. &c. ſee Mr. Delaval's paper, it reflects the incident rays equally and regularly as a mirror; but when their ſurface is rough and unequal, or divided into minute particles, it reflects the incident rays irregularly and promiſcuouſly in different directions, and conſcquently appears white. When the interſtitial vacuities oſ bodies are ſo diſpoſed, that the light can preſerve it's rectiIlinear courſe through them, ſuch bodies appear luminous throughout, and are viſible in their internal ſubſtance; but when their conſtitution is ſuch as will not allow a free paſſage to the light, they are then viſible only by thoſe rays which are reflected from their ſurface, and their internal ſurface is cold and dark. From various conſiderations it appears, that the chemical properties of bodies have a conſiderable influence on their colour; for, doubtleſs, a force which acts powerſully in refracting the rays, muſt likewiſe influence their reflection; and it is hardly to be doubted but that the action of fire has a conſiderable ſhare in the production of colours; indeed it's ſhare in the operations of nature is ſo conſiderable, that it would be ſtrange if it ſhould be excluded from this more curious part. By comparing the refractive power of diſferent bodies, NEwTON found that inflammable ſubſtances poſſeſs it in a much greater degree than ſuch as are not inflammable. From his obſervations on this ſubject, he drew the wonderful concluſion, * that the diamond contained a large quantity of inflammable matter; that tvater was an intermediate ſubſtance between inflammable and uninflarnmable bodies, and that it ſupplied vegetables with the inflammable principle; which truths have been ſcen and demonſtrated only in the preſent dag. Bodies, Bodies, not tranſparent in their ordinary ſtate, may be rendered ſo either by relaxing their parts with heat, ſo that the light may paſs through them more eaſily, or by giving ſome new direction, together with an additional force, to the matter of light. Mr. Hawkſbee was very much ſurpriſed to find, that the ſealing-wax, and the pitch, within ſide a glaſs globe, became ſo tranſparent when the glaſũs was whirled about and rubbed with the hand, that the ſingers might be plainly ſeen on the other ſide through the coating. Oil is condenſed, when cold, into a ſort of globules impervious to the light; but when theſe globules are diſſolved, and opened by the action of fire, the oil not only becomes tranſparent, but appears as bright and ſhining as if the light were a natural part of it's ſubſtance. Many heterogenecous fluids grow dark and muddy with cold, but may ſoon be clarified agæin by rhe application of a moderate heat: red-port wine is ſometimes as foul as if brick-duſt was mixed with it, but will ſoon become bright and clear before the fire. The quality of tranſparency is given, by a wiſe ordination of Providence, to the fluid ſubſtance of water, which is ſo neceſſary to the life of all animals. Tranſparency renders glaſs moſt valuable; the value of gold is arbitrary, but the worth of glaſs is intrinſic; it's cleanlineſs and tranſparency recommend it to our uſe for the common purpoſes of life, and render viſible the moſt curious and ſubtil proceſſes of chemiſtry and philoſophy: in optics, it aſſiſts the aged, and gives to man an inſight into the wonders of creation. *  Jones's Phyſiological Diſquiſitions, p. 86. LECTURE XXI. OF PHOSPHORIC BODIES. Ttlr more the nature of light is inveſtigated, the more its relation to fire is diſcovered: many proofs of this you have already ſeen, many more uill occur in treating of phoſphoric bodies. As I have already ſhewn you, that fire is received and retained in bodies under the form of beat; I have now to ſhew you, that it is alſo retained in moſt ſubſtances under the form of light. By phoſphorus we in general mean thoſe ſubſtances which ſhine in the dark, without emitting heat. Phoſphorus is divided into ſeveral kinds, known by the names of the Bolognian phoſphorus, Mr. Canton's phoſphorus, Baldwin's phoſphorus, phoſphorus of urine, &c. &c. Beſides theſe, it has been found that the far greater part of terreſtrial bodies, upon being expoſed to the light, will appear luminous in the dark. This circumſtance has occaſioned ſome writers to divide the phoſphori into two claſſes, namely, ſuch as require to be expoſed to the light either of the ſun or ſome artificial ſire, before they become luminous; and ſuch as do not. Of the ſirſt kind are the Bolognian phoſphorus, Mr. Canton's phoſphorus, the phoſphorus from earths, &c.; of the latter kind are rotten wood, the ſkins oſ fiſhes, and the phoſphorus of urine. There is another claſs which becomes luminous by friction or vibration, as ſugar, and the ſolution oſ phoſphorus in ſpirits oſ uine. It has been ſaid, that philoſophy was never tunder more obligation to what is called chance, . than with reſpect to the diſcovery of the proc perty of imbibing of light, which was once cthought to be peculiar to a certain foſſil in the c neighbourhood of Bologna, but is now found in cmany other ſubſtances. Not only was a ſingle and ee leading fact, but a whole ſeries of facts the reſult ec of caſual obſervation. VYou are, I hope, better learned, and will enter your proteſt againſt this opinion; for you know that ſuch an opinion, if embraced, would deprive you oſ that ſatisfaction of mind which ariſes from a ſtrong and wellgrounded apprehenſion of a Divine Providence, and of your being conſtantly under a gracious protection that will guard you from every evil unproductive of greater advantage. It is indeed the main baſis of prudence and benevolence, as it enſures to you, that whatever you do well ſhall be attended with ſucceſs either at preſent or in futurity, and thus making the good of your fellow-creatures your own higheſt intereſt. As this opinion is thus dangerous, it can be no improper digreſſion to conſider it more attentively, and the more ſo as you will find another writer, to whom I ſhall have occaſion to refer you on the ſubject of phoſphorus, acknowledging that it was accident which lifted up the veil of nature to him, and attributing to the ſame blind cauſe the greateſt diſcoveries that have been made by others. In common diſcourſe we often indeed ſpeak of chance or fortune, as a power influencing the affairs of men, and having a principal ſhare in the direction of all events; as ſrequently baſfling the ſkill of the wiſe, the valour of the brave, and the ſtrength of the mighty; as turning the ſcale of victory, and determining the ſucceſs of all enterizes. But if you examine the idea of chance philoſophically, you will ſee that it is neither agent nor power, nor has any other exiſtence except in our own ignorance; for whatever is aſcribed to chance or fortunc, we ſhould ſee performed by other cauſes, if we had ſagacity to diſcern them. Chance is no cauſe of any thing, and ſerves only to expreſs our ignorance or uncertainty of the manner in which other cauſes operate; and in this ſenſe may be applied to the moſt cogent neceſſity or moſt deliberate deſign, where we know not the tendency of the one, nor the purpoſe aimed at by the other. What is eſteemed more caſual than weather? Yet nobody doubts of the air being moved, the vapours rarified, and the clouds condenſed, according to a certain impulſe received from mechanical cauſes; but becauſe no mathematician nor naturaliſt can inveſtigate thoſe cauſes ſo as to calculate what they will produce, we ſay, the farmer depends upon chance to bring his corn to maturity, and give him a favourable ſeaſon for his harveſt: yet if we were acquainted with the reſpective qualities, and exact proportions, of the cauſes from whence they proceed, we might calculate the variations oſ the weather, as well as we now do the changes and eclipſes of the moom So that an event, happening by chance, does not elude the operations of neceſſary cauſes, nor the acts of free agents, nor the proviſions oſ wiſdom; for the eſtects of all three will appear caſual when we cannot foreſee them. And when it is ſaid any thing is diſcovered by chance, or that fortune has had ſuch an influence upon our affairs, no more ſhould be underſtood by theſe expreſſions, than that we are ignorant oſ the cauſes acting uround us, and aſfecting the ſucceſs of our meaſures. Before accident takes place in thoſe events where our agency has no concern, there muſt have been natural cauſes in motion previous to any thing thus appearing to fall out accidentally among them; and it is only our ignorance of their concurrence and powers that gives chance a title to the production. Inventions, as we have on a former occaſion obſerved, may appear accidental, and ſo indeed they are with reſpect to us, for no man could have ſeen before hand the day when they would happen: but accidents ariſe from certain cauſes lying in train to produce them; when, and in what manner they ſhall come to paſs, muſt be referred to the DisposER of all events. It is frequent in philoſophical diſquiſitions, that the ſame inquiry produces very different diſcoveries. The attention paid to the immediate object of inveſtigation does not ſhut the eye of the obſerver againſt any thiug elſe thar may oſffer and the ſtate into which the ſubject of examination is put, in order to favour an expected event, oſten gives origin to another not leſs intereſting. Nature is nothing more than a conveyancer, whoſe channels we can in ſome meaſure trace, conducting activity from one ſubſtance to another; and chance grous like an excreſcence ſrom the ſituation, the circumſtances, or mutual concurrence of other cauſes. We have no experience of. any thing that can act otherwiſe than by tranſmitti ng an operation already begun. Volition is the only power, we know oſ, that is capable of beginning an action, or giving an impulſe it did not ſirſt receive. And whoever ſuppoſes a ſubſtance involuntarily ſelf-moving, or cauſing a new impulſe not in being before, builds upon a mere hypotheſis, without any fact, within the compaſs of his obſervation, to ſupport it; whereas, he who holds the contrary, does it becauſe experience of his own actions teaches him that he begins them himſelf, but that every thing acting involuntarily proceeds in another manner, only carrying on an operation begun by ſome other agent. Our vicews of providence muſt be partial and imperfect at beſt, wherefore much of the wiſdom of God will appear fooliſhneſs to man; and ſo does wiſdom always appear to ſuch as have not capacity to diſcern the juſtneſs of her meaſures, nor the ends for which they were purſued: but the more attentively you obſerve the Iuminous tracts, you will find them ſpreading further and further into the dark and exceptionable, and they will open before you an ample field for contemplation. For you will diſcover wheel within wheel, be able to trace the connection between many of them, diſcern their exact adjuſtment to each other, and perceive one adapted to anſwer various purpoſes, till at laſt you will be ready to believe with PuaTO,. that the whole world is a tiſſue of cauſes and effects, wherein nearly or remotely every thing has an influence upon the reſt. From hence we may conclude, not only that the young ravens are fed, and the lilies of the field arrayed in the glory ofſ Solomon by the DiviNe proviſion; but that of two ſparrou: which are ſold for a farthing, not one of them falleth to the ground; not a hair is loſt oſ the number upon our heads; not an atom ſtirs without the permiſſion of our HEAVENLY FATHER. Thus alſo Gob has been pleaſed by a long and extraordinary ſeries of events, continuing from the infancy oſ manckind, to nouriſh up a religion whereby purer ſentiments of himſelf, and a more extenſive charity, may be introduced among the vulgar; and has in his wiſdom raiſed up two trees, philoſophy and religion, from little ſeeds, and by ſſow and ſucceſſive gradations, whoſe influence when mutual continually tends to purify and meliorate mankind, but when ſet at too great a diſtance from each other, philoſophy becomes a vain babbler, and religion a ſuperſtitious enchantreſs. When properly mingled, their branches grow more vigorous, extend over a larger compaſs, and bear fruits of more general uſe, co-operating in that great deſign which has been carrying on from the earlieſt accounts of hiſtory by a remarkable courſe of providence, calculated for the beneſit of the human race in general, diſtinct ſrom that reſpecting particular perſons; intended to introduce a perfect rectitude of ſentiment both in the underſtanding, and inferior faculties of the mind. Too numerous are the inſtances to be noticed in theſe Lectures, and they would lead me too far from the general plan oſ the work; but one or two I cannot refrain from mentioning. You know how much the art of printing has contributed to the advancement of learning; but this was not the diſcovery of any philoſopher; the world had been long acquainted with the method of ſtamping inſeriptions upon medals and ſeals, which one would think might naturally have led rhe ingenious to contrive how to ſtamp the pages of a book, yet was it never thought of until the appointed time written in the book of heaven. The magnetic power of the load-ſtone Was known 2000 years ago, but remained an object of idle curioſity for ages, until the uſe of the needle was diſcovered; when it opened to us a new world, ave a readier acceſs to the remoteſt regions of the old, became a means of communicating knowledge, and familiarizing the nations of the carth. Gunpowder is ſaid to have been diſcovered by a monk trying experiments, without expectation of any ſuch reſult; but how greatly has it changed the polity of nations, and civiliæed the rugged manners of war, making it depend more upon ſcience than bodily ſtrength or perſonal courage, and uniting the civil with the military inteVoI. reſt And in remote conſequence of theſe inventions concurring with other incidents in the ama2ing ſeries, mankind is become better united and civiliæed; every nation has ſome intercourſe with others, and the more barbarous gradually take a tincture from the more humane. Let us now return to our phoſphoretic bodies, and firſt of the Bolognian phoſphorus. This uas diſcovered about the year 1630, by Vincenzo Caſcariolo, a ſhoe-maker of Bologna, who being in queſt of ſome chemical ſecret, among other things tried a calcination oſ ſome ſtones to be found in the neighbourhood of that city; and obſerved, that whenever this ſtone was taken into the dark, aſter having been expoſed to the light, it was plainly viſible by a light iſſuing from itſelf, continuing to appear ſo for ſome time, when it became inviſible: but upon returning it to the light, and then carrying it back to it's former ſituation, it exhibited the ſame appearance as before. Of bodies that give light in the dark there are ſeveral kinds; for Tome bodies throw out light spontaneouſly, and others upon being excited. Oſ the former kind ſome ſhine with a natural light, as glow-worms, dates, and a good many aquatics; others poſſeſs an adventitious light, as rotten woods, and the fleſh oſ ſore quadrupeds and birds. Theſe laſt are not naturully phoſphoric, but owe that property to ſome particular cauſe, which generally is putrifauction, and ſometimes an inſenſible change in the natural conſtitution of the parts. Thoſe bodies which become phoſphori upon being excited, or whoſe phoſphoretic property is at leaſt aſtiſted by excitation, may be diſtributed into different ſpecies according to the mode in which this property is brought into action. Theſe modes are attrition, agitation, heat, the free admiſſion o air, and leiug eapoſed to the external light. Bodies of every kind become phoſphori by attrition, provided they can bear that force ol friction which is ſufficient to produce the reluctant light that is hid in their ſubſtances; agitation agrees moſtly with liquid ſubſtances, as ſea-water. The emerald phoſphorus, and many gems, and amongſt theſe not a few diamonds, the lapis lazuli, and a great part of the mountain cryſtals, become phoſphoric by the application oſ beat. The free admiſſion of air not only produces light in uſing the phoſphorus of Konkel, but even a blaze of fire where friction is uſed. The phoſphorus of Homberg burns alſo furiouſly upon the approach of air. The laſt claſs, thoſe which act after being expoſed to the external light, are exceeding numerous; there ſeem but two ſubſtances which do not emit light when tried in this way, except water, in it's fluid ſtate, and metals. All bodies then whatever, except water and metals, have a power of imbibing light, and when placed in proper circumſtances, of emitting it again. This has been fully proved by the experiments of Mr. Beccari* of Bologna, and Mr. Wilſon, which have been made in the moſt ſatisfactory manner; indeed, ſo great has been their diligence, that there are but little hopes of adding any thing conſiderable to what they have done. A very weak light can only be viſible in great darkneſs. When the ſun is in it's meridian ſplendor, the moon and ſtars are totally obſcured; and yet when his ſuperior light is withdrawn, how plainly the moon and ſtars appear. Art wvill produce a degree of darkneſs far exceeding that of the night, and in ſuch darkneſs the weakeſt light will become viſible. Mr. Wilſon, therefore, to judge F f 2 of the illumination of bodies, when brought ſrom the light, made his experiments in a cloſet about 6 feet by 5 5 ſeet, the height about 9 feet. It was painted black, or covered with black baivze in every part, and had two doors which were s or 6 inches broader and longer than the ſpace to enter at. There were two curtains of black cloth over the hole where the hand was occaſionally put out, to expoſe bodies to the light; the outer one and inner one cach conſiſted of three doubles: all theſe were conſiderably larger than the hole, which was about 15 inches diameter, and opened to the ſouth. There were ſmall leaden weights faſtened to the bottom of each curtain, to preſerve them in their place swhen the hand was drawn into the room; two curved pipes were fitted to the cloſet, one communicating with the external air from the top of the room, the other from the bottom, for the ſake of breathing freely; by means of this cloſet any ſubſtances could be eaſily expoſcd to the light, or withdrawn from it. Numerous, and well worthy of your attention, are the experiments made by Wilſon in this cloſet; here almoſt every ſubſtance was found to be phoſphoretic: but calcined oyſter-ſhells, and white paper, poſſeſſed this power in an eminent degree. A piece oſ paper with a key being expoſed to the light, and again taken into the room, the key was then removed, and there remained as much of the paper dark as had been covered by the key, leaving a black ſpace exactly of the ſame figure as the key. A gentleman's hand, and part of a ruſfie, being dipped in the light, and then ſuddenly withdrawn, appeared luminous; and as every other part of the body was dark, it looked like a hand with a bit oſ ruffle ſuſpended in the air, ſo that the human body was found like others to be phoſphoric. Though fluid water is incapable of emitting light, yet when condenſed into the form of ice or ſnow, it aſſumes it, like other ſpecies of matter. This accounts for the light afforded by ſnow lying on the ground, even when the heavens are involved in utter darkneſs; being expoſed to the light all the day, it abſorbs a great deal of light, and is thereby enabled to give out a conſiderable quantity in the night. It is probable that all the bodies with which we are ſurrounded are ſufficiently endued with this phoſphoretic property, to enable animals to find their food in the night. To this it may be added, that the eyes of animals are better conſtructed for collecting light than the human eye: thus the ſubſtance ſpread out behind the retina of cats, owls, &c. is white, which reflects the moſt light; that behind the retina of gramenivorous animals is green; laſtly, that in the human eye is black; hence we require more light than animals to diſcover objects, but our viſion is more perfect. From the foregoing experiments it appears, that the world is ſtocked with a variety of occaſional phoſphori, from which light is inſenſibly evaporating where we ſhould never have looked for it, nor could poſſibly have detected it, but for the ſubtle mode of examination contrived by Beccari and Wilſon. OPF CANTONS PHOSPIORUS. To prepare this, take ſome oyſter-ſhells, and calcine them, by keeping them in a good coal fire for half an hour; let the pureſt part of the calx be pulverized and ſifted; to three parts of this powder add one of the flowers of ſulphur, and mix them well together; put the mixture into a crucible, and ram it tightly therein; then let it be placed in the middle of a fire, where it muſt be ept red-hot for an hour at leaſt, and then ſet to cool. Whaen it is cold, turn it out of the crucible, and cutting. or breaking it to pieces, ſcrape oſf upon trial the brighteſt parts, which, if good, will form a white powder, which you may preſerve by keeping it in a dry phial, with a ground ſtopple. The quantity of light which a little of this phoſphorus gives when firſt brought into a dark room, after it has been expoſed for a ſew ſeconds to the light of the day, is ſuſſicient to ſhew the hour by a watch, if the eyes have been previouſly ſhut for one or two minutes. By this phoſphorus you may repreſent celeſtial objects, ſuch as Saturn and his ring, the phaſes of the moon, &c. Iſ the figures oſ them made oſ wood, be wetted with the white of an egg, and then covered over with the phoſphorus, a flafh from the diſcharge of an electrical jar will illuminate the phoſphorus as well as the light of the day. lll v By a variety of experiments made with this phoſphorus it appears, that when it had emitted all the light it could in the common ſtate of the atmoſphere, it would emit more on the application of heat, but that the ſame degree of heat would only render it luminous for a certain time. Let one end of a bar of iron of about an inch ſquare, or a poker, be made red-hot, and laid horizontally in a darkened room, till, by cooling, it ceaſes to ſhine, or is barely viſible; then bring a little dry phoſphorus, which has been expoſed to the light, in a glaſs ball hermetically ſealed as near the hot iron as poſſible; and the phoſphorus, though inviſible before, will in a few ſeconds begin to thine, and will diſcharge it's light ſo very faſt, as to be entirely exhauſted thereof in leſs than a minute, and will ſhine no more by the ſame treatment till it has been again expoſed to the light. By this heat light received from a candle, or even from the moon, may be ſeen ſeveral days after; and phoſphorus that will afford no more light by the heat oſ boiling water, will ſhine again by. the heat of hot iron. By means of this heat, phoſphorus, which had been kept in darkneſs more than ſix months, was found to give a conſiderable degree of light. Mr. Wilſon, in his treatiſe on phoſphori, has made a variety of experiments on oyſter-ſhells calcined, and combined with nitrous acid, and without it; in all caſes they acquired the phoſphoric quality in a very high degree. He poured ſome aqua fortis, previouſly impregnated with copper, on a quantity of calcined oyſter-ſhells, ſo as to form them into a kind of paſte; this paſte was put into a crucible in a pretty hot fire, for about 40 minutes. Having taken out the maſs, and waited till it was cool, he preſented it to the external light; on bringing it back ſuddenly to the dark, he was ſurpriſcd with the appearance of a variet ꝗf colours like thoſe of the rainbow, but mact. more vivid. In conſequence of this appearance of the priſmatic colours, he repeated the experiment in various ways; combining the calcined oyſter-ſhells with different metals, and metallic ſolutions; with the different æcids, alkaline, and neutral ſalts; as well as with ſulphur, charcoal, and other inflammable ſubſtances; and by all of theſe he produced phoſphori which emitted variouſly coloured light. What is more remarkable, he found that oyſter-ſhells poſſeſſed the phoſphoretic quality, and would exhibit the priſmatic colours, in a ſurpriſing degree; and for this purpoſe nothing more was neceſſary than to put them in a good ſea-coal fire, and keep them there for ſome time. On ſcaling off the internal yellowiſh ſurface oſ each ſhell, they become excellent phoſphori, and exhibit the moſt beautiful and vivid colours. From Mr. Vilſon's experiments it appears, cthat fire or inflammable matter is eſſentially neceſſary towards producing priſmatic colours in phoſphoric ſubſtances; that there is no particular diſpoſition in the ſhell to exhibit any particular colour without the aid and aſſiſtance of the inflammable principle; and that the ſeveral parts of the ſhells exhibit ſuch colours as correſpond with the diſferent quantities of inflammable matter that they reſpectively contain. he inflammable principle appears to be ſo weakly combined, that it is eaſily diſengaged in conſequence of the action of light. Mr. Beccaria attempted to ſhew, that phoſphorus emitted the very ſame light that it received, and no other; and Dr. Prieſtley concluded from hence, that Zanotti was wrong in aſſerting, that phoſphori ſhine by their ouwn native light, aſter they have been kindled by ſorcign light. Zanotti appears, ſrom Mr. Wilſon's experiments, to have been conſiderably nearer the truth than Dr. P. apprehends; as he ſeems fully to have diſproved, by his numerous and accurate experiments, the opinion of Beccaria: . The experiments on phoſphori may perhaps be accounted for by conſidering, that as an heated iron, which is dark by day-light, appears red and ficry when carried into a dark room, having acquired but a part of that ignition which renders it luminous in the open day-light; ſo other bodies are capable oſ an incipient ignition, which is perceptible to the eye in artiſicial darkneſs; and it is this incipient ignition which brings them under the denomination of phoſphori. It is remarkable, that a degree of light is diſcernible in heated oil, when viewed in ſuch a dark medium; and that even cold water does not immediately extinguiſh the light imbibed by ſugar, gum, paper, &c. It has long been obſerved, that bodies, when beginning to putrify, emit light: this has been obſerved in meat, fiſh, and particularly in wood; in meat the ſofteſt parts are moſt luminous, it looks, when in this ſtate, as if ſprinkled over with gems, and upon touching it the luminous particles come off on your fingers: this however does not take place before a certain degree of putrifaction is induced, and ceaſcs aſter it has proceeded to a further degree. The luminous appearance of the ſea has long been known, and variouſly accounted for; it now ſeems to be generally attributed to a phoſphoretic appearance, ariſing from putrified materials, from fiſh and vegetables, which riſe to the ſurface of the water in the form of ſcum, and when agitated yield more light than when at reſt. There is a remarkable difference between the light of rotten wood, fiſhes, and that of phoſphorus of urine, even when it is not in an ignited ſtate; for this laſt does not ceaſe to be luminous even when included within an exhauſted receiver; the contrary of which happens to rotten wood and fiſhes. When kept in water, and placed in warm air, the phoſphorus of urine diſcharges ſuch large and bright flaſhes into the air above it, as are apt to ſurpriſe, and even to frighten thoſe who are unacquainted with it. Phoſphori, in the moſt extenſive meaning oſ the word, may be conſidered as bodies giving light; though more properly they are thoſe bodies a hich give a faint light, (vilible only in the dark) upon being rubbed, or aſter having been expoſed to the influence of light. Bodies ſhine in the dark in conſequence of an exceſs in their heat, and by the emiſſion of this light the heat is in ſome degree diſſipated; the ſubſtance of the body is thus changed in it's temperature, or in relation to heat. Bodies emit light alſo in conſequence of the reſolution of phlogiſtic marter, which had been contained in their ſubſtance or compoſition. But bodies alſo emit light without being ſenſibly affected in their temperature, or having the compoſition of their ſubſtance changed; this change may be eſfected by that active principle, which there are many reaſons for ſuppoſing to reſide on the ſurfaces of bodies. That particular ſpecies of bodies which have a peculiar power in their ſubſtance, by which incident light is reflected, or which have a power oſ abſorbing light, do not become phoſphoretic by having the powers of their ſurfaces excited by friction or incident light; but thoſe bodies which do not thus eminently abſorb or reflect light, and do not conduct electricity by their ſubſtance, are all in ſome degree phoſphoretic. That the light emitted from the phoſphoretic body is not the identical light to which the body has been expoſed, is proved by Mr. WILSON'S experiments. It would therefore appear, that the ſpecies of the emitted light ariſes only from the particular diſpoſition of the phoſphoretic body, and that by being thus properly diſpoſed, the ſame phoſphoretic bodies may, after being excited, emit any one particular ſpecies oſ coloured light, uccording to the manner in which it had been diſpoſed for this operation of producing light. From  Hutton's c Diſſertations on diſſerent Subjects of Natural From the experiments of Mr. Wilſon it appears, that it is not the exciting light which is emitted by the body ſhining in the dark; it is not the emitted light, or light of the ſame ſpecies, which has the greateſt power of exciting the phoſphorus to ſhine; but the light which has ſo great an energy in exciting the phoſphorus, is that ſpecies of light which is placed at the other extremity of the priſmatic order, or moſt oppoſite in the rule of its refrangibility from that of the emitted light. Thus, though the incident light be a cauſe of ſhining by exciting this quality in the phoſphoretic body, yet there is interpoſed another operation between the incidence and the emiſſion of light; and there is reaſonto ſuppoſe, that the particular ſpecies of light emitted from the phoſphoretic ſurface, depends on the electric fluid put in action by the incident light. Phoſpboretic and phlogiſlic bodies agree in containing a quantity of light, which is not in any perceived ſtate oſ heat. Although phlogiſtic and phoſphoretic bodies emit light upon the ſame principles, ſo far as this depends upon luminous matter contained in the bodies, which is ſet at liberty during the operation, by which it is rendered luminous; yet the manner in which the luminous matter is ſet at liberty, is very different, as is that alſo by which the luminous matter is retained. The expoſure to the atmoſphere is eſſential to the emiſſion of light from phlogiſtic bodies; but this is a circumſtance indifſerent or unneceſſary for the ſame operation in thoſe that are phoeſphoretic. In phoſphoretic bodies there is no diſference perceived aſter they have loſt their ſhining qualities; but this is not the caſe with phlogistic bodies, where the greateſt diſference is perceived on the abſtraction of their luminous matter. Phoſphoretic bodies furniſh us with a ſtrong additional proof of a principle already noticed, that light is matter which may continue for ſome time therein without exciting heat, and may be again ſeparated therefrom, and reſume it's character of light, as will appear by conſidering, 1ſt, That a phoſphoretic body is made luminous only by it's having been expoſed to light. adly, That it muſt be expoſed to light of a certain intenſity. 3dly, That provided the light falling upon the phoſphoretic body be ſufficiently intenſe, the moſt inſtantaneous expoſition ſuffices to ſaturate the body, ſo as to make it emit light viſible in the dark, equally as if it had been expoſed thereto for a longer time. It ſollows from hence, that light is matter, and that this ſolar ſubſtance may be retained in connection with a body, either upon it's ſurface, or connected with the gravitating matter of which the body conſiſts. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING SEVERAL OPERATIONS OF LIGHT IN RELATION TO BODIES. EXTRACTED FROMDR. HUTTONS  DISSERTATIONS ON DIFFERENT SUBJECTS OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. A body heated to an intenſe degree gives light, and light may be conſidered as matter moving in a ſtrait courſe directed from a body. It is a matter of general obſervation, conſfirmed by the experiments of Mr. Pictet, that the intenſity of heat in a hody is diminimſed in proportion to the lighv which is emitted ſrom the body. Ligbt emitted ſrom a hot bocly, and meeting in its courſe with a colder body, whoſe temperature may be accurately meaſured, may be either reſlected from the ſurſace oſ the oppoſing body, or extinguiſhed within the ſubſtance oſ the body. In this laſt caſe, if, in proportion to the light extinguiſhed in the body, the intenſity of heat be increaſed, it may be concluded, that fire is moved ſrom the body in light, but the intenſity of heat in a body is increaſed in proportion as light therein is extinguiſhed; it therefore is, as to matter, the ſame with fire. Heat and lightmay thus be conſidered as different modifications of thè ſame matter, or different actions, according to the ſeveral conditions in which that matter may be placed. lLight, which is incident in relation to a body, may be either reflected or tranſmitted, or both, and that in greateſt part. So far as light is reflected from the ſurface, or tranſmitted through the ſubſtance of a body, no heat ſhould be excited in conſequence of this modification of matter, which is not that oſ heat. This is conſiſtent with obſervation, for no heat is excited by reflected or tranſmitted light. By ſire the volume of bodies may be chanuged, by light the figure of bodies may be perceived;; but we know not whether fire and light have a proper bodily form; yet their exiſtence is manifeſted by their efſects; their actions, or laus of motion, are inferred or diſcerned by reaſon. Nothing is more diſtinct than light and fire in their proper ſenſible qualities, but theſe ſenſible qualities are conditional. On the one hand, fire is not felt, if the ſenſitive body preſerves it's natural or proper quantity of this ſubſtance; on the other hand, light is not perceived when falling on the ſcin or hands. As the conditions therefore neceſſary to the productions of thoſe ſeveral ſenſations are perfectly different, from thoſe diſfferent ſenſations we cannot conclude the matter employed in both is not the ſame. Bodies in relation to light are either luminous or illuminated. It is only by means of light that bodies become viſible, and this light muſt proceed from luminous bodies. As bodies, by having the intenſity of their heat ſufficiently increaſed, may become luminous or made to emit light; if the light of bodies is conſidered in this moſt general view, the claſs oſ luminous bodies will be thereby greatly augmented. In order to diſtinguiſh bodies that are properly luminous ſrom thoſe that only emit light in conſequence of beal, it will be proper to obſerve, that bodies emitting light. in this laſt manner, are not changed further than neceſſarily follows from the operation by which the proper degree oſ heat is produced; conſequently theſe bodies may return to their former ſtate, and, by being again heated, may have theſe operations repeated without limitation. But bodies properly luminous are limited in the quantity of light which they had retained, and which they are able to emit; after which thoſe bodies, exhauſted of their proper light, can only be luminous, in conſequence of fire acting as heat. Bodies that are eminently luminous muſt emit a quantity of light which had been contained in them; ſuch bodies muſt therefore contain a certain ſpecies oſ.matter in their ſubſtance, and this is called phlogistic inj ammabte or combuſtible matter. Novw this phlogiſton may in the chemical operations of matter be tranſſated ſrom the ſubſtance of one body to another; by which means bodies are made phlogiſtic, or capable of becoming eminently luminous, that were not ſo before. All bodies that are made to give light require a certain degree of heat, without which they will remain without giving light; ſo that all bodies that are to emit light, whether properly luminous or not, quence of heat, and in requiring a certain intenſity of heat as a neceſſary condition for the emiſſion of light: ſo far as this is the caſe, without heat bodies could not give light. Heated bodies emitting light, I have already obſerved, are thereby continually loſing heat, while colder bodies expoſed to light, are receiving heat; ſuch bodies therefore muſt have both their heat and light continually diminiſhed, by forming an equilibrium of heat with contiguous and ſurrounding bodies. It is otherwiſe with combuſtible bodies, for though theſe require a certain degree oſ heat as a condition of their emitting light; yet, as they alſo emit light upon other principles, ſo during their emiſſion of light, appearances take place very different ſrom thoſe of bodies that are only luminous by the intenſity of their heat. The ſolar ſubſtance appears to be variouſly modiſfied in relation to bodies, or differently diſpoſed with regard to ſpace and things; it is in one place fire, in another light, in a cthird ele: ctricity. In cach of theſe modifications there are properly perceived actions with different intentions, but not oppoſite natures. From various ſimilitudes, the ſeveral actions are concluded as belonging to the ſame kind of matter, ſrum the ſeparate purpoſes perceived in their various diſtinguiſhed or different modi fications. Bodies, in relation to light, may be diſtinguiſhed as of two different kinds; one kind giving light of their oun, or which had been part oſ their ſubſtance, immediately before the act of emiſſion; the other kind giving no light, except that with which they are illuminated from other bodies. Hence a general diſtinction of bodies, ſome being luminous, others dark or opake. Bodies, in relation to that light with which they are illuminated, are conſidered as of two kinds, either tranſparent or opake. Here is therefore another ſenſe, in which opacity may be taken; conſequently, before the various affections of light and bodies are examined, it will be proper to have a diſtinct notion of this quality, which may perhaps be conſidered in diſſerent ſenſes. Opacity, as a quality in bodies, may be conſidered either in a more limited or in a more extenſive ſenſe; in the one caſe it ſignifies want of tranſparency, in the other that no light comes from a body. The firſt is a quality, properly or only oppoſed to tranſparency; the laſt will ſigniſy darkneſs in a body, from whatever cauſe. Opacity being conſidered in the moſt extenſive ſenſe, then, as there are two different principles of lumination or modes by which light may proceed from a body, the quality of opacity may be examined in relation to each. Light properly belonging toa body, being emitted, is ſaid to come from a luminous body; therefore opacity in being applied to a body, may mean a body that emits no light of it's own. But as, in this caſe, the light to be emitted is ſuppoſed to be part of the body, or it's ſubſtance's opacity, in this particular ſenſe, will mean a quality only in relation to the ſubſtance of the body, and not to it's form, that is, to it's ſigure and volume. At the ſame time that this quality of opacity is thus ſound to be applicable only to the ſubſtance of a body, it muſt ulſo appear that this is only a negative quality, meaning that the body has no light of its own ro emit; or, if it does contain luminous matter, that there are not proper conditions for the emiſſion of that ſubſtance. With regard to the other mode of giving light, when a body may have opacity, or ſhall be eonſidered as opake, this rclates to incident or OPr PHOSPHORIC BODIES. 44 ſoreign liht. ight falling on a body may be either rcñected, in which caſe it illuminates the body, or it may be tranſimitted, in which caſe the body is tranſparent; in neither oſ thoſe two caſes, is opacit;, as æ quality, neceſſarily perceived in that body. But Iight entering the ſurface of the body, and being there retained without immediate emiſſion, here is to be perceived a quality in the body, which, at the ſame time that it is a poſitive quality, is alſo properly ſpeaking the quality of opacity, as being oppoſed to the tranſmiſſion of light, which is tranſparency. In this caſe of opacity, conſidered as a poſitive quality, no relation is to be perceived between form, figurè, or volume, the proper qualities of a body, and this quality or power in relation to light; therefore, opacity, in this moſt proper ſenſe, muſt be conſidered as a quality, which, whilſt it is poſitive, belongs only to the ſubſtance oſ the body, and may be properly examined without attending to the form or volume. Tranſparency conſiſting in the free tranſmiſſion of light through a body, the abſolute ſolidity of the particles oſf matter in a body muſt be inconſiſtent with that quality; for, as tranſpurent bodies tranſmit light equally in all directions, it is only by ſuppoſing the reſiſting parts of the body to be to the unreſiſting parts, in a ratio leſs than any aſſignable proportion, that this quality of perfect tranſparency can be thought conſiſtent with the extenſion, and direct motion of the rays of light. At the ſame time, in judging from the hardneſs and incompreſſibility, if theſe are ſuppoſed to depend upon the ſolidity of the ſubſtance, there muſt be a great proportion of matter in the body. But as there is no reaſon to doubt of the perfect tranſparency of bodies, conſidered ſolely as a tranſmitting quality, there is perhaps every reaſon that can be drawn from the concurring teſtimo ny of natural appearances, to juſtify the ſuppoſition, that, in a tranſparent body, the abſolute volume of matter, neceſſarily oppoſing the paſſage oſ light, and the abſolute volume of the parts of light that muſt neceſſarily be oppoſed in paſſing through that body, are, to the reſt of the ſpace, in a ratio leſs than any aſſignable proportion. This being the caſe, it muſt be evident, that thoſe two qualities of tranſparency in relation to the rays of light, and reſiſting power in relation to external ſorce, are things plainly inconſiſtent, if we are to ſuppoſe ſolid matter to be the principal of bodies. On the other hand, opacity, conſidered as a quality by which tranſmiſſion through the fubſtance of a body is refuſed, will appear not to ariſe from the neceſſary reſiſtance of the matter in a body to the rays of light from it's extenſion, nor ſrom the mechanical diſpoſition of that matter in any conceivable manner; for, 1ſt, According to any way oſ forming a judgment, with regard to the quantity of matter in a body, that quantity does not appear to have any influence in producing opacity. adly, The ſmalleſt examinable quantity of matter, ſuſficiently opake, appears to be as effectual to interrupt the paſſage or light, as the greateſt quantity of matter not ſufficiently opake; at the ſame time this quality of opacity in a body, does not appear to be altered by any mechanical change or diſpoſition oſ the parts: thereſore, though the tranſparency oſ bodies were explicable from the ſuppoſition oſ infinite ſtrength, and infinite rarity, in the ſolid matter and conſtruction of bodies, this theory or fuppoſition would ſtill be inconſiſtemt uith the oppoſite quality, that is, opacity in bodies; parent ſubſtance tranſmits light perfectly in every poſſible direction, the ſmalleſt quantity of a rare opake ſubſtance ſuffices to arreſl light or retain it, without reſlection or tranſmiſſion. It is thus impoſſible, upon mechanical principles, to reconcile thoſe two different qualities of bodies; therefore, independent of the inſurmountable difficulty of conſtructing the ſolid matter of bodies for thoſo two oppoſite purpoſes, here is a demonſtration, from the ſimple quantities of the matter in bodies, by which it is proved, that opacity does not ariſe from any mechanical conſtruction of ſolid. matter; and therefore, that bodies are not compoſed of ſolid matter and ſpace, ſeparate and contiguous. Light appears to paſs through the ſubſtance of a homogeneous tranſparent body with equal facility, as it is conceived to move in the rareſt or voideſt ſpace; conſequently, the matter of ſuch a body makes no ſenſible reſiſtance to light. Therefore it may be inquired, what kind of matter is this, that has not the power of reſiſting light? Or, what particular powers in bodies are aſſociated with this deficiency of power in relation to light? The hardeſt and ſofteſt bodies arc equally tranſparent; light does not appear to be tranſmitted through a diamond with leſs facility than through the air: therefore, that power in bodies, which reſiſts the motion of the parts in relation to each other with ſo great intenſity, does not reſiſt the motion oſ light, or this particular modification of matter. Fluid and concreted bodies, water and cryſtal, are equally tranſparent; conſequently, that power by which the parts of bodies are directed to particular ſituations, does not interpoſe any reſiſtance to the paſſage of light. Heavy bodies may be trunſparent, as well as lighter bodies; glaſs of lead, cryſtal, ice, air, are all tranſparent bodies; thereſore, as the matter oſ light appears to have no gravitating power, the power oſ gravitation in bodies makes no oppoſition or reſiſtance to the motion of light. The particular attractive powers of ſubſtances appear to be no more diſpoſed to reſiſt the matter of light, than the general powers of bodies which have been conſidered; thus air, water, acid, alkali, and neutrals, are all tranſparent. Therefore, from the examination of bodies with regard to tranſparency, this general concluſion may be formed, that the attractive gravitating matter in bodies appears to have no power calculated to oppoſe and reſiſt light. But in opake bodies, there are powers by which light is efſectually reſiſted. In the tranſparent bodies already examined, every ſpecies of ſubſtance has been conſidered, except one; and this, which is phlogiſtic ſubſtance, not yet examined with regard to light, has heen iound capable of oppoſing, reſiſting, and changing every general attractive or gravitating power in bodies: thereſore, on ſinding rhis ſubſtance properly adupted, whesher in a mediate or immediate manner, ijor the oppoſition, reiiſtance, and change of light, the qualities of tranſparency and opacity in bodies will be properly explained; at the ſame time that this natural appearance of tranſparent and opake bodies being in perſect conſiſtency with the theory oſ matter already inveſtigated, will add that conſirmation which in phy ſical ſubjccts is required. Tranſparcnt bodies have been conſidered as not affecting the light, uhich thus traverſes their ſubſtance with perſeet ſacility; but it is a neceſſary condition for this purp oſe, that the ſubſtance be home gencous, and cqual in it's denſity, or, that cthe body be ſulhiciently uniform in rclation to the volume occupied by it's ſeveral parts; for a greater degree of denſity in one part of a body, otherwiſe perfectly homogeneous, diſpoſes the body to affect the light in that part where the change of denſity takes place. Hence the ſurſaces of contiguous bodies, which are tranſparent, but of difſerent denſities, are obferved to affect light in different ways, and according to a certain rule. Thus reflection, reſraction, and extinction, are affections of light by tranſparent bodies, the rule or laws of which, to the honour of philoſophy, have been ſo well inveſtigated. From the particular laws obſerved in thoſe caſes, there is reaſon to conclude, that there are certain powers ſituated in a place correſponding to che ſurfaces of bodies, by which light, that otherwiſe would be unafiected, may be both deflected in it's courſe, and arreſted in it's motion. But on conſidering elcctricity, there are found certain powers ſituated preciſely in this place; and, as the matter of electricity, which is properly ſituated in this place, and that proper to phlogiſtic ſubſtance by which alone light has appeared to be afſfceted, are of the ſame kind, being different modifications of the ſame ſpecies of matter, there is reaſon to conclude, that the powers by which light is affected at the ſurfaces of tranſparent bodies, are of the ſame nature with thoſe by which, in opake bodies, light is alſo found to be affected . OF THE INFLFCTIONS OF THE RAYS OF LIGHT WHICH PASS IN THE VICINITIES OF BOoDIES. THE experiments on this ſubject by Si I. Newton were the laſt that he made, and are acknowledged by himſelf to be incomplete; thoſe who have followed him in this delicate and important department of natural philoſophy, have done little more than added ſome inſulated facts to thoſe obſerved by him. The law ſollowed by the powers that inflect the light, and the limits of it's action, are yet unknown. One, houever, of the general reſults ſrom the experiments is, Ihat bodies act upon light at ſmall diſtances by attraction and repulſion. If a beam oſ the ſun's light be admitted into a darkened chamber, through a hole oſ the bread th of a forty-ſecondth part of an inch or thereabouts, the ſhadows of hairs, threads, pins, ſtraus, &c. appear conſiderably larger than they uould be iĩ the light paſſed by them in ſtrait lines. For example, a hair whoſe breadth was the a soth part of an inch being held in this light, at about 12 ſeet from the hole, caſt a ſhadow, which at the diſtance of 4 inches from the hair was the 6oth part of an inch broad, that is, above four times the breadth õſ the hair. And the effect is the ſame, though the denſity of the medium contiguous to the ſmall body be altered, the ſhadow at like diſtances being equal, whether it was in the open air, or incloſed between two plates of wet glaſs, care being taken that the incidence and emergence oſ the ray was perpendicular to the glaſſes. The ſcratches on the ſurſface, or veins in the glaſs, caſt ſhadows broader than they ought to be, from the uſual reli fraction which might ariſe from any action of the ambient medium. Let x, ſig. a, pl. 7, be a hair placed in the beam;: ADG, BEH, KNO, LOR, rays ol light paſſing by the ſides of it, are bent at x, and falling upon the paper G Q, the two rays TI, VS, paſs by the hair without being deflected: but all the rays between TI and VS are bent in paſſing by the hair, and turned aſide from the ſhadow I S. The light paſſing neareſt the hair, as at D and N, is moſt bent paſſing to G and Q; thoſe that are farther off, as at E and O, are leſs bent; and ſo on to TI and VS: conſequently the action upon the rays of light is ſtrongeſt at the leaſt diſtances, and grows weaker and weaker as the diſtance of the ray paſſing by is increaſed. The ſhadows of all bodies in this lighr are bordered with three parallel fringes of coloured light; the neareſt to the ſhadow is the brighteſt, and the furtheſt very ſaint; the order of the colours, reckoning from the innermoſt, are violet, blue, green, yellow, red. On looking at the ſun through a feather or black ribbon, held cloſe to the eye, ſeveral fringes of colours will appear. Let a beam of the ſun's light be admitted through a hole 3 of an inch broad; place a ſheet of paſteboard, blacked on both ſides, at about 3 feet from the hole; in the middle of the paſteboard let there be a hole 3 of an inch ſquare for the light to paſs through; behind the paſteboard faſten the blade of a ſharp knife, ſo as to ſtop part oſ the light going through the hole. The knife and paſteboard are to be parallel, and both to be at right angles to the beam. Let a part of the light, which paſſes by the knife edge, fall upon a white paper at about 3 feet diſtance, and there will be two ſtreams of light ſhooring out both ways into the ſhadow, ſomewhat like the tails of comets. Theſe ſtreams being very fuint, it is neceſſary, in order to ſee theim diſtinctly, to let the direct rays paſs through a hole in the paper on a piece of black cloth; the li ght of the ſtreams is then perceptible on the paper to the diſtance of 6 or 8 inches ſrom the ſun's direct light each wayv, and in all the progreſs ſrom that direct light decreaſes gradually till it becomes inſenſible. Placing another kniſe with it's edge very near and parallel to the firſt, if they be diſtant the 400th part oſ an inch, the ſtrcam of light paſſing between them uill be divided, parting in the middle, leaving a dark ſhadow in the interval: as the edges approach, the ſnradow grous broader, and the ſtream narrower at the inner end: ſo that the light that is leaſt bent goes to the inner end of the ſtream, and paſſes at the greateſt diſtance from the edges. This diſtance is about the Ssooth part of an inch; when the ſhadow begins firſt, the light which paſſes at leſs diſtances is more bent, and goes to that ſide which is fartheſt from the direct light: a little before the ſhadous appear, the fringes commence on both ſides, and as the knives approach they grow more diſtinet and larger, till upon contact of the knives, the whole light vaniſhes, leaving it's place to the ſhadow. Admit a beam of the ſun's light through a ſmall hole, made by a pin, in a thin plate of lead, and place a priſm at the hole to refract the light on the oppoſite wall. The ſhadows of all bodies held in the coloured light are borderd with fringes oſ the colour of that light in which they are held; in the red, they are red; in the blue, blue, &c. but the fringes in the red light, are the largeſt; thoſe im the violet, leaſt; the green, between both; and this at all diſtances from the ſmall body. So that the rays which made the fringes in tance than thoſe which made the violet fringes: conſequently the hair in cauſing theſe fringes acted ſimilarly upon the red rays, which were at a greuter diſtance, as upon the violet at leſs diſtances; and by theſe actions diſpoſed the red light into larger fringes, and the violet into ſmaller, &c. without changing the colour of the rays. When a hair is held in a white beam of ſolar light, and caſts a ſhadow which is bordered by three fringes of coloured light, theſe colours ariſe from the various inflections by which the rays are ſeparated, and being ſeparated produce each its own colour. In the laſt experiment, where the rays are ſeparated before the light comes to the hair, the red or leaſt refrangible rays were inflected at greater diſtances, and the violet or moſt refrangible rays at a leſs diſtance, making three violet fringes at a leſs diſtance, whilſt the red makes three red fringes at a greater diſtance; the mean rays making 3 fringes of their proper colours at mean diſtances from the ſhadow of the hair. In the white light theſe various colours are ſeparated by the various inflection of the rays, and their fringes appear all together; the innermoſt being contiguous, make one broad fringe, compoſed of all the colours in due order, the violet being next the ſhadow, and the red fartheſt ofſf, and the reſt in their places. In like manner the middlemoſt fringes conſtitute one broad fringe, of all their colours, and the outmoſt fringe compoſe another broad fringe like the reſt; and theſe are the three fringes of coloured light with which the ſhadows of all bodies are bordered. From theſe and ſome other experiments oſ the ſame tendency, it may be inferred that the rays of light are influenced by ſome power that turns them out of their direct road; and as this power bends the rays not into the ſhadow of the podies from whence the influence is ſuppoſed te proceed, but from the ſhadow, it has been conſidered as a repulſive power which is ſtrongeſt al the leaſt diſtance. OF THE ACTION OF LIGHT OνM BODIES, AND THAT THE COLOUR OrF PLANTS, &C. DEPENDS ON LIGHT. You vill oſten find, that philoſophical knowledge makes quicker advances by reaſoning upon known facts, than by diſcovering new ones, which, though they enlarge and add to the ſubjects we ought to reaſon upon, are apt by their novelty to ſurpriſe us into haſty undigeſted theories. We have a ſtrange propenſity to be looking either behind or before us for variety, inſtead of cultivating the fruitful ſpot we ſtand upon. Iam led to make this and ſome ofſ the ſollowing obſervations from the ſubject beſore us, which has been too much neglected by modern philoſophers: we have treatiſes on light, as ſeparated and divided by the priſm; on heat, as meaſured by the thermometer; but none on that ocean of the ſolar fluid, in which all bodies are as it were immerſed; * none upon the various influences of the ſun, upon which the life and activity of all things in this natural world depend. They ſeem to have forgotten, that the proceſſes continually carrying on in nature, on every ſide, are as much the inſtruments of knowledge, as the more refined apparatus of the experimental philoſopher. Senſe and experience acquaint us with the courſe and analogy of appearances or natural effects; thought, reaſon, intellect, introduce us into the knowledge of their cauſes. To avoid the conjectural method of ſome former philoſophers, thoſe of the preſent day are continually labouring to accumulate unconnected facts; thinking every new form, or every new appearance, pearance, an important diſcovery; ſeldom endeavouring to trace out their connection with ſuperior and inferior cauſes, on which all their real powers and activities depend. If we ſtop at experiments, without proceeding any further, we ſhall never arrive at any cauſes; and if we rely wholly upon experiment, we ſhall come at none but falſe ones: becauſe the principal agent in nature is fo ſubtil as to elude both ſenſe and experiment, ſo that they can never diſcover it, though when we have been told of it they will ſerve to demonſtrate it's obſervations. The ancients paid little attention to experimental philoſophy, but devoted themſelves, with a truly philoſophical ardour, to the obſervation of the phenomena of nature; and thar proceſs was conſonant to ſound reaſon, for experiment is only properly called in to ſill up the chaſm which ſimple obſervation neceſſarily lenves. The department of experimental philoſophy is the unfolding of thoſe phenomena, w hoſe cauſes cannot be diſcovered by unaſſiſted reaſon, and whoſe connection it cannot trace: the advancement therefore oĩ this branch of ſcience depends on the number and accuracy of our obſervations νith reſpect to the relations which natural objects have to each other. It has been well obſerved by Dr. G. Fordyce, that vall our knowledge of every thing whatever muſt ariſe ſrom experiment only, that is, from the evidence our ſenſes give us of what appearances nature, in other words, the creatures oſ the Almighty, give impreſſions of. Yet rſome ofſ rheſe impreſſions are received from the ideas that ariſe from things not at all under our dominion, or ſrom circumſtances more immediately governed by 1thé Almighty. Thus, for example, a man ſees a tree loſe it's leaves in autumn, ſees them renewed in LECTURES ONNATURAL PHILOSOPHY. in ſpring, and a new growth takes place during the ſummer; he ſees the bloſſoms open in the ſpring; theſe he ſinds followed by the fruit, which, if it falls into the ecarth, is capable of producing new trees of the ſame ſpecies; or he ſees it gathered by animals, and aſſording nouriſhment. In this mode of acquiring knowledge man is totally paſſive; he did not contrive to make leaves fall in the autumn, and be reproduced in ſpring; he did not contrive to make new wood grow in the ſummer, nor that bloſſoms ſhould open, that the ſeeds ſhould be impregnated with the embryo; he did not contrive that the ſruit ſhould grow, nor did he teach animals that it was fit for their nouriſhment. What knowledge is acquired by attention to thefe natural circumſtances, has been called obſervation. It is indeed a contemplation of the benevolence of the ALMIGHTY, giving nouriſhment and happineſs to all the inhabitants oſ the earth. s The minds of mankind, not ſatisfied with their powers of obſervation of what paſſes in this earth, but being even forced for their own ſubſiſtence to exert themſelves far beyond the brute creation, are neceſſarily led to make a farther inquiry, and that with a labour beyond the contemplation oſ the benevolence oſ the Almighty. To thoſe creatures who have only this earth to exiſt in, food and raiment are afforded, without labour or attention, during the ſhort period of their lives. It is not ſufficient for the farmer to look where grain grous naturally; it is neceſſary to try, with an infinite variety of applications that may be made to the ground, to produce crops ſuperior to thoſe which would ariſe in it without any cultivation. It is neceſſary for the hunter not only to obſerve the natural hiſtory of wild beaſts, but alſo to try by what means he can engage them to fall into his toils. It is necoſſary for the ſiſierman, beſides admiring the multiplicity of fiſh, to be able to contrive either to entangle or ſurpriſe them into his nets. In many other caſes it is neceſſary for mankind not only to contemplate thofe things which happen naturally, but he is likewiſe conſtrained to form projects oſ his own, and to contrive means of putting both mind and matter in circumſtances foreign to what would naturally ariſe in them, and contemplate the eſſects; and this we call experiment.  Thus obſervation and experiment are the ſfources of all the know ledge of mankind. e Man ſeems to have a degrec of pride planted in his nature, which prompts him conſtantly to conſider himſelf as being ſar ſuperior to what he actually is, which inſtinct is the ſureſt proof that be is to be very ſuperior indeed. But as all the virtues of man are ballanced by oppoſite imperfections, the pride of experiment huas often thrown ſcience into confuſion, inſtead of advancing it's progreſs. An experiment to prove a thing otherwiſe demonſtrable is totally ſuperfluous, and not only ſuperfluous but fallacious. Another circumſtance which injures philoſophical purſuits, and retards their progreſs, is the neglect of old principles as ſoon as new ones are aſſumed, as if their efficiency ceaſed immediately, like that of old miniſters of ſtate upon the introducing of new ones. If the placita of their predeceſſors were not loſt ſight oſ or neglected, they would ſooner attain the end of their inquiries, than by being a Every vanity of man ſhhews his degraded ſtate, and from what dignity he has fallen. Did not man find and feel that he is a poor priſoner in the valley and ſhadow of death, he would no more have any of thoſe inſtincts alluded to above, nor any reaching deſire after all the beauties oſ fallen nature, shan the ox  have his paſture incloſed with beautiſul walls and painted being ſo intent on their own diſcoveries as to neglect, as rubbiſh, all thoſe circumſtances that were formerly of ſuch mornent. That light and fire are ſubſtantially the ſame, or different modifications of the ſame fluid, is evident from their commutability, or their reciprocal generation of each other. For as fire neceſſarily generates light, and thus diſcovers itſelf ro the ſcnſe of ſecing as infallibly as to the feeling; ſo light conveyed to a focus, conſtitutes pure fire. Light and heat are propagated by the ſame laws; they act in ſtrait lines;: they diffuſe themſelves from a center outward; their powers decay according to their diſtances from the centers from whhich they are irradiated; they are ſubject to the ſame laus of reflection. Notwithſtanding that the phenomena of nature, which tend to aſcertain beyond doubt that the matter oſ common light or fire pervades all nature and ſills all things, are exceeding numerous and obvioòus to every eye; yet the whole has been overlooked as an accidental ſiltration, implying no conſequences, nor interſering with the various properties of bodies, notuithſtanding it's acceſs to their innermoſt penctralia. Our globe itſelf ſeems to be nothing more than an accumulation of terreſtrial materials, introduced into the boundleſs ocean of the ſolar fluid, for a theatre on which iĩt may diſplay it's inexhauſtible power and energy; the maſs being ſo diſpoſed and arranged by it's author as to become a ſeminal bed oſ nterials, to be pierced and animated by light, and from which muterials light can extricate all the forms, and generate all the powers in nature. Without this principle all that we call body vould remain for ever an inactive, paſſive, incoherent culx. Water by it's tranſparency evidences to your ſenſes, that light has free acceſs into and through it's ſubſtance. By the volatilization of water it is equally evident, that light or fire has not only acceſs to it's interſtices, but penetrates and occupies it's ſimilar elementary particles, in the conformation of which particles the character of water conſiſts. Theſe particles could not be rendered volatile but by internal dilatation, nor could they be dilated but by ſomething that reached their internal parts; they have their individuality as ſeparable elementary particles, as well as their ſimilarity of character preſerved by the ætherial principle poſſeſſing them. If the natural life of all things depends on the activity communicated to them by the ſun, is it not evident that it is the ſame influence which muſt generate and maintain that life in all it's ſpecific characters, in every being according to it's kind? . When the ſun is ſaid to rule over the day, and to have been made for this end, what elſe can be underſtood but that he acts as a vicegerent; and is inveſted with a mechanical power of giving light, life, and motion, to ſuch objects as are ordained to receive his impreſſions? All nature revives, and puts on a new ſace, when he approaches us in ſpring; and ſinks into a temporary death, at his departure from us in the winter. That he acts in a mechanical manner, is alſo certain, becauſe a chain of matter is continued all the way from the agent to the object. His power conſiſts not in any immaterial quality, becauſe it obſerves the ſame geometrical law with the diffuſion of it's light; and his efficacy upon the production of the earth is greateſt, when the greateſt angle is formed between the horizon and his rays. A good teleſcope will ſhew you what changes are produced in the refraction of the atmoſphere, and what a tumult ariſes in the air from the agitation of the ſunbeams in the heat of noon-day: the heaven ſeems tranſparent and undiſturbed to the naked eye while a ſtorm is raiſed in the air by the impulſe oſ light, not unlike what is raiſed in the waters of the ſca by the impetuoſity of the wind. It increaſes with the altitude of the ſun: and when the evening comes on, it ſubſides almoſt into a calm. Light is now no longer conſidered by chemiſts, t merely as an ideal ſubſtance; they perceive it's influence in many of their operations, and as it modiſics many of their reſults, they ſfind it neceſſary to attend to it's action. The effects of light are more evident in the phenomena of nature, than in the experiments performed in the laboratory. Light is abſolutely neceſſary to plants; vegetation does not ſuccecd without it: deprived of this principle, they become pale, languiſi and die. It appears from inconteſtible facts, that the root of the moſt variegated flower, though excluded from the external air under a glaſs veſſel, will, provided it be daily expoſcd to the light oſ the ſun, arrive at it's utmoſt perfection both w ith re ſpect to fragrance and colour; but if the proceſs be reverſed, and the air admitted without the light, the flouer may perhaps grow to its natural iiæe, but we ſhall in uain look for that beauti ful variety of vivid colouring, and that exquiſite perſume which nature beſtous on every individual of the ſpecies, when permitted to imbibe and enjoy the ſolar beam. The ſame ſact is ſurther evinced by a variety of experiments by ſeveral French academicians, in which the light was admitted to one part of a lant, and excluded from the others. The invariable eſſect of this was, that the part expoſed to the - Chaptal's Rlements of Chemiſtry. 1 Joncs s Fſſay on the Firiſt Principles of Philoſophy. the ſun was of a lively green, while that which was ſhaded continued of a diſagrecable pale colour; nay, ſo powerſul are the effects of the ſun's light on vegetables, that when deprived of it, their taſte and oſher native properties undergo ſuch a change, that ſome, in their nature poiſonous, become a ſaſe and wholeſome ſood. Without the influence of light, vegetables would exhibit one lifeleſs colour, and are deprived of their beautiſul ſhades by the interception of the luminary fluid. On theſe principles, celery, endive, and other plants, are bleached. All theſe circumſtances evidently ſhew, that there is ſomething in light abſolutely neceſſary to vegetable life. Hence all plants ſhew a remarkable ſenſibility to the light; they expand their leaves, and open their flou ers to the ſun, and cloſe them the moment he diſappears. Many accurate experiments prove, that it is not the heat but the light of the ſun, that cauſes them to turn to him. A plant in a room, where there is a fire, turns it's flowers to the light which comes from the colder ſide. Many experiments ſhew, that the change of poſition in the Icaves oſ plants, at different periods of the day and night, is entirely owing to the agency of light. The upper ſurface ofſ leaves, which are ſuppoſed to be their organ of reſpiration, ſeems to require light as well as air; for plants, which grow in windous on the inſide of houſes, are as it were ſolicitous to turn the upper ſides of their leaves to the light. This agent is ſubtil, active, and penetrating; by the ſmallneſs of it's conſtituent particles, it is capable of entering all bodies, and from it's activity of producing great effects and conſiderable changes therein. Vegetables are not only indebted to the light for their colours, but likewiſe ſor their ſmell, taſte, combuſtibility, maturity, and the reſinous principle, which equally depend upon this fluid. The aromatic ſubſtances, reſins, and volatile oil, are the inheritance of ſouthern climates, where the light is more pure, conſtant, and intenſe. All theſe circumſtances, it is hoped, will concur to make you attentive to the nature and office of the ſun. The ſun is the united power of fire and light. and by theſe powers calls forth from the earth a beautiful variety of vegetable life, cloathing them with it's own brightneſs and beauty, and rendering them holders and diſplayers of all it's colours, powers, and virtues. The influence of light is evident on other animated beings: worms and grubs, which live in the earth or in wood, are of a whitiſh colour. Birds, and flying inſects of the night, are likewiſe diſtinguiſhable from thoſe of the day by the want of brilliancy in colouring; and the difference is ſtill more marked between thoſe of the north and of the ſouth. Avery aſtoniſhing property of light upon the vegetable kingdom is, that when vegetables are expoſed to open day-light, or to the ſun's rays, they emit vital air. f . It has been proved, that the ſun does not act in the production of this phenomenon as a body vwhich heats. The emiſſion of the air is determined by the light; pure air is therefore ſeparated by the action of light, and the operation is ſtronger as the light is more vivid. It would ſeem that Iight favours the work of digeſtion in the plant, and that the vital air which is one of the principles of almoſt all the nutritive juices, more eſpecially of water, is emitted when it finds no ſubſtanc e  Chaptal's Elements of Chemiſtry: ſubſtance to combine with it in the vegetable. Hence plants, whoſe vegetation is the moſt vigorous, aſford the greateſt quantity of air. By this continual emiſſion of vital air, the Author of nature inceſſantly repairs the loſs thereof occaſioned by reſpiration, combuſtion, and the alteration of bodies, including every kind of fermentation and putrifaction: in this manner the equilibrium is always maintained between the conſtituent parts of the atmoſphere. Scheele and Berthollet have ſhewn, that the abſence or preſence of light has an aſtoniſhing effect upon the reſult of chemical experiments. Light diſengages vital air from ſeveral fluids, ſuch as. the nitrous acid; dephlogiſticated marine acid, &c.; it reduces the calces of gold, ſilver, &c.; it changes, according to Mr. Berthollet, the nature of oxigenated muriates. M. Chaptal has ſhewn, that it determines the phenomena of vegetation, exhibited by ſaline ſnutions. Theſe circumſtances ſhew the importance of light, and how much it's agency in nature ſhould be attended to by every philoſopher: heat often accompanies light, but ſome of the phenomena, we have mentioned, cannot be attributed to mere heat; heat may indeed modify them where it exiſts, but is not the producing cauſe. . here are many inſtances where the action of the ſolar light contributes to the deſtruction oſ colour, and inſtead of extricating vital air, fixes it, and produces a Kind of combuſtion. In like manner phoſphorus, while in the dark, is not affected by the oxigenated muriatic acid, even aſſiſted by heat; but when the action of light concurs, it is converted into phoſphoric acid. Anvariety oſ ſacts ſhew, that vital air is capa; H h2 Bile of whitening or rendering paler the colouring matter with which it unites, perhaps by having produced on them the effects oſ a ſlight combuſtion. * Vital air has conſiderable influence on the colouring particles of vegetables; theſe are formed chiefly in the leaves, flowers, and inner bark of trees, and by degrees they undergo a ſlight combuſtion: hence moſt trees contain fawn-coloured particles. The manner in which the ſun acts upon colours may be ſeen by examining the appearances preſented by a ſolution of the green part of vegetables in alcohol. If ſuch a ſolution, which is oſ a fine green colour, be expoſed to the light of the ſun, it very ſoon acquires an olive hue, and loſes it's colour in a ſew minutes. Iſ the light be weak, the effect is ſower; and in perſect darkneſs the colour remains without alteration, or requires a great length of time. M. Berthollet inverted over mercury a bottle half full of this green ſolution; when the colour uas diſcharged, the mercury uas found to have riſen in the bottle, and conſequently vital air had been abſorbed, the air having united with the colouring matter; on evaporating this liquor, it's colour was ſmmediately rendercd darker, and became brown: the reſiduum was Ulack, and in the ſtate of charcoal. The light ſeemed therefore to have produced its effect.by favouring the abſorption ofſ vital air, and the combuſtion oſ the colouring matter; the marks of combuſtion are not evident at firſt, but by the aſſiſtance of heat the liquor becomes brown, and leaves a black reſiduum. If the veſſel containing the liquor holds no vital air, the light has no eſſect on the colouring matter. The * See what was ſaid on incipient ignition, under the articlo The effects of light on the colour of wood have been long obſerved; it preſerves it's natural appearance while kept in the dark, but when expoſed to the light it becomes yellow, brown, or oſ other ſhades. M. Senebier found, that the changes were proportioned to the brightneſs of the light, that ſeveral folds of ribbon were required to defend the wood completely, that a ĩingle leaf of black paper was ſufficient; but that when paper of any other colour was ſubſtituted, the change was not prevented; a ſingle covering of white paper was inſufficient, but two intercepted the action of the light. Theſe obſervations are important, as they prove that light can paſs through coverings that appear to be opake, and exerts it's energy at ſome diſtance within. M. Berthollet put tincture of turnſole in contact with vital air over mercury; one parcel he placed in the dark, the other was expoſed to the light of the ſun; the former continued unchanged for a conſiderable length of time, and the vital air was not diminiſhed; the other loſt much of it's colour, became red, and the air was in a great meaſure abſorbed, and a ſmall quantity of fixed air was produced, which no doubt had occaſioned the change oſ colour from blue to red. This obſervation may lead us to form an idea of ſome of æhe changes produced by a particular diſpoſition of the component parts of vegetable ſubſtances, when by the combination of vital air they undergo the effects of a ſlight combuſtion, vhich may generate an acid; as in the leaves in autumn, which grow red before they become yellow, and in the ſtreaks obſervable in flowers, whoſe vegetation is growing languid. uehe ſucceſs of the preſent age in arts, experiments, and new ſyſtems, is very apt to elate the minds of men, and make them overlook the anH eients. But notwithſtanding the encouragement and purſe of princes, and the united endeavours of great ſocieties in theſe later ages, have extended experimental and mechanical knowledge; yet it muſt be owned, the ancients werc not ignorant of many things, which are now more generally, though not firſt known. Their notions oſ fire and light, the reſult of obſervation, were for the moſt part juſt. They conſidered the principles of motion and vegetation as delibations from the inviſible fire of the univerſe, which, though preſent to all things, is not nevertheleſs one way received by all; but variouſly imbibed, attracted, and ſecreted by che fine capillaries and exquiſite ſtrainers n the bodies of plants and animals, and is thereby mixed and detained in their juices. They ſuppoſed the elaborate ſpirit, whereon the character, diſtinguiſhing virtue, and properties of the plant depend, to be oſ a luminous and volatile nature. It was from an etherial and luminous fluid that they derived the many and various qualities, virtues, odours, flavours, and colours, which diſtinguiſh natural productions; conceiving that the original particles productive of theſe properties were diverſely ſeparated, and attracted by the various ſubjects of che animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms, which thereby become claſſed into kinds; and indeed with thoſe diſtinct properties which continued till their ſeveral forms, or ſpeci fic proportions of fire, returned into the common maſs. They conſidered all the appearances of fire, even in earthly things, as ſomething of a heavenly, exalting, and glorious nature; as that which diſperſes deatb, darkneſs, and groſſneſs, and raiſes up the power and glory oſ every life; that it was ſeldom ſeen in this world but as a deſtroyer, a conſumer, and reſiner of groſſneſs; as a hindler of life and . 2 light light out of death and darkneſs; that ſo much as any thing had of light, ſo much it had of heaven; and that this was rendered evident in the power of the ſun, and manifeſted in the ſoftneſs of ſounds, the beauty of colours, the fragrance of ſmells, and the richneſs of taſte. Before I finiſh this Lecture, I muſt make a further obſervation on colour, on account of the miſchievous inferences deduced from the Newtonian cheory, by Voltaire and ſome other infidel writers. Theſe men ſuppoſe that light and colour, as apprehended by the imagination, are only ideas in che mind, and not qualities that have any exiſtence in matter. Strange as this may ſeem, it has been univerſally received, and conſidered by ſome as one of the nobleſt diſcoveries of modern philoſophy. By colours all men, who have not been tutored in this ſchool, underſtand not a ſenſation of the mind, which can have no exiſtence when it is not perceived, but a quality and modification of bodies, which continues the ſame whether it be ſeen or not. The ſcarlet roſe, which is before me, is ſtill a ſcarlet roſe when I ſhut my eyes, and was ſo at midnight when no eye ſaw it; the colour remains when the appearance ceaſes; it remains the ſame when the appearance changes; for when I view this ſcarlet roſe, through a pair of green ſpectacles, the appearance is changed; but I do not conceive the colour in the roſe to be changed. To a perſon in a jaundice it has ſtill another appearance, but he is eaſily convinced the change is in his eye, not in the colour of the object. We can by a variety of optical experiments change the appearance of figure and magnitude in a body, as well as that of colour; we can make one body appear to be ten. But no man believes the multiplying glaſs really produces ten guineas out of one; in like manner, no one belicves the coloured glaſs changes the real colour of the object ſcen through it, when it alters the appearance of that colour. Colour is not a ſenſation, but a ſecondary quality of bodies, whereby in fair day-light they exhibit a certain and well underſtood appearance; and there is a real permanent quality in bodies, to uhich the common uſe of this word agrees. Had modern philoſophers given, as they ought to have done, the name of colour to the cauſe inſtead of to the eſſect, they would not have ſet philoſophy ft parently in contradiction with common ſenſe; for they muſt then have affirmed with the vulgar, that colour is a property of bodies, and that there is nothing like it in the mind. Their language as well as their ſentiments would have been perfectly agreeable to the common apprehenſions of mankind, and true philoſophy would have joined hands with common ſenſe.Inſtead of ſeeking objections againſt revelation from every appearance in nature, the true philoſopher finds abundant ground therein to confirm and eſtabliſh his faith; he learns from the adaptation of objects to the ſenſcs, the abſurdity of thoſe infidels, and their want of knowledge in the human underſtanding, who require for conviction a ſtronger evidence in the objects oſ faith, than is to be oſfered ſor thoſc oſ the other faculties. In examining the objects of various parts of intellect, do not we find men at a Ioſs to prove in what manner they exiſt? Do they ſuſpend their aſſent to the rcality of a roſe, till they can explain why the lcaves are oſ a different colour, odour, and ſhape, from thoſe of the lily? or why they are oſ any particular ſmell, ſhape, or colour? Is it an objection to the evidence of the eye-ſight, that the ſounds oſ a violin are imperceptible by that organ? * Reid's Inquiry into the Human Mind. or becauſe neither form nor ſound are the objects of reaſon, that neither of them exiſts? Would not a geometrician treat with contempt the perſon who ſhould deny the reality oſ the properties of a ſquare, becauſe they are irreconcileable with thoſe of a circle? All that is required in theſe inſtances, is a conſentaneous diſpoſition in the objects and the faculties to impart and receive thoſe ideas, and the mind reſts convinced of their realities. The utility and pleaſure which are derived from the ſenſes are the great proofs which ſatisſy men of the reality of the objects of them. Hæ whoſe eye-ſight prevents him from running over a precipice, whoſe ears are delighted with the pouers of harmony, can entertain no doubt of the exiſtence of thoſe objects; and whoever ſhould attempt to prove that the firſt was not ſeen, and the latter not heard, would inevitably render himſelf an object of ridicule. And is not a man equally ridiculous, who denies that the objects of ſaòh are real, though he is every day acquiring happineſs, and obtaining ſecurity, as the reſult of them? The adaptution of the doctrines of faith to the nature of man, and the ſuperior utility ariſing from it, are che ſtrongeſt proofs of it's divine original; their principles correſpond to the faculties and wants of human nature, and it's precepts to their welſare. To deny theſe proofſs would be to reject all moral evidence, and even the exiſtence of a Deitiy. When we perceive all parts of matter fitted to the uſes of creation; when we ſee that rain and ſun are neceſſary to vegetation, and that the order and courſe thereof is ſuch, that they never fail the purpoſes oſ their intentions; is it poſſible to deny the providence of a ſupreme intelligence? In like munner, when it is diſcovered that all parts of our religion coincide as perſectly with the nature or mun and his welſare, is it not equally abſurd to reject it as proceeding from the ſame ſource? Whoever conſults the ſenſations of his own mind, will feel the evidence of the hereditary evil of man as evinc ing, as the dry leaſ is expreſſive of it's having been in a more perfect ſtate. What are the preſentiments and preſages of the ſoul, but the remains of a more perfect intelligence? And what is that abatement of pleaſure which enjoyment taſtes, compared with the felicity imagination preconceives, but an indication of the defect in human ſaculties? Like the evaneſcent colours of a declining tulip, they pronounce their former excellence. The ſenſe of degradation, and of it's being irremediable by the powers of man, creates thoſe deſires in the human breaſt which are conſtantly yearning after a berter ſtate, and the belieſ oſ the neceſſity of a more perfect being to reſtore it. Here the idea of infinite mercy, inſeparable from the Divine Being, leads the ſoul to fee that it's redemption can only be accompliſhed by the Supreme Being. Thus you may perceive, that the truths of chriſtianity are obvious and plain; they ſpeak the language of nature; and all nature is expreſſive oſ the ſenſe and ſound thereof; and points out the neceſſity of a REDEEMER, whoſe exiſtence and influence is as extenſive as nature itſelf. To ſhew that nothing under him,  in whom we live, and move, and have our being, could redeem us, our REDEEMER, when he had ſhrouded his BEAUTY with the veil of mortality, gave hourly and oculur proofſs of his GODHEAD by the extent oſ his power in and over all things. c In HIS WORUD was LIFE, in nis BREATH was healing, and ſic kneſs grew ſound at nIs ſight; the lame ſprang up at unIs bidding, by niν the deaſ ear was opened, and the dumb tongue looſcd to utterance; nr poured ms of his light upon the new ope lind-born gazer; death fled before he tombs nis woRrD was life and e tempeſt heard nis voice and was embled with reverence; and the a carpet beneath the foot oſ her c a Yet Even all his mighty works to me import But as they greatly ſerve to authorize The mightier words he utteredas the e Bears witneſs to the light, or the charm'd To tuneful undulation; ſo the heart Strikes uniſon to his great law of LOVVE, 4756 LECTUKES ON NaTUuRAL PnrLosornv. LECTURE XXII. Oλx TFELESCOPES. Notur laſt Lectures, I endeavoured to render plain and eaſy to your comprehenſion, ſome of the great diſcoveries of Sir IsaAc NeuTONν, who ſurpaſſed himſclf in his Thesry of Light and Colours, as much as he had exceeded others in his Principia. BHoth theſe works give teſtimony to the depth and clearneſs oſ his intcllect, his ſcill in conducting experiments, and the comprehenſive force of his mind. But ſar as he has penetrated into the receſſes of light, the ſame Lectures muſt have convinced you, that many appearances are yet unexplained, many diſficulties are yet unexplored; and that the inſtances are numerous u hich prove, that the inward conſtitution, the real cauſes, and connections of the moſt obvious phenomena, are beyond your apprehenſion. Vanity in any man is weakneſs; but a vain philoſopher is the moſt abſurd among men, for every new diſcovery demonſtrates his imbecility; cvery new eſlect that is brought to light, ſerves only to convince him of innumerable orhers which rumain concealed, and of which he had no previous knowledge: the works of Gob are too vaſt, and of too large an extent for our capacities. There is ſuch an expanſe of power, wiſdom, and goodneſs, in the formation of the world, as is too mighty for our graſp, too much ſor us to comprehend. Power, wiſdom, and goodneſs, are manifeſt to us in all thoſe works of Gob which are within our view: but there are likewiſe infinite ſtores of each poured forth throughout the immenſity oſ the creation, no part of v hich can be underſtood without taking i in it's reſcrence and reſpect to the whole, and this is beyond the reach oſf human faculties. To cohom batb ihe root of wiſdom been revealed è or who hatlh ùknotwn her wiſe counſels ? There is one iſe and greatly t0 be feared, the LOꝶRD ſitting upon his ihrone. HE created her, aend ſat her, and mimbered ber, and poured ber out upon all his worts. Theſe reflections naturally occur to the mind when it contemplates the diſcovery of the teleſcope, and the advantage ariſing from it; for who, reaſoning a priori, could have imagined that the refraction of light in glaſs, the ſame power by which a ſtrait rod appears crooked in water, whereby viſion is variouſly diſtorted, and whereby we are liable to innumerable deceptions, ſhould ever be ſo circumſtanced as to extend the boundaries of ſight, and enable us to diſtinguiſh objects too remote for natural viſion? Yet ſuch are the powers ſcience has beſtowed, that by glaſſes, properly adapted to each other, we as ĩit were contract ſpace, and bring within our Ken the grander ohjects of the univerſe; and are enabled to extend our inquiries beyond the boundaries of the ſolar ſyſtem. If Pliny, in regard to Hippurebuę, could extravagantly ſay, e Auſus rem Deo im prol am aonnumerare poſteris ſtella,,  what would that pomous hiſtorian of nature have ſaid, had it been foretold him, that in the latter days a man would ariſe, who ſhould enable poſterity to enumerate more new ſtars, than Hipparchus had counted of the old; who ſhould aſſign four moons to Jupiter, and in our moon point out higher mountains chan any here below; who ſhould in the ſun, the foungatn of light, diſcover dark ſpots as broad as two quarters oſ the earth, and by Phec ſpots aſcertain his his motion round his axis; who, by the varyi phaſes oſ the planets, ſhould compoſe the orteſt and plaineſt demonſtration of the ſolar ſyſtem? Yet theſe were but part of the annunciations to the world of a ſingle perſon, of Galileo, of unperiſhing memory! To him, his cotemporary and rival in fame, Lord Bacon, aſcribed the invention of perſpicilla, (for ſo at firſt were called the teleſcopes,) and in a figurative ſtrain thus expreſſed himſelf concerning them: sc With theſe (perſpicilla), which Galileo, by a memorable effort oſ genius, hath diſcovered, we are enabled, as with ſome ſmall ſailing veſſels, to open and keep up a nearer commerce with the ſtars. Nor did the celeſtial commerce ceaſe with the acquiſitions of Galileo, but has been extending ever ſince the time that that groat man firſt turned his glaſſes to the heavens. In our own day the energy and philoſophic enthuſiaſm of Herſchell has enlarged the boundaries of aſtronomical knowledge, added a new planet to our ſyſtem; the heavens ſave, as it were, increaſed under his eye; and 44000 ſtars, ſeen in the ſpace of a few degrees, ſeem to indicate that ſeventy-five millions may be diſcovered in the expanſe expoſed to human inveſtigation. What is neceſſary for the conduct of our animal life, the bountiful AuTHOR Of nature has made manifeſt to all men. But there are many other choice ſecrets of nature, the diſcovery of which enlarges the power and exalts the ſtate of man; theſe are left to be diſcovered by the uſe of our rational powers; they are hid, not that they may be always concealed from human knowledge, but that we may be excited to ſearch for them: this is the proper buſineſs oſ a philoſopher; and it is the glory of a man und a reward for his labour, to diſcover that which has been thus concealed. Thus in the ſubject before us, our eyes are incapable of diſcerning objects, either very ſmall or very diſtant; but the CREATOR has given properties and qualities to matter by which it may procure us theſe advantages: nE elevated the underſtanding from one degree of knowledge to another, tili it was able to diſcover theſe aſſiſtances for our ſight. It is to the ſame power, therefore, who created the objects of our admiration, that we are ultimately to refer the means of their diſcovery; and whatever we find out by their means, becomes a freſh ſource of praiſe to HIM from whom we receive every bleſſing. The very great importance of the teleſcope has made the firſt diſcovery of it an intereſting object of inquiry; but no reſearch has been able to aſcertain either the exact period when it was firſt éound out, or who was the inventor. It has been by ſome, and with no ſmall degree of probability, attributed to the famous friar, Roger Bacon, before the year 1300, and it is worth your while to be acquainted with ſome of his expreſſions. Lenſes and specula may be ſo ſignred, that one object may be multiplied into many; that thoſe which are ſituated at a great diſtance may be made to appear very near; that ihoſe which are ſmall may be made to ap pear very large, and tboſe which are obſcure very plain ; and we can mate ſtars to appear wherever we uwill. Theſe and other expreſſions and tracts of this author ſeem to indicate, that he was well acquainted with the nature, conſtruction, and uſe of teleſcopes, and all the glaſſes which compoſe them ; but ſume modern critics in the ſcience not only deny him the invention, but even the knowledge of any ſuch conſtruction, as we at preſent call teleſcopes, shough he mentions the refractions oſ the ſun's rays through a glaſs ſphere; but as he does not ſav, totidem verbis, that he ever viewed an object through ſuch a ſphere, Dr. Smith ſuppoſes that he had no experience of it's magnifying power. In the ſame manner, had Seneca deſcribed his glaſs ball. ſilled with water, only as a burning-glaſs, it might have tempted us to argue that he knew nothing of it's uſe in magnifying letters; but he has precluded conjecture by declaring the contrary. He might know more than is ſpoken of; the mathematicians and workers in glaſs of thoſe days might know more than he did. From the foregoing and other expreſſions of our countryman, ſriar Bacon, there is little doubt but that he was acquainted both with ſpectacles and teleſcopes.  Friar Bacon, ſays the Rev. Mr. William Jones,  may be conſidered as the firſt of Engliſh philoſophers; his profound ſkill in mechanics, optics, aſtronomy, and chemiſtry, would make an honourable figure in the preſent age; but he is entitled to further praiſe, as he made all his ſtudies ſubſervient to theology, and directed all his writings, as much as could be, to the glory of God. He had the higheſt regard for the ſacred ſcriptures, and was perſuaded they contain the principles of all true ſcience. He had a liberal way of conſidering things, not adhering ſervilely to his ſubject, but uſing all the ſciences of which he was maſter to illuſtrate each other. It is very unjuſt to ſpeak of philoſophy, as if it was unknown till the laſt century, when in reality a ſcholar furniſhed with no materials, but ſuch as might be extracted from Friar Bacon's works, would yet be a very conſiderable perſon, and entitled to no ſmall degree . oſ 4  Jones's Phyſiological Diſ ſquſuions Introduction. Duten's Inquiry into the Origin of Modern Diſcoveries. oſ ſame among the literati of the preſent age. Hc uwould excel as a mathematician, experimentaliĩt, phyſician, chemiſt, artiſt, aſtronomer, philoſopher, and divine. Men of learning have been divided in their opinions concerning the optical konuledge oſ the ancients; ſome are ſo ſualloued up by an admiration of the diſcoveries that have been made in the laſt and preſent century, that they have been tempted to paſs ſentence upon the ancients, before they knew uhtt the ancients have ſaid for themſelves. It is ſaid, indeed, that if dioptric glaſſes were anciently in uſe, it is ſtrange we ſind them ſo ſeldom mentioned in their writings. This may be hard to account for, but it is unſafe to draw a poſitive concluſion from negative evidence. The accounts we have of many ancient works of art are ſo much broken by the injuries of time, the ambiguities of language, the ſucceeding intereſts of different ſects of philoſophers, the barbariſm of ſucceeding ages, that it is now very diſficult to eſtabliſh the ſuppoſition hy ſatisfactory prooſs If we argue by inſ rence, the caſe uill be a little altered. The cabinets of the curious contain ſome very ancient gems, of admirable workmanſhip, the figures on which are ſo ſinall, that they appear beauti ſul through a magnifying glaſs, but altogether confuſed and lIndiſtinct to the naked eye: and if they cannot be viewed, how could they be wrought without the aſſiſtance of glaſſes? Iow could it DBe Lnown that the moon has a ſorm like that of the earth; that it has pluins, hills, and vallies in it? When it is ſcen through a teleſcope, the diſpoſition of light and ſhide render this evdent, agrecable to the comion rules ofſ porſpectiv e; but no Tuch thing appears to the naked eve. IHow could it be known that the via lacea anſcs ſrom the combined raps of an infinite number of ſmall 2 But above all, how came it to be aſſerted, the ſphere of the fixed ſtars is ſo immenſe, that irele of tbe earth's annual orb hears no greater ortion to it than the center of anv ſphere bears to 2hole ſurface è This diſcovery docs ſo far ed the comprehenſion of the human mind, it uas not allerted aſter the revival oſ the Py reou ſcheme, till Dr. Bra lley, by a courſe oſ noſt accurate obſervations thar ever were made a ted ſcopic apparatus, reduced the anuual lax of the ſixed ſtars to an inſcniible quantity. If icaving the ancients we return to the mos, ue find the time of the invention, and the oſ the inventor, are ſlill involved in obſcurity. me it is aſeribed to James Mectius, a Dutch; byothers to John Lepperiheim, of Middlebut Lorellus, in a eircumitantial and appay uvell nuthenticated account, attributes the ition o Zacharias ſanſen, of Middleburg. t the vear 190. 3anſen uas a diligent inr into nature, and being enonged in theſe purand trring whut advantanes conld be derived cembining lenſes, fortunately diſcovered the ope. . The uonderſul eſſects cſ this inſtrument ſoon 1d Galileo, uho, ſetting himſclf to work, ired an inſtrument to clſect the ſame purAs this ſubject is ſo curious and intereſtI think you ulll be picaicd uith his oun actoſ it, as publiſed n a bLook intitled, NunSſiderius, in March, 1610. Nedr ten months dIays he, it was reported that a certain hman had made a perſpective, through which diſtant objcets apprarcd as diſtinet us if they near; ſeveral ellects oſ this wonderful inſtruuere reported, uhich ſome believed, and s denied: but having had it conſirmed to me ca9 aſter by a letter irom the noble John Badoverie, at Paris, I applied myſclf to conſider the rationale thereof, and by what means I might contrive a ſimilar inſtrument, which I afterwards attained to by the doctrine of refraction; and firſt I prepared a leaden tube, to whoſe extremity I fitted two ſpectacle-glaſſes, both of them plain on one ſide; on the other one of them was ſpherically convex, and the other concave. I ſaw objects appear pretty large, and pretty near; they appeared three times ncarer, and nine times larger in ſurface than to the naked eye: and ſoon aſter I made another, which repreſented objects above 60 times larger; and at laſt, having ſpared no labour or expence, I made an inſtrument ſo execellent as to ſhew things almoſt a thouſand times larger, and above thirty times nearer than to the naked eye.? If the true inventor is he who makes diſcovery by reaſoning a priori, and deſcending from eſtabliſhed principles to their conſequences, Galileo may be conſidered as the real inventor of the teleſcope; but the uſe he made of it does him more honour than the invention: the inſtrument was at firſt, in Holland, a mere article of curioſity, not an inſtrument of ſcience; himſelf being amply rewarded by prevailing over the diſficulty of the ſubject, and with new diſcoveries which enlarged the territories of reaſon. OF REFRACTING TELESCOPES. By a ſeleſcope is ufually ſignified an inſtrument that renders the view of diſtant objects more perfect; or, in more general terms, which repreſents diſtant objects under a larger angle than that under which they appear to the naked eye. When the diſtance of the object is very conſiderable, the eſfects mav all be referred to the ſame diſtance, and a teleſcope may be ſaid to enlarge an object juſt as many times as the angle under which it repreſents it is greater than that under which it appears to the naked eye. Thus the moon appears to the naked eye under an angle of about half a degree; conſequently a teleſcope magnifies 100 times, if it repreſents the moon under an angle ofſ sO degrees; if it magniſied 200 times, it would exhibit the moon under an angle of roo degrees; and the moon would appear to occupy more than half the viſible heavens, of which the whole extent is only 180 degrees. It is a common expreſſion, that teleſcopes bring objects nearer; but this expreſſion is equivocal, admitting of two diſfferent ſigniſications. The one is, that, looking through a teleſcope, we eſtimate an object to be as much nearer to us as it is magnified by the teleſcope. But I have already ſhewn you, that we can form no certain eſtimate of the diſtance of an object but by the judgment, and that our judgment deceives us when the objects are beyond a certain diſtance; and in the preſent inſtance, loſing all thoſe ſubjects of compariſon on which it is founded, will deceive us more. The other meaning applied to the exproſſion is, that the teleſcope repreſents the objects as large as they would appear if we were ſo much nearer to them: this latter meaning is more conformable to the truth than the preceding, for you know that the nearer we approach to an object the larger is the viſual angle. When you look, however, at a well known object, as a man, at a great diſtance, and he is ſeen under a larger angle, we are led to think him ſo much nearer, when he would really appear under a greater angle; but with reſpect to objects leſs known, as the ſun and moon, there can be no eſtimation of diſtance. One principal end of teleſcopes is to enlarge or multiply the angle under which objects appear to the naked eye, and they are eſtimated according to this effect, and are ſaid to magnify five, ten, or any other number of times, according to the nature and conſtruction of the teleſcope. This diagram, ſig. 13, pl. 6, repreſents a ſmall Galilean teleſcope: the convex lens P, P, is directed toward the object, the concave glaſs Q, Q, is applied to the eye; on this account the one neareſt to the eye is called the eye-glaſs, that towards the objectglaſs is called the object-glaſs. Theſe glaſſes are ſituated upon the ſame axis AB, which paſſes through the center of the glaſſes, and to which they are perpendicular. The focal diſtance, or focus of the convex-glaſs, ſnould be longer than that of the concave, and the lenſes ſhould be ſo diſpoſed, that if AF be the focal diſtance of the convex lens PAP, the focal point of the concave glaſs ſhould fall upon the ſame point F. Thus the interval AB, between the two glaſſes, is the difference between their foci, A F being the focal diſtance of the object-glaſs, and B F that of rhe eye-glaſs. When the glaſſes are ſo placed, a common eye will ſce diſtant objects diſtinctly, and will magnify in the ſame proportion that the line AF exceeds the line BF. Thus, ſuppoſing the focus of the object-glaſs to be ſix inches, and of the eyeglaſs to be one inch, the interval between them will be five inches; the length of the teleſcope and the objects will be enlarged ſix times, that is, it will appear under an angle ſix times greater than what they do to the naked eye. After having explained to you the manner in which the glaſſes are to be diſpoſed, in order to produce the deſired effect, it remains for me to ſhew you why they repreſent the objects diſtinctly, and why they are magnified as many times as the line AF exceeds that of BF. With reſpect to the ſirſt, I muſt juſt remind you of what has been beIi3 fore obſerved, that we ſee objects beſt when the rays that proceed from them and fall upon the eye are ncarly parallel to each other. This obſervation being attended to, you muſt now conſider another diagram, ſig. 14, pl. 6. Let V be a point in the object towards which the tcleſcope is directed, and as it is ſuppoſed to be very diſtant, the rays proceeding therefrom may be conſidered as parallel to each other; thoſe therefore that fall upon the objcct glaſs QA, vwill be united at its focus F, and being conv ergent there, will not be adapted to produce diſtinct viſion ſor a common eye. Nou itbeing the property oſ a concave glaſs to render rays more diverging, or to diminiſh their convergence, it uill reſract the ras OR, R, ſo as to render them parallel to each other; ſo that inſtead of uniting at E, they uill proceed in the direction RS, RS, parallel to the axis ARF, and thus the teleſcope uill be ſitted for diſtinct viſlion. I have now to explain the principal eſſect oſ teleſcopes, that is, their magniſying pouer; a ſubject which I hope to render ſo clear, that no doubts ihall remain on your mind. 1. Let Ee, ſig.3, pl. 7, be the object placed on the axis of he teleſcope, which puſſes through the center oſ the tuo lenſes. Ee is to be coniidered as at an inſinite diſtance. 2. Iſ the eye placed at A look at this object, it will ſee it under the angle Ee, called the viſual angle. What we have therefore to prowe is, that in looking through the teleſcope it will appear under an angle as much larger than this, as the focal diſtance of the object-glaſs exceeds that of the cye-glaſc. 3. As the eſſect of all the glaſſes conſiſts in repreſenting the object in another place, and of a certain ſiæe, all ue have ro do is to examine the 8. Now as the ſpectator applics his eye at B, and as the rays that iſall upen his eye are received as if they came from the image G g, it will appear under the angle G Bg evidently larger than the angle EAe, under which the object E e appears. 9. Io compare theſe angles, I muſt inform you that the angle EAe is equal to the angle FAſ, acd the angle GB3  is equal to the angle F Bf. ſ larenovw therefore only to prove that the angle I Bſ excecds the angle FAf, as much as the line AF exceeds the line Bf. 10. Io prove this, we muſt have recourſe to certain propoſitions deduced from geometry, concerning the nature of ſectors. You probably remember that a ſeetor is an arch of a circle included betueen tuo radii; thus CMN, ſic. 4, pl.6, is a ſeetor of a circle; CM, CN, the two radii; M Nſhe arch or portion of the circumſcrence. There are therefore three things to be conſidered in a ſector: 1. lIhe radius oſ the circle, as CM, CN. 2. Ihe quantity of the arch MN. 3. The angle M CN. . 11. Let us now conſider the tuo ſectors MCN, and men, ſg. a, pl. 6, oſ uhich the radii CM and cm are reſpectively equal. Geometry proves, that in this caſe the angles C and c are in the ſame ratio as the arcs M Nand mn; or in other words, that the angle C is ſo many times larger than the angle c, as the arc MN is larger than the arc mn; or in more general terms, when the radii are equal, the angles are proportional to their reſpective arches. 12. In the two ſectors MCN and mec n, ſig. S, nl. 6, the angles are equal, but the radii are unequal. Tĩhe elements of geometry prove, in this caſe, that the arc MN is ſo many times greater than the arcmn, as the radius C M is greater than cm; or that the ares are proportional to the reſpective radii when the angles are equal. The reaſon is evident, for cach arc contains the ſame number of degrees; but the degrees of a large circle are as much larger than thoſe of a ſmallone, as the longer radius exceeds the ſmaller one. 13. In the two ſectors M CN and me n, fig.6, pl. 6, the arcs are equal, but the radii are uncqual. Here the angle C, which anſuers to the longeſt radius, is the ſmalleſt, and that in the ſame ratio as the radii; or the angle c is ſo many times larger than the angle C, as the radius CM is larger than the radius cm; or in more general terms, the angles are reciprocally proportional to the radii when the arcs are equal. 14. The laſt article comes more immediately to our purpoſe, with the addition of this obſervation, that when the angles are very ſmall (as is the caſe in ſmall Galilean teleſcopes), the arcs MN and m n do not differ ſenſibly from their cords, or the ſtrait lines M N and m n. 15. We may novw return to the former diagram. The triangles F Af, F Bf, may be conſidered as ſectors, and the arc F f as common to both; conſcquently the angle F Bf exceeds the angle FAf, as much as the diſtance AF exceeds that of BF; or the object E e will appear in the teleſcope under an angle as much larger than that under which it appears to the naked eye, as the focal diſtance of the object-glaſs exceeds that of the eye, which was what I had to prove to you. You vwill eaſily comprehend from what has been ſaid, that very great advantages are not to be expected from a teleſcope conſtructed on this plan; for in order to obtain any conſiderable magniſy ing power, it muſt be made very long, a circumſtance that renders it inconvenient in uſe. Beſides this there are other diſadvantages, among which the ſmallneſs of the apparent ſicld is the principal. This naturally leads me to conſider the nature of the anparent field, which is an article of great importance in all teleſcopes. When you direct a teleſcope towards the heavens or any other diſtant object, the ſpace diſcovered appears of a circular form, and no objects are ſeen but uwhat are contained within this circle; ſo that if you are deſirous of viewing other objects, you muſt change the poſition of the teleſcope; this circular ſpace is called the apparent ſield, or ſimply the field of vietw. Hence vou will readily conceive, that it muſt be a great advantage to have a teleſcope with a large ſield, and that a ſmall ficld muſt be conſidered as a defect. As a large ſicld is a great perfection in a teleſcope, it is oſten neceſſary to meaſure the field; cthis is generally attained by meaſuring the number of degrees contained in the ſpace taken in by the teleſcope, when directed to the heavens, or to ſome very diſtant object. Thus as the apparent diameter of the full moon is about half a degree, iſ a celeſcope only takes in the moon, ue ſay it's ſield is half a degree; but if vou only ſee one half of the moon, the field would only be a quarter of a degree. . But in order to judge rightly oſ the ſicld oſ a teleſcope, you muſt take in the magnifying pouer; for it is an univerſal maxim, that the more a teleſcope magnifies, the ſmaller is the ſield: nature here preſcribes the boundaries. Let PAP , ſig.3, pl. 7, be the object-glaſs, Q B O the eye-glaſs of a teleſcope, EF the axis thercof, Ee an object at a great diſtance, ſeen under the angle EAe, which repreſents half the diameter of the apparent field; which extend as much on one ſide the axis as on the other. The point E is the center oſ the ſield; the rav EA is not reſracted as it paſſes through the middle oſ the glaſſes, perpendiculur to their axis: in order thereſore that this ray ſhould enter the eye, the eye muſt be placed ſumeu here on the axis BF, behind the eye-glaſs, and ſo that the pupil may be on the line Bl; this is a general rule with reſpect to all teſeſcopes. Let us now conſider the viſible extremity e of the object; and ofſ this it is plain that the extremity e of the object cannot be ſcen unleſs the ray eA proceeding therefrom enters the eye. Let us then conſider the direction of the ray eA; nou, according to the laws oſ reſraction, this ray is not refracted, becauſe it paſſes through the middle oſ the object-glaſs A. Ihis ray will therefore continue in the ſame direction to unite with other rays proceeding from the ſame point e, to form at f an image oſ the object repreſented by ſ F, the point f being the image of the point e of the objcet e E: but this ray meeting at m the concave glaſs, and not falling on the middle thereof, will be refracted; and inſtead of proceeding to f, will proceed in the direction m n, more diverging from the axis BF. You remember that the object-glaſs forms an inverted image of the object at Ff, and that F ſ becomes the object with reſpect to the eve-glaſs, by which it is tranſported to Gg. The diſtance BG is as great as that of the object, becauſe Ffis in the focus of the eye-glaſs. With reſpect to the ſize of the images, the ſirſt F ſf is determined by the ſtrait line e Aſ, drawn from e through the middle of the glaſs PAP; and that of the other G g, by a ſtrait line fBg, drawn from f through B the middle of the eye-glaſs. The ray Am directed towards the point f is refracted and proceeds towards mn, and this line continues backuards, paſies by g, for the ray m n produces the ſame eſtect upon the eye as if it proceeded really ſfrom & Now as mnn direrges from BF, uhere the pupil oſ the eye is placed, it cannot enilli 492 LECTURES ON NATURAL PnILosoruv. ter the eye if it diverges further than the limits of the pupil oſ the eye; ſo that in this ſpecies of teieſcope the ſield depends on the ſiæe of the pupil of the eye, and the larger this is the larger is the ſitld; ſo that if the diſtance Bm does not exceed ihe ſame diameter oſ the pupil of the eye, and that this ſield may not be diminiſhed, the eye ſhould aluays be placed as near as poſſible to the eye-glaſi. To determine then the ſize oſ the field in theſe teleſcopes, you have only to take the interval Ib m equal 1o the ſomidiameter of the pupil, and then draw a line m Ae ſrom m, and the middle of the object glaſs, and this line uill mark upon the object that extremiry e which will be viſible by the teleſcope, and the angle eAE uill give the femidiameter of the licdd From this it is very evident, that if the diſtance betueen the tuo glas exceeds a ſew inches, the angle BAmm ꝶx ill become very ſimall, becauſe the diſtance 13 m is only about the ſ oſ an inch. Nov, in order 1o0 magniſy much vwith theſe teleſcopes, the diſtance between the glaſſes muſt be conſiderably increaſed, in which caſe the field vould he infinitely ſmall; ſo that the extent ofſ theſe teleſcopes is limited by the nature of their conſtruction, and the optician, in order to produce great eſſects conveniently, is obliged to have recourſe to other Kinds. ASUMMARY VIFW OF TIHE PROPERTIES OF Tut. GALILEAN IELESCOPI. 1. The ſocal diſtance of the object-glaſs muſi be greater than that oſ the eye-glaſs, or it will not magnisfy an object. 2. The magnifying pouer is equal to the quotient, ariſing by dividing the ſocal diſtance oſ the object-glaſs by that of the eye-glaſ. 3. IThe rays proceeding from the eye-glaſs to the eve, are nearly parallel, if his does not ſuit the eyve, the tube containing the eye-glaſs muſt bè put in, or drawn out a little, till the object appears diſtinct. 4. The viſible area of the object is greater, the neurer the eye is to the glaſs, and depends on the diameter of the eye's pupil, and of the object-glaſs; the ſficld of vieu is therefore very ſmall. 5. If this teleſcope be long, the viſible arca is ſo ſmall as to render it uſeleſs; this ariſes from the ſmallneſs of thèe object-glaſs; but if this be broader, the object will De coloured and confuſcd. OF THE ASTRONOMICAL TELESCOPE. The next kind, which is denominated the aſtronomical teleſcope, conſiſts alſo only of tuo lenſes, and both of them are convex- Let PAP, ſig. 15, pl. 6, repreſent the object-glaſs which is convex, and whoſe focus is at F; QQ a deeper and ſmaller convex lens for the eye-glaſs, which is to be fixed upon the ſame axis, ſo that it's focus may coincide with the point F; holding the eye at o, ſo that the diſtance B O be nearly cqual to the focal diſtance ofſ the eye-glaſa. With a teleſcope conſtructed in this manner objects will be ſccn diſtinctly, and magnified in the ſame e prop ortion as the focus of the object-glaſs exceeds that of the eye-glaſſes; but it repreſcr i1s all objects invertei, uhich does not leſſen it's value ſor aſtronomi al purpoſes, bat renders it inconvenient and improper for viewing terreſtrial objects. I nave to explain to you, 1ſt, How this arrangement oſ glaſſes ſhews diſtant objects diſtinciiv. 2d, Why it magniſies in the ſame proportion as the focus of the object-glaſs excecds that of che eyc-glaſs, and exhibits the objects in an inverted poſition. And, 3d, Why the eye is not to be placed cloſe to the eye-glaſe, as in the former conſtruction. I. Ihe firſt article is proved in a ſimilar manner to the ſame article in the preceding conſtruction; the rays eP, e P, uhich are parallel to each other, before they fall upon the object-glaſs, are thereby refracted and united at its focus; in order thercſore for diſtinct viſion, the eye-glaſt muſt re-eſtabliſh the paralleliſm of the rays, which is efſected by placing the eye-glaſs ſo that it's focus may be at F, and conſequently the rays will proceed from it's parallel to cach other, and fall upon the eye in that direction. 2. For the explanation of the ſecond article, let us conſider the object el, ſig. 16, pl. 6, ſuppoſed to be placed at an inſnite diſtance. The image of this object formed by the object-glaſs, at it's ſocus, will be Ff; this image will be inverted, and become an object for the eye-glaſs, and being ſituated at it's focus rhe image will be at an inſinite diſtance, ſuppoſe at Gg, AG being conſidered an infinite diſtance as uell as AE. Now to determine the ſiæe of this image, draw a ſtrait line B ſg through B the middle oſ the lens, and the extremity ſ oſ the image. Ilis ſecond image is the immediate object of viſion, and being at an infinite diſtance will be ſcen under the angle GBgG; but the object itſelf is ſecn under the angle E Ae. I ſcarcely need obſerve to vou, that it is indifſerent where the points A and B are taken, as the diſtance is conſidered as inſinite. Ihe triangles FAF, I Bſ, may, as in the preceding conſtruction, be conſidered as ſectors oſ a circle, the line VF ſ being an arch common to both, ſor the angles are ſo ſmall that the chord mavy be taken for the arch; AE and BF are the reſpective radii, and the arches are equul; and of courſe, as I have proved beſore, the angles Fa f (or EAe,) and F Bf ſor G B g) are in the ſame ratio as the radii BF and AF. Thereſfore the angle G B g, under which the object is ſeen by the teleſcope, is ſo much larger than the angle EAe, under which the object is feen by the naked eye, as AF is larger than BF. 3. With reſpect to the place of the eye, the proper ſituation thereof is determined by the field; for if you remove it either way from the focus of the eye-glaſs, the ſield is diminiſhed. It is a great advantage in teleſcopes of this conſtruction, that by removing the eye from the eye-glaſs, the field may be to a certain degree increaſed; and it is owing to this that the magnifving power of theſe may be ſo much increaſed, which will be evident by the following conſiderations: I. Let Ece, ſig. 17, pl. 6, be the object at an infinite diſtance, e the extremity viſible by the teleſcope, whoſe glaſſes PAP, O B O, are ſituated on the axis EABO; we have now to conſider the direction of the ray e, which procecds from the extremity of the object through the middle of the object-glaſs; for the other rays proceeding ſrom the ſame pointe, only contribute to ſtrengthen the effect produced by this ray. 2. The ray eA paſſing through the middle of the glaſs PP is not bent, but paſſing on in the direction AſM, paſſing by the extremity f of the image, and falling upon the eye-gluſs at M. Here it is neceſſury to obſerve, that if the eye-glaſs is not large enough to reach M, this ray would not enter the eye, and the point e would be inviſible; that is, in other words, the extremity e muſt be placed nearer the axis, to make the ray AſfM ſull upon the eye-glaſs. 3. This ray AM vill be reſracted by the eyeglaſs; the mode oſ it's reſraction uill be ealily inveſtigated: to this end let us conſider the ſecond image G g. Now the line B prolonged, fall⸗ upon g, the extremity of the ſecond image, and the refracted ray takes the direction N O, which being prolonged iĩulls upon g. 4. Since then the two lines ON and B f meet at g at an infinite diſtance, they may be conſidered as parallel to each other therefore, to determine the poſition of the refracted ray NO, we have only to draw a line parallel to the line Bf. 5. I'rom hence it is evident, that the ray NO muſt meet with the axis of the teleſcope as at O; and ſince generally when the magnifying power is great, the point F is much nearer the glaſs QO than the glaſs P P, vhe interval BM will be a little larger than the image Fſ; and as the line NO is parallel to f B, the line B O will be almoſt equal to BF, the focal diſtance of the eve-glaſs. 6. The eye being placed at O will reccive not only the rays which come from the middle of the object E, but alſo thoſe which procecd ſrom the extremity e, and conſequently thoſe which come ſrom all other parts of the object; the rays from B O and NO uvill fall at the ſame time on the eye, however ſmall the pupil may be; the field therefore in this conſtruction does not depend upon the ſize of the pupil, provided the eye be placed at O, but the moment the eye is removed from O, the appurent ſield is diminiſhed. . 7. If the point M was not at the extremity of the eye-glaſs, it would tranſmit rays that were further removed ſrom the axis, and the ficld would be larger. Thereſore to determine the field of uwhich the teleſcope is capable, draw from A the middle of the object-glaſs, to M the edge of the eye glaſs, the line AM; this continued to e, the object will mark the viſible extremity thereof, conſequently the angle EAe or BAM gives the ſequently augmented in proportion as the eyeglaſs is larger. In the firſt kind the field depended on the aperture of the pupil of the eye, in this it depends on the aperture of the eye-glaſs. By theobject-glaſs the object is carried from Ee to Ff; by the eye-glaſs it is as it were removed from F f to Gg; the image Gg, from being at ſuch a diſtance, is ſcendiſtinctly. This image is ſeen by the eye at O under the angle G Og or BON, while the object is ſeen by thè naked eye under the angle E Ae; the teleſcope therefore magnifies in the ſame proportion as the angle BO Nis greater than the angle EAe. Now as NO is parallel to Bf, the angle BON is equal to the angle Fbf, and the angle EAc is equal to FAfſ; therefore the magnifying power may be determined by the proportion between the angles Fbſ and FAf. Now Fbſ is as much larger than FAf, as the line AF is larger than the line Bſ, or as much as the focus of the object-glaſs exceeds that of the eye-glaſs. SUMMARY OF THE PPOPERTIES OF THE ASTRONOMICAL TELESCOPE. The magnifying power is in the proportion of the ſocaſ diſtance of the object to the eyelaſs. ẽ 2. The rays emerging from the eye-glaſs to the eye ſhould be parallel ſor a good eye; if this does not ſuit another eye, then the tube muſt be puſhed in or pulled out till the object appears diſtinct. 3. The apparent magnitude of an object is the ſame wherever the eye be placed, but the viſible area is the greateſt when the eye is nearly at the focal diſtance of the eye-glaſs. 4. The object is always inverted. 5. The viſual angle depends on the breadth of the eye-glaſs;: for it is equal to the angle which the eye-glaſs ſubtends at the object-glaſs from E e. There are two other circumſtances relative to the perfection of teleſcopes, which we have now to conſider; the brightneſs or quantity of light, and the diſtinctueſs with which objects are ſeen. With reſpect to brightneſs, the teleſcope may be conſidered as perfect when it repreſents them as bright as they are ſeen by the naked eye, which is the caſe when the aperture of the pupil is filled by the rays which come from each part of the object after being tranſmitted through the releſcope; ſo long as a teleſcope furniſhes a ſufficient quantity of rays to fill the aperture oſ the pupil, no greater brightneſs can De deſired, for a greater quantity would be uſeleſs. But as the ſiæe of the pupil varies, it has been uſual, in conſidering this ſubject, to conſider it of about ſſ oſ an inch diameter: when you coriſider that the light of the ſun is reckoned to exceed that of the moon 300,000 times, you will eaſily perceive that a ſmall diminution of light is not of any great conſequence. Let us, however, examine the rays tranſmitted by the teleſcope, and compare them with the aſſigned diameter of the pupil; this will be clearer by attending only to one point of the object, that, for inſtance, which coincides with the axis of the teleſcope. 1. The object being at an inſinite diſtance, the rays which fall upon the ſurface of the object may be conſidered as parallel to cach other; thereſore all the rays which come from the center ol the object will be contained between the lines e P, e P, parallel to the axis EA, ſig.15, pl. 6. All theſc rays taken together are named the pencil of rays, which fall upon the object-glaſs, and the thickneſs of this pencil is equal to the aperture of the object-glaſs, whoſe d ameter is P AP. 2. This cylindrical pencil of rays is changed into a conical one P F P by the object-glaſs; after having croſſed at the focus F, the rays procecd and form another cone, the apex of which is at the focus, and the baſe is the eye-glaſs. Now it is evident, that the baſe of the cone m m is as much ſmaller than the pencil PP, as the diſtance F B is ſhorter than the diſtance AF. 3. Now the ravs Fm, Fm, aſter paſſing through the eye-glaſs, again become parallel to each other, and form the pencil no, no, which enter the eye, and paint thereon the image of that point from which they originally proceeded. 4. Every thing turns now upon the ſiZe of the pencil oſ rays no, no, which enters the eye; if the diameter thereof is equal or greater than the aperture of the pupil, it will be fſilled, and the object will be ſeen with all poſſible brightneſs. 5. But if the ſize of this pencil be much ſmaller than that of the pupil, it is clear that che repreſentation would be obſcure, which is a great defect in any teleſcope; to prevent uhich, the laſt pencil of rays ſhould be rather more than æ5 of an inch in diameter, though it would be better if it was nearly ĩs of an inch. 6. Nov it is evident, that the ſize oſ the laſt pencil of rays depends on the ſize of the firſt by which it Is formed, which is eaſily determined; for we have only to ſce how much ſmaller nn is than PP, the aperture of the object glaſs. Now PP is to nn as AF to BF, on uhich the magnifying power depends: therefore the magniſying pouer ſheus how much larger the pencil E P, EP, is than the pencil no, no 7. From hence it is evident, that the aperture of the object-glaſs ſuould be increaſed in proportion as the magniſying power is augmented; conKxE ſequently if this proportional diameter cannot be given to the object-glaſs, the teleſcope will be deſfective. Opticians have eſtabliſhed, as a general rule, that the aperture of a Iens ſhould always be ſmaller than half it's focal diſtance. Diſtinctneſs of expreſſion is confeſſedly the moſt important article in the nature ofſ teleſcopes, and to attain it, has exerciſed the genius, and called forth the abilities of a Newton, Dollond, Euler, DAlembert, &c. You may remember that I aſſumed as a principle, that a convex lens united in one point the image of all the rays proceeding from any given point of an object. Iſ this was rigorouſly true, the images formed hy lenſes would be as well terminated, and as perfectly deſined, as the object itſclf. But this principle is only true to a certain degree, and with reſpect to thoſe rays that are near the center of the lens; ſor the rays which paſs through the glaſs at a diſtance from this center are not collected in the ſame point with thoſe which paſs through the middle, and from this double image great indiſtinctneſs ariſcs. To render this more clear, we muſt again have reference to a diagram. Let PP, fſig.7, pl.7, be a conrvex-glaſs; Ee an object ſituated on the axis thereof; E the point coinciding with the axis, and ſending out rays EM, EN, EA, EM, EN, on the ſurſace of the glaſs. We have to conſider how the direction of theſe rays is changed by the lens. 1I. The ray EA paſſing through the middle of the glaſs is not refracted, but proceeds in the ſame rectilinear direction A B E. 2. The rays EM, EM, which are very near to EA, are only refracted in a ſmall degree, but ſo as to unite ſomewhere, as at F, which point oſ union we have conſidered as the focus of the lens. 3. The rays EN, EN, uhich are furthei from the axis, or neurer the edge of the glaſs, art refracted ſomewhat dilierently, ſo as to meet at G nearer the lens than the point F, forming a ſeparate image G g. 4. Ihis circumſtance concerning the rays which fall upon the lens at a diſtance from the center, and there forming another image of the ſame point, ſeparate from that which is formed by che rays that paſs near rhe center of the lens, though I have not noticed it to ou before, merits conſiderable attentionS. Irrom hence you will perccive, that the firſt image Ffſ is formed only by the union oſ thoſe rays which are very near the middle of the glaſs, and that a ſucceſſion of images is formed by the rays that are more and more removed from the axis, till at laſt you come to thoſe which fall near the edge of the lens, which form the image G g. 6. An indeſinite number of images are therefore formed berween Fſ and G g, by the rays that fall upon the ſurſace oſ the lens between the axis and the edge thereofſ. 7. Ihis ſucceſſion of images is termed the aberrulion ariſiug from ibe ſphericity oſ the glaſs, or the diffuſion of the image; and it muſt be evident to you, that when theſe rays enter the eye, the viſion obtained thereby of the original point muſt be confuſed and indiſtinct; but if the ſpace F G could be reduced to the point F, there would be no confuſion or want of diſtinctneſs. 8. This diſtuſion or diſperſion of the rays is greater in proportion as the ares PAB, PBP, are larger ſegments of their reſpective circles; and you will perceive from thence, that very thick and convex lenſes are to be rejected; thus, in this figure, vhere the arcs PAP and PBP are the fourth part of the whole circumſcrence, the confuſion would be inſupportable. Some authors who have written upon this ſubject, ſay, that the arch forming the lens ſhould not contain more than aodegrees of it's reſpecti ve circumſerence. 10. But if the lens be deſigned for the objectglaſs of a teleſcope, it muſt be ſormed of an arc containing fewer degrees; for though the diſperſion of the rays may be inſenſible in itſelf, the magnifying power multiplies it as often as the obĩ ditſclf: hence the greater the magnifying power, ſmaller rhe number of degrees that ſuould be el braced by the object-glaſs. When the diſperſion oſ the rays is very great, it may be leſſened by covering the edge ofſ the lens with an opake ring, leaving only a ſmall aperture round the center oſ the lens; Ly this means diſtinctueſs is reſtored, but brię ilnesi i is dimimiſhed, and as much is loſt on one hand as is gaincd on the other; the more ſo as every increaſe in magnif ng power requires a proportional increaſe of aperture. Onhicians ha c therefore with much pams and aſſiduit: endeavoured to diſcover ſome means of corre in- tlus diſperſion, without leſſening the aperture oſ ſche object- glaſſ. The ſocns of the rays which paſs through the middle of a c n ex lens, is, as you have ſeen, further ſrom tl c lens than the ſocũs oſ the rays which paſs near the edge oſ the gliſs. Nouw it has been obſerved by opticians, that a concave lens produces a contrary efiect; they have conſequently inveſtigated this ſubject, in order to ſce whether they could not combine a concave with a convex lens, ſo as to correct or deſtroy this aberration, while the compound lens produced the ordinary eſfect oſ a ſimple object-glaſs. We have already ſhewn you, that concave lenſes are conſidered according to their ſocus as well as convex lenſes, but with this difference, that the focus of a concave lens is virtua:or imaginary, and falls before the lens, while that oſ the convex is real, and ſalls behind the lens. Theſe circumſtances being conſidered, opticians reaſoned in the ſollowing manner. I. If you place a concave lens behind a convex one of the ſame ſocal diſtance, the rays that would have been united in it's focus are ſo refracted as to be rendered parallel to each other, as they were before they entered the glaſs. 2. In this caſe the concave lens deſtroys the effect of the convex, and the rays go on in their original and natural order. 3. If the focal diſtance oſ the concave lens is ſmaller than that of the convex, the effect would be greater, and the rays rendered diverging. Ihus the incident parallel rays, LM, L.A, L M, ſig. 8, pl. 7, paſſing through the glaſſes M P, O O, vill go on diverging in the direction NO, BF, N Theſe tuo glaſſes therefore, when combined, produce the ſame eſfect as a ſingle concave, that would give to parallel rays the ſame degree of divergence. Two glaſſes combined together, of which the concave has a ſmaller focal diſtance than the convex, are equivalent to a ſingle concave glaſc. 4. But if the concave lens OO, ſig.9, pl. 7, has a longer focal diſtance than the convex lens PP, it will not even render the rays parallel that the convex lens would unite at it's focus F, but it will however ſo far leſſen their convergence, that inſtead of meeting at E they will unite at O, a point further from the lens. 5. The combined lenſes in this inſtance produce the ſame eſfect as a ſingle convex lens, w hoſe focus would be at O. It is evident then, that it is poſlible to vary inſinitely the combination of cwo lenſes, the one convex and the other concave, ſo that the combined lenſes may be equivalent to any given convex lens. 6. Such a combined lens may be applied to a teleſcope inſtead of a ſingle lens, and the effect with reſpect to magnifying power will be ſtill the ſame; but the degree of diffuſion or diſperſion in the rays vill be very different; it may be greater or much leſs than in a ſingle lens: in the laſt caſe the double object-glaſs will be far preferable to a ſingle one. 7. But what is ſtill more advantageous, it is poſſible ſo to arrange them, that this diſperſion may be deſtroyed. Calculation diſcovers theſe combinations, but the hand of the artiſt is not equal to the execution. The combination of two lenſes in the manner shat I have here deſcribed, forms what is called a compound object-glaſs : the end to be attained is, that the rays which paſs through the lens, as well thoſe at the edge as thoſe at the center, may be united in a ſingle point, and form only one image, without ſuch a diſperſion of the rays as takes place in a ſingle object-glaſs. Many are the advantages that would be derived from ſuch a combination; the object would appear more diſtinct and better terminated, becauſe the viſion would not be confuſed by that mixed ſucceſſion of images produced by a ſingle object-glaſs. This diſperſion oſ the rays is one of the principal reaſons which forces us to make uſe of very long teleſcopes, in order thereby to diminiſh the effect of the diſperſion; but if this diſperſion was entirely deſtroyed, much ſmaller ones might be uſed, that ſhould be productive oſ the ſame effect. It vill be neceſſary to obſerve to you here, that the ſides or faces of the lenſes may be formed in different ways, almoſt ad infinitum, and yet the focus remain the ſanie; this is effected by forming the ſides of equal or unequal radii, as will be evident by conſidering an example. Let us ſuppoſe then a convex lens, whoſe ſides have been fogmed on a tool of 24 inches radius, conſequently each face is the ſegment of a circle of a4 inches radius; it will be equally convex on both ſides, and be of 24 inches ſocus, as commonly eſtimated; but as the focus depends on the refſraction, it varies according to the denſity of the glaſs; generally the focal point is nearer the lens than the radii of the face, ſometimes a tenth or twelfth part, ſo that the lens that we have ſuppoſed to be ground on a tool of a4 inches radius will have it's focus at 22 inches. By making the ſurſfaces unequal, an infinite variety of lenſes may be ſormed, that ſhall all have the ſame focus; ea. gr. if one face be taken of a ſmaller radius than 24 inches, the other muſt taken of a longer, the one thus compenſating for the other. The following table exhibits a view ofſ ſome of the varieties with which the two faces of a lens may be worked, and yet produce the ſame effect. Glaſſes. Radius of 1ſt face. Radius oſ 2d face. I . 24 24 2 a1 28 3 20 30 4 18 36 5 16 48 6 I 60 7 14 84 8 13 156 9 12 infinite. In the laſt or ninth form the radius is only 12, the half of 24 inches; but the other face the ſegment of a circle, whoſe radius is infinite, and rherefore may be conſidered as a ſtrait line; and therefore this lens would be a plano-convex. If you are deſirous that one of the faces be formed of a ſmaller radius than 12 inches, the other face muſt be concave, and the glaſs will be convexo-concave, or what is termed a meniſcus. The following table is a ſpecimen of figures for this ſorm: Meniſcus. Rad. of 1ſt face. Rad. of concave. 10 II 132 II 10 60 12 9 36 13 8 24 I 6 12 i 4 6 16 3 4 You have here then ſixteen different kinds oſ lenſes, whoſe ſoci will all be at the ſame diſtance or point. If the ſocus only were conſidered, it would be indifferent which oſ theſe were employed; yet it is not ſo with reſpect to the diſperſion of the rays, for in this reſpect they differ conſiderably; it is much more in ſome than in others. Amongſt theſe, that oſ the ſcventh kind is one of thoſe where the diſperſion is leaſt, being nearly one halſ leſs than it would be if the lens were equally convex on both ſides; and it is therefore of an advantageous figure for a ſingle object-glaſs. From what has been ſaid, you perceive, that in order to correct the aberration that ariſes from the ſphericity, it is neceſſary to reſolve a problem which will diſcover what are the proper radii for the tuo ſurfaces of a lens, ſo that the diſperſion of the rays may be annihilated; the ſolution requires a conſiderable knouledge of the more proſound parts of geometry, and therefore does not come within the compaſs of theſc Lectures: enob h, however, has I hope been ſaid to render the ſubject clear to you, and to point out the neceſſity and nature of theſe inveſtigitions. There is ſtill another aberration to be corrected, another cauſc of dęſperſion in the rajs to be counteracted or deſtroyed; this ſcems more important, and more diſſicult to be cured, as it does not depend on the glaſs, but on the nature and properties of the rays of light. You no doubt remember what I have already told you reſpecting the variety in the rays, according to the different colours they occaſioned, that is, that they were of different degrees oſ refrangibility; thus, that the red-making rays were the leaſt refracted, and the violet-making rays the moſt reſracted, all the other rays falling within theſe two extremes. Thus when a beam oſ 'light falls obliquely upon a piece of glaſs ABCD, ſig. 10, pl. 7, inſtead of proceeding in the ſame direction P Q, it is not only refracted but ſeparated into ſeveral rays Pt, PS, Pr, Pv, of which the firſt Pt, that is the leaſt reſracted, repreſents the red-making ray, and the laſt Pv, the violet-making ray. Their divergence is indeed much leſs than that which is repreſented in this diagram, but ſufficient to become ſenſible. From this difference in the refrangibility oſ the rays, ariſe various phenomena with reſpect to dioptric glaſſes, among which are the following: I. Let PP, ſig. 11, pl. 7, be a convex lens at a conſiderable diſtance AO, from the object Oo, to determine the image formed by the lens, without taking into conſideration the aberration already diſcuſſed; or what comes to the ſame thing, only conſidering the rays that paſs through the middlc of the lens. 2. Let us ſuppoſe that the object Oo be red and the rays procecding therefrom will be all redmaking rays, and will form ſomewhere a red image Rrof the object, and R vill be the ſocus of the red-making rays, or thoſe which have the leaſt refraction. 3. But if the object Oo be violet, the rays vill be more refracted, and the image Vv vill be nearer the lens, and the point V vwill be the focus of theſe rays. 4. If the object be of any of the intermediate colours betu een theſe two, the image will fall between R and V. 5. But if the object is not of an homogeneous colour, (or is white,) as is the caſe in moſt bodies, the different kinds of rays are ſeparated by refraction, and each kind forms an image apart; that formed by the red-making rays will be found at Rr, and that by the violet at Vy, and the ſpace RVvill be filled by images of the intermediate colours. 6. The glaſs P P vill repreſent an indefinite number of images oſ each object O o formed in the ſpace RV, and ſituated in the order of the priſmatic colours. 7. Each of theſe images will be diſtinct in itſelf, but taken together productive of a very ſenſible confuſion. 8. Here then is another ſpecies of diſperſion totally independent of that which we have already treated of, and tinging each image with a particular colour. 9. This diſperſion depends conſiderably on the focal diſtance oſ the lens, being about s-ſth part; uhen the focal diſtance is 28 feet, the ſpace RV is about 1 foot. Iſ the lens was of 56 feet focusRV vwould be about a feet. I nhave now explained to you a ſecond ſource or cauſe of indiſtinct or imperfect viſion; namely, that which ariſes from the diſferent refrangibility of the rays: which requires a different mode of correction ſrom the former error, which I ſhall treat of when we come to ſpeak of ACROMATIC TELESCOPES; and only ſhew here, how the error may be in a degree corrected, by the diſpoſition of the eye-glaſſes. I. It is certain, that the object-glaſs forms an inſinity of images of each object, ſucceſſively ranged in the ſpace of diſſuſion, each of which tinged with it's proper colour. 2. Fach of theſe images becomes an object, with reſpect to the eye-glaſs, with it's reſpective colours; and iſ, inſtead of one eye-glaſs, more arc uſed, the ſame thing ſtill takes place. 3. Let us thercfore, in this diagram, conſider the laſt images that the teleſcope forms for the eye at O, and Uet Rr be the red image, and VV the violet; the other colours falling within this ſpace, according to their dilferent degrees of refrangibilitt. ſhe lenſes are not exhibited in the figure, becauſe ue are only to conſider the manner in which the imuges are ſcen by the eye, ſuppoſing the diſtance from. tne eye to them to be very great. 4. All theſe images, together with the intermediate oncs, are ſituated on the axis ORV oſ the teleſcope, and terminated by a ſtrait line rv, that we may call the terminator of all the images. 5. According to the repreſentation in the figure, the red image Rr is ſeen by the eye at O, under the angle ROr, uhich is larger than the angle VOV, under uhich the violet image VvV is viewed; the violet rays which enter the eye, are thereſore mixed with the red rays which proceed from the part Rr of the image Rr; and, conſe4 quently, rhere is a very great conſuſion of the images. 6. But the ray Or not being mixed with the others, the extremity or edge oſ the image will be red: but will ſoon after be mixed with the other colours, forming the iris, which is ſo common in other teleſcopes. If the largeſt image was the violet, the conſuſion would be as great as before, with only this difierence, that the extreme edge uwould be violet, not red. 7. Much of the confuſion will depend, therofore, on the poſition of the terminator rv; and ſrom the various ſituations that may be given to it, this confuſon will be ſometimes greater, and ſometimes leſs. 8. Suppoſe that the images were ſo arranged, that the terminator vr paſſed directly into the eye by a ſingle ray vrO; then the extremities of the image, and all the points which anſwer to one point in the object, would form only one point in the eve, and the point of the object uould be repreſented diſtinctly. . 9. Ihis advantage is to be obtained when the terminator, being prolonged, paſſes directly into the eve; and ſuch a poſition is to be ſought ſor in the arrangement oſ the eye-glaſſes. Before we enter upon acromatic teleſcopes, I ſrall endearour to explain the nature of teleſcopes with three e e-glaſſes, in which the image is ſeen erect. I. Let the four glaſſes A, B, C, D, ſig. 7. pl. 8, in the tube repreſent the teleſcope; the glaſs A, directed touards the object, is called, as we hatse beſore ſaid, the object-glals, the three others the eye-glaſſes: the ſour glaſſes are convex. 2. Let us conſider the eſſect produced by each eye-glaſs, the object o O being ſuppoſed at a conſiderable diſtunce. The object-glaſs will form an image of the object at Pp, it's ſocus; the tige oſ this image may be found from o, through the middle of the glaſs A. I have not drawn this line, in order to avoid confuſion from a multiplicity thereof. 3. The image Pp now becomes an object, uith reſpect to the eye-glaſs B, which is ſo placed that the interval Bp is equal to the focus oſf B; by this the ſecond image is tranſported to Qq, and is inverted, as well as the firſt P p; it's ſize is determined by a line drawn from the middle of the glaſs B, through p. 4. The interval AB, between theſe two lenſes, is equal to the ſum of their foci, forming the aſtronomical teleſcope already explained; the image being inverted, and magniſied as many times as AP exceeds BP; but inſtead of the eye-glaſs, another lens C is placed behind B; with reſpect to this lens, the image O ꝗq becomes the object, which being at a conſiderable diſtance, the lens C forms an image thereof at it's focus r. 5. The image Oq being inverted, that of Rr vill be inverted, and terminated by a right line drawn from q through the middle oſ the glaſs C, which vwill paſs by r; conſequently, the three lenſes A, B, C, give the image oſ the object Oo at r, and this image is upright. 6. You have now only to place the third lens ſo that the interval DR be equal to the focus. By this the image will be again, as it were, tranferred to an inhinite diſtance Ss, of which the ſize will be determined by a ſtrait line drawn through the middle of the glaſs d, and paſſing by the extremity oſ the image r, and the image Ss will be ſeen by the eye, inſtead of the object Oo. 7. It is eaſy now to determine how many times a four-glaſſed teleſcope magniſies the object. For this purpoſe, you have only to conlider the lenſes in pairs, A, B, and C, D; cach of theſe, taken ſeparatelv, being an aſtronomical teleſcope. The firſt pair oſ glaſſes, A and B, magniſy the object as many times as the focal diſtance of A exceeds that of B, and juſt ſo many times the image Qq exceeds the object O o. 8. Qq being now conſidered as the object, is magni fied as many times as the focus of C exceeds that of D; theſe tuo powers added together, give the total magnifying power of the teleſcope. Fig. i1, pl. 4, is a perſpective view of a model deſigned to illuſtrate the nature of a four-glaſi teleſcope, which ſheus the objects in their true poſitions; the rays oſ light are repreſented by ſilk ſtrings of different colours, ſo that their progreſs is eaſily traced; AB C the object, D E the objectglaſs, IK, MN, CR, the eye-glaſſes, ſo placed that the foci of DE and I K meet in G. Thoſe oſ IK and MN may mect at L, and thoſe of MN, OR, may meet in g. From the progreſs of the rays, you perceive that the image at H T is inverted, that the rays proceed from IK in a parallel direction, croſſing at I, from whence they go on to MN, paſs through it, and are thereby converged into a focus, and form a ſecond image f g h erect, which image will be viewed by the eye in the focus of the eye-glaſs QR. SUMMARY VIEW OF TIE PROPERTIES OF THIS TEISCOPE. . The magnifying power is in proportion as the focal diſtance of the object-glaſs is to the focus of the eye-glaſs. It ſhews the object erect, but not ſo bright as in the teleſcope with two lenſes; becauſe the other eye-glaſs reflects a conſiderable quantity of light which is loſt. The . At ſsig. 12, pl. 4, another model is repreſented, formed The viſible area depends on the breadth oſ the eye-glaſs. The brightneſs of an object ſeen through a given teleſcope, is greater in proportion as the aperture of the object-glaſs is greater. If the aperture and focus of the object-glaſs remain the ſame, an object appears brighter or fainter according to the greater or leſs focal diſtance oſ the eye-glaſs, that is, according to the magnifying power; for the ſame quantity of light being ſpread over a greater or ſmaller ſurface, renders the image obſcure or brighter. ONX THE CONSTRUCTION AND MAGNIFYING POWER OF TELESCOPES MADE WITH SEVERAL EYE-GLASSES. lIn this diagram, pl. 8, ſig. 1, A is the firſt, B the ſecond, Cthe third, D the fourth, E the fifth eye-glaſs, and O the object-glaſs. DA the axis of the teleſcope is alſo the common axis of all the Ienſes; I m w an oblique pencil paſſing through the object-glaſs, and falling on the extreme edge oſ the lens, which is next the object-glaſs. Ow is the axis of the pencil (repreſented by a black line), ſhewn as refracted ſucceſſively into the lines wv, vt, ts, s1, T a, cutting the axis of the teleſcope (when produced) in the points s, 3, v, 8, a4, reſpectively. O is the focus of this oblique pencil after reſraction at the object-glaſs; e, ſ c, b, the ſucceſſive foci oſ this pencil aſter refraction at each ofſ the eye-glaſſes. From cach of theſe foci draw perpendiculars to the axis of the teleſcope, and theſe perpendiculars, ox, eg, dh, c7, by, will be places and magnitudes of ſuccefſive images either real or imaginary; real when the image is actually formed, ſo that it would be viſible if the rays were received upon a white paper; imaginary when the rays after reſtaction proceed as if they came os tended to ſuch an image, although this image is not actualty formed. Mlben tbe image is real, Ibe ras of each pencil actually come to a focus. When it is imag nary, theſe rays after reſraction diverge from or concrge towards ſuch a focus, but are never actually uiired. Although each lens la it's image either real or imaginary, yet there are only tuo real ones in the conſtruction here delineated, the firſt e g inverted, the ſecond by upright. When the number of real images is even, the object will be ſeen upright; when that number is odd, the object is inverted. Galileo's teleſcope, in which there is no real image, ſheus the object upright; it cannot thereſore be applied to inſtruments in which croſs wires are neceſſary, becauſe the wires cannot be fo placed as to be ſeem diſtinctly together with the object. All that is eſſential to the conſtruction of teleſcopes is, only that the rays of the ſame pencil, which enter parallel, ſiould likewiſe emerge parallel, for the object will in that caſe be ſeen diſtinctlv; the intervals and focal lengths therefore of all the lenſes, except one, may be aſſumed at pleaſure, from whence that one muſt be determined. This aſſertion of moſt writers on optics is true, if nothing elſe be attended to but the courſe of a few rays coming ſrom a ſingle point in the axis of the teſeſcope, and it be only required that the middle of the object be ſeen diſtinctly; but the caſe is very different, if it be nequired that all parts of the object ſhould be ſeen as far as may be equally diſtinct, for then the aberration oſ the extreme pencil in paſſing through the eye-glaſſes muſt be taken into conſideration; and the number, place, and focal lengths of the eye-glaſſes, muſt be ſuch as may leſſen at leaſt, if not remove theſe aberrations. It may be obſerved, that generally in any ſingle lens, the greater the focal length, and the leſs the aperture, the leſs will be the aberration of the refracted rays. That conſtruction is thercfore (cæteris paribus) the beſt, in which the eye-glaſſes have large focal diſtances and ſmall apertures; thoſe eſpecially that are concerned in forming the laſt image. As to the ſingle lens by which the laſt image is viewed, it may be allowed to have a ſhort focal length, particularly if it's aperture may be contracted; for though this lens magni fies the faults already made in the laſt image by the other glaſs, it does not create new faults. Among the various ſorts of teleſcopes made with convex lenſes, and deſigned to ſhew the object upright, thoſe with four or five glaſſes are preferable to thoſe with fewer. The fewer lenſes there are in the eye-tube, the greater muſt be the refraction of the extreme pencils at each lens, ſuppoſing the ſum of all the refractions, or the whole change in the direction of the pencils, to be the ſame. Now though the number of refractions is increaſed, yet if the quantity oſ each refraction be proportionably diminiſhed, the ſum of all the aberrations in theſe pencils will be greatly leſſened; and the loſs of light, by paſſing through more glaſſes, will be very inconſiderable. Agreeable to this principle, it is found, that an object ſeen through two double convex lenſes, both of a ſize, and put cloſe together, appears diſtincter near the edges of thoſe lenſes, than if ſeen through one lens whoſe focal length is equal to that of the other two ſo combined together: likewiſe two equal plano-convex lenſes ſhew an object diſtincter at their edges when combined with their convex ſides touching each other, than contrariwiſe. Thus then the aberrations from the figure of- the eye-glaſſes may be leſſened, by inL creaſing the number and diminiſhing the quantity of the ſeveral refractions. The lens E, which intercepts the rays before the firſt image is formed, diminiſhes the magnifying power, but improves the diſtinctneſs of the teleſcope, by leſſening the diameter of the apertures of the deep lenſes D and C. The extreme pencil OW, which diverges from O, being refracted by this lens into WV, is made to converge towards the axis of the teleſcope, ſo that if produced it would meet at e. By this means the ſemidiameter of the lens D is reduced to DV, whereas if the firſt real image had been formed at OX by the object-glaſs only (the extreme pencil Oo in that caſe continuing to diverge), the ſemidiameter DV muſt have been greater than the image Ox, to take in the ſame field. The rays belonging to this and every other pencil which diverge from e g, the firſt real image muſt be made to converge again by the two lenſes D and C, that a ſecond real image may be formed upright. Two lenſes are employed for this purpoſe, becauſe the errors in the ſecond image will be Ieſſened by their contrary reſractions; ſuppoſing therefore their convexities equal, and that the rays of this pencil (refracted into vt) go parallel or nearly ſo between the lenſes D and C, then it is evident, that the focal length of D muſt be equal to the diſtance e v(g D), or nearly ſo; therefore the lenſes D and C, having a ſhorter focal length, will by no means admit of an aperture, whoſe ſemidiameter is greater than o x. It may be ſurther obſerved, that this pencil, which at firſt diverged ſrom the axis of the teleſcope, in the angle w OE and vò D, by the interpoſition of the lens E, this change is made at two refractions (at w and v), which muſt otherwiſe have been made by the reſraction of the lens D only. In like manner, the other lens B, which intercepts the rays juſt before the ſecond real image is formed, diminiſhes indeed the magnifying power, but makes the releſcope more diſtinct. The extreme pencil we have been conſidering, aſter refraction at t by the lens c, diverges ſrom the axis of the teleſcope, proceeding as if it came from the point y; but being refracted by the lens B into sr, is made to converge, ſo that if produced it would meet the axis of the teleſcope in . This leſſens the laſt image, reducing it from c æ to by; and as it is this image which is viewed by the eye through the eye-glaſs A, the interpoſition of the lens B leſſens the magnifying power, the eye-glaſs A remaining the ſame. The extreme pencil Sv thus converging upon the eye-glaſs A, the ſemidiameter of this glaſs will be reduced to Ar; whereas, had rhe lens B not been interpoſed, ſ(the extreme pencil ts c continuing to diverge from 7) the ſemidiameter of this eye-glaſs muſt have been greater than the image c 7, to take in the whole field. As a ſmall aperture of the eye-glaſs A is ſufficient ro take in the whole field when the pencils thus fall upon it converging, this lens may be allowed to have a ſhorter focal length, and thus compenſate for the loſs of magnifying power by the interpoſition of the lens B, without increaſing the aberration of the extreme pencils. You may prove this experimentally by taking out the ſecond eye-glaſs, then drawing out the tube to make the teleſcope diſtinct again, and you uwill find the magnifying power increaſed, the ficld diminiſhed, and perhaps indiſtinct near the edges. OF ACHROMATIC TELESCOPES. To render this ſubject plain and clear, I ſalt recal to your mind a few oſ thoſe principles which we have already explained. Thus you know that a ray oſ light, refracted by paſſing through mediums of different denſities, is at the ſame time proportionally divided or ſpread into a number ofſ parts, called homogencal rays, each being the exciting cauſe of a diſferent colour; and that theſe rays after reſraction proceed diverging. That a ray of light paſſing obliquely from a rarer into a denſer medium, is refracted towards the perpendicular; but when it paſſes from a denſer into a rarer medium, it is reſracted from the perpendicular. That when a ray of light is refracted out of air into a given medium, or out of a given medium into the ai, the ſines of the angles of incidence and refraction are in a conſtant ratio. But light conſiſting of parts which are differently refrangible, each part oſ an original or compound ray has a ratio peculiar to itſelſ; and that the more the heterogene ray is reſracted, the more will the colour-making rays diverge, as the ſines of the homogene rays are conſtant, and equal reſraction produces equal divergenc ies. Irom hence you have alſo been ſhewn, that the rays uhen paſſing through a convex lens, inſtead of uniting in one focus, ſorm as many ſoci of different diſtances, as there are coloured rays; and that the priſmatic colours or iriſes, which appear touards the borders of convex lenſes, render the images confuſed. The indiſtinctneſs of viſion produced by this cauſe, which is ſenſible in teleſcopes of a ſmall aperture, increaſes into ſo high a ratio upon enlarging the aperture, namely, as the cubes of the diameters, that unleſs this confuſion oſ colours uas corrected, it would be impoſſible to increaſe greatly l jyover oſ reſracting teleſcopes, without extendirg their length to a very inconvenient ſize. Tt was known before Mr. Dollonds, that different tranſparent bodies poſſeſſed ſome a greater and ſome a leſs refractive power; and it was taken for granted, until he evinced to the contrary, thal The diſperſive power of the coloured ray was in every tranſparent body proportional to it's mean reſractive power; or in other words, that the refraction oſſ the coloured rays, whatever body they paſſed through, were always in a conſtant determinate ratio to each other. Conſequently, if the diſperſion produced by a convex lens, were counteracted by another lens or medium of a concave form, that the refraction would alſo be totally deſtroyed; and that this would be the event, if the tuo lenſes were even made of the ſame matter. Upon this ſuppoſition, it was impoſſible ever to correct this fault in dioptric teleſcopes. While opticians continued to think, that equal refractions would, in every ſort of medium, neceſſarily produce equal divergencies, and that conſequently equal and contrary refractions would deſtroy each other, and that the divergency of colour from one refraction would be corrected by the other, there could be no poſſibility of producing any refraction that would not be affected by the different refrangibility of light. For, however a ray of light might be refracted bac kwards and ſorwards by diſſerent media, provided it was ſo done that the emerging ray was parallel to the incident one, it would always be white or colourleſs; but if it came out inclined to the incident ray, it would diverge and be ever after coloured. This erroneous ſuppoſition was countenanced by an experiment of Sir I. Newton, oſ placing tuo priſms, one made of glaſs contained within a priſmatic veſſel, filled with water, in ſuch manner that the rays oſ light which were refracted by the priſm of glaſs ſhould paſs through and be refracted in a contrary direction, and in as great a degree by the water priſm; by which means he relates, that light thus reſtored to it's original direction was white and free from colours. In the year 1757, Mr. John Dollond repeated this ſamous experiment of Newton, of refracting a ray of light through priſms of glaſs and water, placed with their refracting angles in oppoſite directions, and ſo proportioned to each other that the ray aſter theſe oppoſite reſractions emerged parallel to the incident ray. According to the Newtonian doctrine, there ought here to frave been no divergency of the heterogeneal rays, and no colour produced by theſe equal and oppoſite refractions. But this was not the reſult of the experiment:; the ray was very ſenſibly coloured. Mr. Dollond, finding that oppoſite refractions produce colour notwithſtanding the paralleliſm of the incident and emergent ray, concludes, that by properly adjuſting the angles, he might effect an inclination of the refracted to the incident light, without any colour or divergency. Experiment proved his reaſoning to be juſt. It may be proper to obſerve here, that thoſe media are ſaid to have the ſame mean refractive denſity, which, under equal obliquities of incidence, equally refract the mean refrangible ray; and two media are ſaid to have the ſame diſperſive power, which produce an equal inclination of rays of the ſame colour to the mean refrangible ray, when the whole refraction oſ the mean refrangible ray is equal in both. i Let ihe vertex of a ſlint glaſs priſm, tbe refracting angle of which is equal to 23040, be applied to ihe baſe of a erewn glaſs priſm, tbe refracting angle of which is equal to 2525 a ray of ſolar lighi will paſs through the priſms when their ſurfaces are contiguous, but the emergent ray will be coloured. * The ray is ſuppoſed to fall perpendicularly upon the ſurface of the priſm, whoſe refracting angle is the greateſt. The poſition of the priſms in this experiment is ſuch, that the effects of refraction upon the paralleliſm of the homogeneal rays paſſing through them are contrary to each other, and conſequently if they were equal the rays would emerge parallel. Bur the flint priſm, by it's greater diſſipating power, more than counteracits the ſeparation of the rays cauſed by their paſſage through the firſt priſm, which was equal 383 minutes; and inverting the order of the colours, cauſes the red and violet rays to emerge, inclined to each other at an angle of 12  minutes, ſufficiently great to produce a ſenſible tinge oſ the priſmatic coloura in the emergent rays. Every tbing remaining as in the laſt experiment, let the vertex of a crotun glaſs priſin, the refracting angle of which is 100, be applied to the baſe of the ſlint priſm. If a ray of solar light paſſes through the three priſms, when their ſurfaces are contiguous, the emergent ray will deviate about 50 37 from the courſe of ibe incident ray, but will be colourleſs. In this caſe the two crown glaſs priſms refracting the ray in the ſame direction, cauſe it to deviate from the courſe of the incident ray about 50 37 more than the deviation in the contrary direction ariſing from refraction througha flint priſm. But the flint priſm, by it's greater diſſipating power, exactly counteracts the ſeparation of the rays cauſed by refraction through the other two priſms, priſms, ſo that the homogeneal rays emerge at length parallel, and of courſe colourleſs. Now this was what was wanted; for you have ſeen, rhat the difficulty which chiefly impeded the improvement of teleſcopes was, ſo to refract a ray while it deviated conſiderably from it's original courſe, that the diſperſion of the homogeneal rays might be counteracted, and that by this means they might all emerge parallel, and of courſe free from colour; and this is, you perceive, effected by a combination of tranſparent ſubſtances, the refracting and diſſipating powers oſ which are different. In this experiment the rays of mean refrangibility emerge at an angle of refraction equal to 160 57. i a ſolar ray impinged upon the ſurface of the priſm laſt applied at an angle of incidence equal to 160 57, the angle of diſſipation aſter e nerę ence into air would be equal 12 2. But it was ſhewn in the former experiment, that the diſſipation of the rays emerging from the two priſms was equal 12 8, for which reaſon (and on account of the contrary poſition of the priſms) the red and violet rays emerging, inclined to each other at an angle of 12 1 from the two priſms, and falling upon the third will be refracted out of it colourleſs. It appears then that two kinds of glaſs are neceſſary for achromatic teleſcopes, one of which ſhall poſſeſs as ſmall, and rhe other as great diſperſive powers, relatively to their mean refracting ray, as can be procured. The difference oſ glaſs in this reſpect depends on the quality of the ingredients employed in their compoſition. ted by means of the aſhes oſ ſea-weeds, barilla, or kelp, both which fluxes are known to conſiſt of veetable earth, alkali, and neutral ſalts, is ſfound to give the ſmalleſt diſperſive power. P late-glaſs, which is compoſed oſ ſand melted by means of fixed alkali, with little or no vegetable earth, gives a greater diſperſive power. . The diſperſive power of flint-glass is much greater than either of the other, and this conſiſts of ſand melted by a mixture of minium and fixed alkali. It is probable therefore, that minium and other metallic calces give the greateſt diſperſive power, and that alkalis give more than vegetable, and probably other earths. Let a crown-glas priſm, whoſe refracting angle is 306, be applied contiguous to a priſm of flint-glass, whoſe refracting angle is 190; with the vertices of tbe priſins in oppoſite directions, a ſolar ray RE refracted tbrough them will deviate ſrom the courſe of the incident ray, but will not be ſeparated into ibe coloured rays. Here it appears, that the two priſms operate equally upon the paralleliſm of the homogeneal rays paſſing through them, and that as theſe effects by the poſition of the priſms tend to correct each other, the homogeneal rays, after being refracted through them, emerge parallel and coloureſs. Mr. Dollond next conſidered, that as a ray might be refracted free from colour through a wedge, it might alſo through a lens. When an image of an object is formed by a convex lens, it appears coloured, owing to the diſperſion of the rays by refraction; as thereſore rays can be refracted without diſperſion by priſms, he conceived that it might alſo be done by a combination ofſ lenſes. And in this he ſucceeded, by conſidering, that in order to make two ſpherical glaſſes that ſhould refract the light in contrary directions, as in the two wedges, one muſt be concave and the other convex; and as the rays are to converge to a real focus, the exceſs of refraction muſt be in the convex lens, becauſe that makes rays converge, and the concave makes them diverge. Alſo, as the convex lens is to refract moſt, it muſt be made of croun-glaſs, as appeared from the experiments with the wedges, and the concave lens of white flint-glaſs. Farther, as theangle of diſperſion varies inverſely as the focal length, very nearly, from the principles of optics, and the angle of diſperſion alſo varies as the diſperſing powers, therefore if the focal lengths be taken inverſely as the diſperſing powers, found ſrom the two wedges, the angles of diſperſion will be equal, and being in contrary directions they wiil correct each other, and the different refrangibility of light will be removed. Upon tis principle, Mr. Dollond was enabled to make a combined lens to form an image free from colour, and thereſore brought to perfection the refracting teleſcope, making it repreſent objects with great diſtinctneſs, and in their true colours. Inſtead of forming the object-glaſs with one convex lens of croun and one of flint-glaſs, two convex lenſes oſf crown are uſed, and the concave one of flint put between them. This conſtruction oſ the object-glaſs tends alſo to correct the error ariſing from the ſpherical form of the lens; for as the rays at the edge of the convex lens tend to a focus nearer to the lens than thoſe at the middle, the concave lens, which makes the rays at the edge diverge more than thoſe at the middle, will counteract the above effect, and bring the rays at all diſtances from the center of the lens to a focus more nearly together; and by a proper adjuſtment of the foci, the diffuſion of rays at the focus may be rendered inconſiderable. Teleſcopes thus conſtructed are called achromatie. This diſcovery of Mr. DOoLLOND was ſo extraordinary, and ſo contrary to the beſt eſtabliſhed principles, that it was not believed at firſt by Mr. EuLEκ. At length, however, Mr. Zic usr, of Peterſourg, made experiments ſimilar to thoſe oſ Mr. Dollond, and convinced Mr. Euler that it was true. He alſo ſhewed, that it is the lead which is uſed in ſome compoſitions of glaſs, which produces the extraordinary property of augmenting the diſperſion of the extreme rays, without ſenſibly changing the refraction of the mean. Mr. Euler, in a paper read at the academy of ſciences at Berlin in 1764, was candid enough to own he did not at firſt credit the account, and thereby gave to Mr. DoLLOND the credit of the diſcovery. Notwithſtanding this, Mr. Delaland in his aſtronomy, and Mnr. Fieſs in his eulogy on Mr. Luler, both aſcribe the invention to Mr. Euler. Mr. P. Dollond has however fully proved, that the diſcovery muſt be attributed to Mr. John DOLLOND. * In the ſame pamphlet Mr. Dollond has ſhewn the reaſons which prevented Newton from drawing the ſame concluſions; that it aroſe from the kind of glaſs he made uſe of, ſo that his veracity remains unimpeached, and the experiments, when made with the ſame Eind of glaſs, exactly correſpond with thoſe of Sir I. Newton. In his time the Engliſh were not famous ſor making teleſcopes, many were imported from Venice. The glaſs imported from this place was nearly of the ſame refractive quality as our crown-glaſs, but of a better * d Some account of the diſcovery by the late Mr. John Dollond, which led to the grea improvement oſ refratting tere ter colour. It is probable that Newton's priſms were made of that glaſs, becauſe he mentions the ſpecific gravity of common glaſs to be to water as a, 58 to 1, which anſwers nearly to that of crownglaſs. Mr. Dollond made a priſm of a piece of this glaſs, and trying the experiment with it, found it anſwered very nearly to what Newton relates; the difference being only ſuch as may be ſuppoſed to ariſe from the ſame kind of glaſs made at different times. OF REFLECTING TELESCOPES. Sir John Pringle, in his diſcourſe to the Royal Society on the refiecting teleſcope, attributes the firſt thought thereof to Merſennus, who propoſed to Deſcartes a teleſcope with ſpecula, muny years before Gregory's invention; though indeed in a manner ſo very unſatisſactory, that Deſcartes, who had given particular attention to the improvement oſ the teleſcope, was ſo ſar from approving the propoſal, that he endeuvoured to convince Qerſennus of the fallacy. Gregory was led to the invention by ſeeking to correct two imperfections of the common teleſcope; the ſirſt was, it's too great length, which made it leſs manageable; the ſecond the incorrectneis of the image. It had been demonſtrated that a pencil of rays could not be collected in a ſingle point by a ſpherical lens, and alſo that the image tranſmitted by ſuch a lens would be in ſome degree incurvated. Theſe inconveniences he believed would be obviated by ſubſtituting for the object-glaſs a metallic ſpeculum of a parabolic figure, to receive the image, and to reſlect it towards a ſmall ſpeculum of the ſame metal; this again was to return the image to an eye-glaſs placed behind the great ſpeculum, which, for that purpoſe, was to be perſforated in it's center. But as Gregory was endowed with no mechanical dexterity, nor could find any workman capable of realizing his invention, after ſome fruitleſo attempts he gave up the purſuit. And, probably had not ſome new diſcoveries been made in light and colours, a reflecting teleſcope would never more have been thought of, conſidering the difficulty of the execution, and the ſmall advantages that could accrue from it, deducible from the principles of optics that were then known. But Newton, whoſe happy genius for experimental knovw ledge was equal to that for geometry. and who to theſe talents, in a ſupreme degree. joined patience and mechanical abilities, happily interpoſed and ſaved this noble invention from well nigh periſhing in it's infant ſtate. While he was employed in endeavouring to grind lenſes of the figure of one of the conic ſections, he happened to examine the colours formed by a priſm, and having by means of that ſimple inftrument made the ever memorable diſcovery of tbe different refrangibility of the rays of light, he then perceived that the errors of teleſcopes ariſing from that circumſtance alone, were ſome hundred times greater than ſuch as were occaſioned by the ſpherical figure of lenſes. This forced Newton as it were to fall into Gregory's track, and to turn his thought to reflectors. If Netvton was not the firſt inventor of the reſlecting teleſcope, he was the main and effectual inventor. It was towards the end oſ 1668, or the beginning of the following year, that Newton being thus obliged to have recourſe to reflectors, and not relying on any artiſicer for making his ſpecula, ſet about the work himſelf, and carly in the year 1673 completed two ſinall reflecting teleſcopes; one oĩ theſe he preſented to the Royal Society, communicating at the ſame time a ſull and ſatisfactory æccount of it's conſtruction and performance, and received from them ſuch thanks as were due for ſo curious and valuable a preſent. But how excellent ſoever the contrivance was, how well ſoever ſupported and announced to the public, yet, whether it was that the artiſts were deterred by the difficulty and labour of the work, or that the diſcoveries even of a Netwton were not to be exempted ſrom the general fatality attending great and uſeful inventions, ſbe making a ſlow anda vexalious progreſs to the authors; the ſact is, that excepting an unſucceſsful attempt which the Royal Society made by employing an artificer to imitate the Newtonian conſtruction, and a diſguiſed Gregorian teleſcope, ſet up by Cuſſegrain abroad, as a rival to Netwton's, and that in theory only (for it was never put in execution by the author) no reflector was heard of for near halſ a century after. But when that period was elapſed, a reflecting teleſcope was produced to the world of the Seurtonian conſtruction, which the venerable author, ere yet he had finiſhed his much diſtinguiſhed courſe, had the ſatisfaction to find executed in ſuch a manner, as to leave no room to fear that the invention would longer continue in obſcurity. This memorable event was owing to the dexterity, the genius, and application oſ Mr. Hadley, the inventor oſ the reſlecting quadrant, another moſt valuable inſtrument. The two teleſcopes which Newton had made, were but 6 inches long, and in power were compared to a 6 feet refractor. Hadley's teleſcope was above 6 feet long, and equalled in performance the famous aerial teleſcope of Hu, gens, of 123 fcet in length. * . It Int may be worth obſerving, that Sir I. Newton ſent his tcleſcope to the Royal Society while his election into the ſociety was depending, and he concludes with ſaying, that if he ſhould be elected, he would endeavour to teſtiſy his grutitude by communicating what his poor and ſolitary endeavours could effect, toward promoting their philoſophical deſign. Such was the modeſty of the nian, who uas the glory of the ſociety, of the nation, oſ the world. OFr THE GRECORIAN REFIECTING TELESCOPE. The Gregorian reflector conſiſts of tuo concave mirrors, and tuo plano-convex lenſes for the eye-glailes. TITTII, ſfig. a, pl. 8, is a cylindrical tube; at the bottom ofſ this a concave metallic reſlector or mirror DUVF is placed; this reflector has a hole in the middle. Touwards the other end a ſinall concave mirror L is placed; this is ſupported on an arm M, which may be moved nearer to, or ſarther ſrom the great ſpeculum, at pleaſure. Theſe two mirrors are placed parallel to each other; the ſmall one is generally ſomewhat larger than the hole in the great mirror. At the bortom oſ the c lindrical tube, and juſt oppoſite to the perforation in the ſarge mirror, is a ſmall braſs tube æfòe, containing the tuo eyelaſſes; at the further end of this tube is a very mall hole, to which the eſe is to be applicd. The conſtruction being underſtood, we may proceed to explain the optical eſiectoſ this inſtrument. . 1I. The open end of the cylindrical tube being ſet directly towarus the object, which being ſupVOL. poſed to be diſtant, the rays proceeding thereſrom may be conſidered as parallel to each other; and being reflected back by the large concave ſpeculum, they will form an image of the object at it's focus, which, ſrom the figure, is evident will be inverted. Let C repreſent all the rays proceeding from the point B of the object, and E the pencil of rays proceeding from the point A. The rays C falling parallel upon the great mirror, will be thence reſſected, and converge in the direction DG; and by croſſing at I, the principal focus of the mirror, they will form the upper extremity of the inverted image IK, ſimilar to the lower extremity B oſ the object A B. In like manner, the rays E, which come from the top of the object, and fall upon the great mirror at F, are thence reſlected converging to it's focus, where they form the lower extremity K of the inverted image IK, fimilar to the upper extremity A of the object A B. The rays ſrom theſe two pencils paſs on ſrom I and K to the ſmall mirror L, the rays from F ſalling upon it at h; thoſe ſrom D falling upon it at g, from which points they are again reflected. 2. The focus of the ſmall ſpeculum is at n, a little beyond the place where the image is ſormed by the great ſpeculum. If the focus of this mirror fell preciſely on m, vhere the image from the other is formed, the rays would be reflected parallel therefrom; but as it is ſomewhat beyond or longer than that diſtance, they are reflected converging in the direction g N. 3. Ihe converging pencil of rays g N, proceeding from the point a, and reflected by the ſmall mirror, would coincide beyond the teleſcope glaſſes. It is the ſame with the other converging pencil. But to render the inſtrument ſhorter, theſe converging rays are made to fall on the lens R in the eye-tube, which increaſes their convergence, and makes them coincide at a and b, where they form an erect image of the object at a b. This image being at the focus of the lens S, the rays proceeding from the image formed there, are ſo refracted by it as to emerge parallel to the eye, and thus produce diſtinct viſion. The light which ſalls upon the ſurſace of the large mirror is reflected to the ſmall mirror; the eye therefore receives ſrom the teleſcope a quantity of light, which is to that which it would receive by naked viſion, nearly in the ſame proportion that the ſurface of the large mirror is to the ſurface of the ſmall hole at e, ncar the pupil of the eye. The rays paſſing on from the image, paſs through the ſecond eye-glaſs S, and through a ſmall hole e enter the eye f, uhich ſees the image ab, and by means of the eye-glaſs under the large angle c ed, the ſecond glaſs increaſes the field, and renders the imæge more perfect. In order to ſuit diflerent eyes and diſtances, there is a ſmall rod with a ſcrew at one end; this ſcrew goes through the arm uhich is ſixed to the ſmall reflector, ſo that by turning the end it brings it nearer, or removes it further ſfrom the larger ſpeculum. An eye-ſtop is plaoed at the laſt image, to cut off he ſuperfluous rays; a very ſmall hole is made at e, to let the rays paſs to the eye. do ſee near objects, or to accemmodate the teleſcope for long-ſighted people, the ſmall mirror muſt be moved further ſrom the large mirror than when uſed for diſtant objects or a conunon ſight; for if an object comes nearer, is image at m will come nearer n, and as nm grows leſs, n P will grou greater, and will come nearer the lens R; to reduce or bring it back, the mirror muſt be removed further. For ſbort-ſighted people, the focus P muſt be brought nearer R, to make the rays more divergent; that is, n P muſt be longer, and conſequently nm ſborter, or h g brought nearer to DU, VF. Thereſore for diſtant objects, and ſhortſighted people, turn the ſerew to tbe right; but for near objects and old eyes, turn io ibe left. This teleſcope, as you have ſeen, ſhews the object erect, but not ſo bright as in refracting teleſcopes, becauſe glaſs tranſmits more light than metal reflects. It has been eſtimated, that one third of the light received is loſt by reflection. The viſible area of an object is as the breadth of the eye-glaſs; for if the image at IK, and the eye-glaſs be increaſed, the image at m ulll alſo be increaſed, becauſe the angles oſ incidence and reflection at h g are equal, and conſequently the viſible part of the object is increaſed. The brightneſs of the object is in proportion to the aperture, for the larger this is, the greater is the quantity of light that comes to the eye. The extreme parts of the image are leſs bright than the reſt, becauſe the ſhadow of the ſmall ſpeculum ſalls on the outſide, but towards the middle it only covers the hole. To render the determination of the magnifying power more eaſy, I ſhall conſider the tube to be twelve inches long, tuo inches diameter; the concave ſpeculum, at the bottom oſ the tube, to be of ſeven inches focus, and tuo inches diameter ; the hole in the center 7r of an inch in diameter; the focus of the ſmall mirror 43, it's diameter ?æ of an inch; the firſt eye-glaſs about three inches focus, the ſecond about 72. We muſt now refer back to our former inſtructions on the principles of rays of light, when reſlected from a ſpherical concave mirror. You will recollect, iſt, That the light, which comes from a very diſtant object, is ſo refiected that the point where they meet, and where the image is formed, is  part of the diameter ofſ the ſphere, of which the great ſpeculum is a ſegment. ad, That if the object is at the ſocus of a concave ſpherical mirror, the rays falling therefrom are reflected parallel to cach other. Now diſtant objects ſcen through the reflecting teleſcope, form an inverted image at IK, the focal point of the large ſpeculum, and nine inches thereſrom, and the image and object both appear under the ſame angle from the vertex oſ the mirror; this image at the focus IK being the baſe of two angles, whoſe ſummits are the centers oſ the two ſpherical mirrors. Nou the diſtance of the focus of the two mirrors is as 1 to 9, or as 3 to 18, hy taking away the fraction; or as 1 to 6, by dividing the terms by 3: therefore the two angles are in the proportion of 1 to 6, that is, the angle ſubtended by the ſpherical ſurface, of which A B is a portion, is ſix times larger than what the object ſubtends at the ſurface of the larger mirror; conſequently if the eye vas placed in the parallel rays proceeding froni the ſmall ſpec ulum, it would ſee the object perfectly therein, and m 3niſied in the proportion of the focal diſtances of the tuo metals, that is, as 6 to I. Novw the two lenſes in the eve-tube form a celeſcope, whoſe property, on the principles alM ready laid down, is to magniſy the object in the proportion that the focus of the lens S exceeds that of R in this inſtance, as 36 to 10; but the teleſcope was before ſhewn to magnify in the proportion of 6 to 1. By combining theſe proportions, we ſhall obtain 10 X 1, and 36 X 6, or 10 to 216, or nearly as 1 to 22. OF THE NEWTONIAN TELESCOPE. The teleſcope of Newton differs a little in the conſtruction from that of Gregory, but it is founded upon the ſame principles, as well geometrical as phyſical. It conſiſts, like the former, of a tube to receive the metals; the upper end of the tube is open; at the bottom of this is placed a concave metal reflector, and a plain ſmall metal reflecior, inclined 45 degrees to the axis of the large reflector. This ſmall reflector muſt be of an oval form; the length of the oval ſhould be to the breadth as 2 to 1, on account of the obliquity of it's poſition; it is ſupported on an arm fixed to the ſide of the tube; an eye-glaſs is placed in a ſmall tube, moveable in the larger tube, ſo as to be perpendicular to the axis of the large reflector, the perpendicular line paſſing through the center of the ſmall mirror, The ſmall mirror is to be ſituated between the large mirror and it's focus, that it's diſtance ſrom this focal point may be equal to the diſtance from the center of the mirror to the focus of the eyeglaſſ. The tube vx2y, ſig. 3, pl.S, being turned with its open end towards the object, parallel rays coming thereſrom will be reflected by the concave mirror to it's ſocus, where it would form an inverted image of the object, but from the interpoſition of the ſmall refiector ſe g, they are prevented coming ro the focus, and are reflected to t, the focus of the eye-glaſs, where they form an image equal to what would have been formed at the focus of the concave mirror. This image being in the focus of the eye-glaſs, the rays proceeding therefrom will be ſo refracted by the lens, as to emerge parallel to the eye, and therefore properly conſtituted to produce diſtinct viſion. If the face be turned towards the open end of the tube, and the eye be applied at h, the object will appear inverted; but if the face be turned towards c d, the object will be erect: the latter poſition is in moſt caſes very inconvenient. The magnifying power is in the ſume proportion as the focal diſtance of the concave ſpeculum exceeds that of the eye-glaſs. This teleſcope will bear a greater aperture than the Gregorian reflector; leſs light is alſo loſt from the oval plane, cthan from a ſpherical reflector. It is by means oſ a Newtonian teleſcope that Dr. Herſchel has added ſo many valuable diſcoveries to aſtronomy. There is another kind of reflecting teleſcope, known by the name of Caſſegrain; but as it is not uſed at preſent, it will be needleſs for me to deſcribe it here; I ſhall therefore only obſerve, that it is ſimilar to the Gregorian teleſcope, except in one inſtance, namely, that the ſmall ſpeculum is convex inſtead of concave. The diſadvantages under which reflecting teleſcopes labour, ariſe from rheir requiring larger apertures to tranſmit the ſame quantity of light; from being more affected by the imperſections oſ the atmoſphere than a reſracting teleſcope; from being liable to tarniſh; but principally from the imperfections of the workmanſhip of the object-ſpeMm culum, which injures them more than equal faults in the object-glaſs of refractors. in the hands of a man whoſe mind is well directed, every part oſ ſcience is made uſeful; among many inſtances oſ this, I ſhall give you one from the lIcarned Mr. acob Bryant's treatiſe on the Authenticity of the Scriptures, in which, from the teleſcopes we have been coniidering, he ſhews the ueakneſs of ſome inſidel objections to revelation. Thus he ſheus, that there is no more reaſon to object to the authenticity of the ſcriptures on account of ſome diſficulties, than to natural religion or natural philoſophy on the ſame account; for they are equally attended with diſfſiculties. Natural philoſophy abounds with phenomena which we ſec and know, but cannot explain, as gravity, magnetiſm, &c. If any perſon had prophetically inſormed Archimedes or Endoaus, that viſion would one day be wonderfully aſſiſtcd by art, and that the manner of improving ght vould be to place a dark opake ſubſtance directly between the object and the eye, they muſt hare thought the prophet out of his ſenſes. And when they heard that the other method was, in viewing an object, not to look at it, but to keep the eye in a quite diſferent direction, how could they digeſt theſe doctrines, by which they were taught, that ſight would be helped by impediments, and that the beſt way of ſeeing objects was Iooking another way? Yet uhoever is acquainted with the Gregorian teleſcope, muſt know, that ſuch a dark body does intervene be tucen the eye and the object; and that in the Metonian teleſcope the ſight is directed ſideways, at an angle of 90 degrees. When oncce knoun, the thing is ſound to be conſonant to reaſon and experience. If then we meet with many things in common liſe and worldly ſcience, which ſeem difficult to comprehend, and ſome beyond our reaſon, we muſt expect to find others beyond our reaſon in that grand ſyſtem oſ life and immortality laid before us in holy writ. LECTURE XXIII. OF MICROSCOPES. Y a microſcope we underſtand an inſtrumeni sor viewing ſmall objects, rendering choſe viſible which would be orherwiſe imperceptible. Microſcopes are divided into three different kinds, ſingle, compound, and ſolar; ſingle microſcopes are thoſe which conſiſt of one lens; com pound, thoſe which are formed of two or more lenſes; ſolar, thoſe which are uſed in a dark room, the object being illuminated by the ſun, and the image received on a ſcreen. It is generally ſuppoſed, that microſcopes were invented about the ycar 1680, a period fruitful in diſcoveries, when the mind began to emancipate itſelf from thoſc errors and prejudices by which it had been too long enſlaved, to aſſert it's rights, extend it's powers, and follow the paths which lcad to truth. The honour of the invention is claimed by the Italians and the Dutch; the name of the inventor, houever, is loſt; probably the diſcovery did not at firſt appear ſuffſiciently imortant, to engage the attention oſ thoſe men, who, be their reputation in ſcience, ucere able to eſtabliſ an opinion of it's merit with the reſt of the world, and hand down the name oſ the inventor to ſucceeding  See mv Eſſuys on the Lcroſcope. oſ which I mean to putliſh a ntw cdinon tne larme hre with this work, 10 which it will be a proper ſupplement, auonfeſſing the wildom oſ oOd in ſucceeding ages. Men oſ great literary abilities are apt to deſpiſe the firſt dawnings of invention, not conſidering that all real knowledge is progreſſive, and that what they deem trifling may be the firſt and neceſſary link to a new branch of ſcience. The microſcope extends the boundaries of the organs of viſion; enables us to examine the ſtructure of plants and animals; preſents to the eye myriads oſ beings, of whoſe exiſtence we had before formed no idea; opens to the curious an exhauſtleſs ſource of information and pleaſure; and furniſhes the philoſopher with an unlimited field of inveſtigation. It leads, to uſe the words of an ingenious uriter, to the diſcovery of a thouſand wcenders in the works of his hand, who created ourſelves, as well as the objects oſ our admiration; it improves the faculties, exalts the comprehenſion, and multiplies the inlets to happineſs; is a new ſource of praiſe to him, to whom all we pay is nothing of what we owe; and while it pleaſes the imagination with the unbounded treaſures it oſſers to the view, it tends to make the whole life one continued act of admiration. For there is no object ſo inconſiderable, that it has not ſomething to invite the curious eye to examine it; nor is there any, which, when properly examined, will not amply repay the trouble of inveſtigation. It is not difficult to fix the period when the microſcope firſt began to be generally known, and was uſed for the purpoſe of examining minute objects; for though we are ignorant of the name of the ſirſt inventor, we are acquainted with the names of thoſe who firſt engaged the public attention, by exhibiting ſome of its wonderful effects. Zacharias Janſens and his ſon had made microſcopes before the ycar 1619, for in that year the ingenious Cornelius Drebell brought one, which was made by them, with him into England, and ſhewed it to William Borrell and others. It is poſſible this inſtrument of Drebell's was not ſtrictlv what is now meant by a microſcope, but was rather a kind of microſcopic teleſcope, ſomething ſmilar in principle to that lately deſcribed by Mpr. Aepinus, in a letter to the Academy of Sciences at Peterſburg. It was formed oſf a copper tube ſix ſeet long and one inch diameter, ſupported by three braſ pillars in the ſlape oſf dolphins; theſe werc ſixed to a baſe of ebony, on which the objccts to be viewed by the microſcope were alſo placed. In contradiction to this, Fontana, rin a work which he publiſhed in 16426, ſa s, that he had made microſcopes in the year 1618: this may be alſo very true, without derogating from the merit of the Janſens, for we have many inſtances in our oun times oſ more than one perſon having executed the ſame contrivance, nearly at the ſamie time, without any communication ſrom one to the orher. In 1685, Stelluti publiſhcd a deſcription of the parts of a bee, uwhich he had examined with a microſcope. If we conlider the microſcope as an inſtrument conſiſtinæ oſ one lens only, it is not at all improbable, that it uas known to the ancients much ſooner than the laſt century, nay, even in a degree to the Greess and Rormans; for it is certain, that ſpectacles were in u long before the above-mentioned period. Novw as the glaſſes of rheſe were made oſ diſterent convexities, and conſequently oſ dilicrent magniſving powers, it is naturul to ſuppoſe, that ſmalier and more convex lenſes were mads, and ap plicd to the examination oſ minute ohjects. lIntrus ſenſc, there is alſo ſome 2round for thinling the ancientuere not ignorant of the uſc oſ lenſe : or at Itaſt oſ what approached nearlto, and inight in ſume inſtunees Ue ſubilirutc ſor thr. i OFP THEOPTICAL LFFECT OP MICROSCOPES. It has been already obſerved, that the human eye is ſo conſtituted, that we cannot ſee an object diſtinctly when it is nearer the eye than ſix inches. To enable us to ſce objects nearer is the deſign oſ microſcopes, for by this means we are enabled to diſcern thoſe objects which, from their minuteneſs, become imperceptible at a ſmall diſtance. Hence a microſcope is ſaid to magnify the objects ſeen through it; but this expreſſion is only true with reſpect to the appurent magnitude of the object. To have right ideas on this ſubject, you muſt diſtinguiſh the appurent from the real magnitude of objects; the real magnitude of an object is the object of geometry, and. remains invariable as long as the object continucs in the ſame ſtate; the apparent magnitude may be inſinitely varied, while the real ſize rerins Unaltered. Thus the ſtars in the heavens appeai to us exceeding ſmall, although their real ſise is prodigious; this diſſerence is occaſioned Dy therr immente diſtance. If we could approach them, we ſhould ſind them increaſe in ſiæe as the dillunce diminiſhes; the apparent magnitude depending in a great degree on the angle under uwhich it is ſeen, and this angle increaſes or diminiſhes, according as the object i is nearer to or further ſrom the eje. Thus let POQ, ſis.a, pl.8, be the object of our ſight; this, iſ the ee be at A, will appear under the angle PA  called the viſu. al angle, and which determines in a great meaſure the apparent ſize of an object. It is plain from hence, that the further the eye is ſrom the object, the ſmaller is this angle; and that thus the largeſt bodies inav be ſeen under an excecding ſmall angle, if they are at a ſuſſicient diſtunce. If the eye be at B, the object will be ſeen under the angle O BO, which is viſibly larger than the angle PA O. Let the eye be at c, the angle P C O is larger than P BO; and ſo on, the nearer the eye is to the object, the larger is the viſual angle. From hence it follows, that the apparent diameter of an object ſeen by the naked eye, may be magnified in any proportion we pleaſe; for as the upparent diameter is increaſed in proportion as the diſtance from the eye is leſſened, we have only to leſſen the diſtance of the object ſrom the eye, in order to increaſe the apparent diameter thereof.Thus, ſuppoſe there is an object, A B, pl. 8, fig. s, which to an eye at E ſubtends or appears under the angle AE B, we may magnify the apparent diameter in what proportion we pleaſe, by bringing our eye nearer to it. If, for inſtance, we would magnify it in the proportion of FG to AB; that is, if we would ſee the object under an angle as large as F E G, or would make it appear the ſame Iength that an object as long as F G would appear, it may be done by coming nearer to the object. For the apparent diameter is as the diſtance inverſcly; thereſore, if CD is as much leſs than CE, as FG is greater than AB, by bringing the eye nearer to the object in the proportion of C D to E b, the apparent diameter will be magnified in the proportion of FG to AB; ſo that the object A , to the eye at D, will appear as long as an object F G would appear to the eye at E. In the ſame manner, we might ſhew, rhat the apparent diameter of an object, when ſeen by the naked eye, may be infinite. For ſince the apparent diameter is reciprocally as the diſtance oſ the eye, when the diſtance oſ the eye is nothing, or when the eye is cloſe cloſe to the object at C, the apparent diameter will be the reciprocal of nothing, or infinite. There is, however, one great inconvenience in thus magnifying an object, without the help of glaſſes, by placing the eye nearer to it. The inconvenience is, that we cannot ſee an object diſtinctly, unleſs the eye is about five or ſix inches from it; therefore, iſf we bring it nearer to our eye than five or ſix inches, however it may be magnified, it will be feen confuſedly. Upon this account, the greateſt apparent magnitude of an object that we are uſed to, is the apparent magnitude when the eye is about five or ſix inches from it: and we never place an object much within that diſtance; becauſe, though it might be magni fied by this means, vet the confuſion would prevent our deriving any advantage from ſccing it ſo large. The ſiZe of an object ſeems extraordinary, when viewed through a convex lens; not becaufe it is impoſſible to make it appear oſ the ſame ſice to the naked cye, but becauſe at the diſtance from the eve uhich would be neceſſary for this purpoſe, it would appear exccedingly confuſed; for which reaſon, we never bring our cye ſo near to it, and conſequently as we have not been accuſtomed to ſee the object of this ſiæe, it appears an extraordinary one. On account of the extreme minuteneſs of the atoms of light, it is clear, a ſingle ray, or even a ſmall number of rays, cannot make a ſenſible impreſſion on the orgun of ſight, whoſe ſibres are very groſs, when compared to theſe atoms; it is neceſſary, therefore, that a great number ſhould proceed from the ſurface of an object, to render it viſible. But as the rays oſ light, which proceed from an object, arc continually dive ruing, different methods have been contrived, as we have already ſhewn you, either of uniting them in a given point, or of ſeparating them at pleaſure. Thus, by the help oſ convex lenſes, we unite in the ſame ĩenſible point a great number of rays, proceeding from one point of an object; and as each ray carries with it the image of the point from whence it proceeded, all the rays united muſt form an image of the object from uhence they were emitted. IThis image is brighter, in roportion as there are more rays united; and more diſtinct, in proportion as the order in which they procceded, is better preſerved in their union. We perceive the preſence and figure of objects by the impreſſion each reſpective image makes on the retina; the mind, in conſequence of theſe impreſſions, forms concluſions concerning the ſize, poſition, and motion of the object: It muſt however be obſerved, that theſe concluſions are oſten rectiſied or changed by the mind, in conſequence of the cffects of more habitual impreſſions. For example; there is a certain diſtance, at which, in the general buſineſs of life, we are accuſtomed to ſee objects: now, though the meaſure oſ the image of tlicſe objects changes conſiderably when they move from, or approach ncarer to us, yet we do not perceive that their ſiæe is much altered: but bevond this diſtance, we find the objects appear to be diminiſhed, or increaſed, in proportion as they are more or Ieſs diſtant from us. For inſtance, iſ I place mv eve ſucceſſively at two, at four, and at ſix fect irom the ſume perſon, the dimenſions oſ the image on the retina will be nearly in the proportion of I, oſ 35, oſ 1, and conſequently they ilould appear to be dimini hed in the ſame proportion; but ue do not perccive this diminution, preſſion reccived on the retina. To prove this, we necd only conſider, that if we ſce a perſon at 120 feet diſtance, he will not appear ſo ſtrikingly ſmall, as if the ſame perſon ſhould be viewed from the top of a touwer, or other building, 120 feet high, a ſituation to which we had not been accuſtomed. From hence, alſo, it is clear, that when we place a glaſs between the object and the eye, which ſrom it's ſigure changes the direction of the rays of light from the object, this object ought not to be judged as if it were placed at the ordinary reach of the ſight, in which caſe we judge of it's ſiæe more by habit than by the dimenſions of the images formed on the retina: but it muſt be eſtimated by the ſize of the image in the eye, or by the angle formed at the eve, by the tuo rays which come from the extremity of the object. If the image of an object, formed after refraction, is greater or leſs than the angle formed at the eye, by the rays proceeding from the extremities of the object itſelf, the object will appear alſo proportionably enlarged or diminiſhed; ſo that if the eye approaches to, or removes from, the laſt image, the object will appear to increaſe or diminiſh though the eye ſhould in reality remove ſrom it in one aſe, or approach towards it in the other; becauſe the image takes place oſ the object, and is conſidered inſtead of it. The apparent diſtance oſ an object from the eye, is not meaſured by the real diſtance from the laſt image; for, as the apparent diſtance is eſtimated principally by the ideas we have of their ſize, it follows, that when we ſee objects, whoſe images are increaſed or diminiſhed by refraction, we naturally judęe them to be nearer or further from the eye, in proportion to the ſize thereof, when compared to that with which we are acquainted. The apparent diſtance of an object is conſiderably afſected by the brightneſs, diſtinctneſs, and magnitude thereof. Now as theſe circumſtances are, in a certain degree, altered by the reſraction of the rays in their paſſing through different media, they will alſo, in ſome meaſure, afſect the eſtimation of the apparent diſtance. OF THE SINCLE MICROSCOPE. The ſingle microſcope renders minute objects viſible, by means of a ſmall glaſs globule, or convex lens, oſ a ſhort ſocus. Let EY, ſig. 6, pl. 8, repreſent the eye; and O B, a ſmall object ſituated very near to it, conſequently the angle of it's apparent magnitude very large. Let the convex lens RS be interpoſed betueen the eye and the object, ſo that the diſtance betueen it and the object may be equal to the focal length; and the rays which diverge from the object, and paſs through the lens, vill aſteruards proceed, and conſequently enter the eye parallcl: aſter which, they will be converged, and form an inverted image on the retina, and the object will be clearly ſeen; though, if removed to the diſtance of ſix inches, it's ſmallneſs would render it inviſible. When the lens is not held cloſe to the eye, the object is ſomen hat more magnificd; becauſe the pencils, which paſ at a diſtance from the center of the lens, are reſracted inward touards the axis, and conſequently ſecim to come from points more remote ſrom the center of the object. Fig. 10, ꝑl. 8, nay, perhaps, give the reader a ſtill clearer view, uhy a convex lens increaſes the angle of viſiun. Without a lens, as FG, the eye at A uould ſee the dart BC under the angle b Ac but the rays B F and CG ſrom the extremities oſ rhe dart in paſſing through the lens, are refracted to the eye in the directions fA and G a, which cauſes the dart to be ſeen under the much larger angle DAE (the ſame as the angle ſA g). And therefore, the dart B C will appear ſo much magnified, as to extend in length from D to E. The object, when thus ſeen diſtinctly, by means of the ſmall lens, appears to be magnified nearly in the proportion which the focal diſtance of the glaſs bears to the diſtance of the objects, when viewed by the naked eye. To explain this further, place the eye cloſe to the glaſs, that as much of the object may be ſeen at one view as is poſſible; then remove the object to and ſro, till it appears perfectly diſtinct, and vell defined; now remove the lens, and ſubſtitute in it's place a thin plate, with a very ſmall hole in it, and the object will appear as diſtinct, and as much magnified, as with the Iens, though not quite ſo bright; and it appears as much more magniſied in this caſe, than it does when viewed with the naked eye, as the diſtance of the cbject from the hole, or lens, is leſs than the diſtancc ar which it may be ſcen diſtinctly with the naked eye. From hence we ſce, that the whole eſſect of the lens or microſcope is to rencer the object diſtinct, which it does by aſſiſting the eye to increaſe the refraction of the rays in each pencil; and that the apparent magnitude is entirely owing to the object being ſeen ſo much nearer the eye than it could be viewed without it. In other words, a ſingle microſcope removes the confuſion that accompanies objects when ſeen very near the eye, while it Icaves the viſual angle the ſume. I. It removes the confuſion, for the object being placed in the focus of the lens, the rays emerging from thence are parallel, which you know is neceſſary to diſtinct viſion. 2. The angle is the ſame, for whether the eye touches the glaſs, or is removed a little way from it, it appears under the ſame angle as it would to the eye placed where the glaſs is fixed. Single microſcopes magnify the diameter oſ the object, as we have ale. y ſhewn, in the proportion of the focal diſtance tio the limits of diſtinct viſion with the naked eye) to eight inches. For example, if the ſemi-diameter of a lens, equally convex on both ſides, be half an inch, which is alſo equal to it's focal diſtance, we ſhali have as à is to 8, ſo is 1 to 16; that is, the diameter of the object in the proportion of ſixteen to one. As the diſtance of eight inches is always the ſame, it follows, that by how much the focal diſtance is ſmaller, there will be a greater difference betuween itand the eight inches; and conſequently, the diameter of the object uill be ſo much the more magniſied, in proportion as the lenſes are ſegments oſ ſmaller ſpheres. As the cloſer the objcct is to the eye the larger it appears, it follous, thut a doubie and equally COVCX ſens is preſerable to a plano-convex lens, becauſe with equal convexities the focal leneth of the ſormer is only half as long as the latter. Nou as the double convex conſiſts of two ſegments oſ a ſphere, the more an object is to be magniſied, the greater muſt be the convexity, and therefore the ſmaller the ſphere, till at laſt the utnooſt degree of magnifying power vuill require that theſc ſegme nts becorne hemiſpheres, and conſequently the lſens will be reduced to a perfect ſpherule, orvery ſmull ſphere. Very extruordinary magnifying powers may be obrained by means of ſmull ſpherules, for the focus of parallel rays is only half the radius diſtant from the ſpherule; therefore, iſ the radius of the ſpherule be ĩę of an inch, the eye will have diſtinct viſion of an object by means thereof at the diſtance of a radius and a half, i. e. æs of an inch, which is but the fortieth part of 6 inches, ſo that the length of an object will be magnified 40 times, the ſurface 1 60o. OF THE DOUBLE OR COMPOUND MICROSCOPE. In the compound microſcope, the image is viewed inſtead oſ the object, which image is magnified by a ſingle lens, as the object is in a ſingle microſcope. It conſiſts of an object lens, LN, ſig. 8, pl. 8, and an eye-glaſs F G. The object O B is placed a little further from the lens than it's principal focal diſtance, ſo that the pencils of rays proceeding from the diſferent points of the object through the lens, may converge to their reſpective foci, and form an inverted image of the object at PQ; which image is viewed Dy the eye through the eye-glaſs F G, which is ſo placed, that the image may be in it's focus on one ſide, and the eye at the ſame diſtance on the other. The rays of each pencil will be parallel, after paſſing out of the glaſs, till they reach the eyc at E, where they will begin to converge by the refractive pouers of the humours; and after having croſſcd cach other in the pupil, and paſſed through the cryſtalline and vitrcous humours, they will be collected in points on the retina, and form a large inverted image thereon. It will be eaſy, from what has been already explained, to underſtand the reaſon of the magnifying power of a compound microſcope. The object is magniſied upon two accounts; firſt, becauſe if we vicwed the image with the naked eye, it would appear as much larger than the object, as the image is really larger than it, or as the diſtance fR is greater than the diſtance ſb; and ſecondly, becauſe this picture is again magni fied by the eyeglaſs, upon the principle explained in the foregoing article on viſion by ſingle microſcopes. But it is to be noted, that the image formed in the focus of a lens, as is the caſe in the compound microſcope, differs from the real object in a very eſſential particular; that is to ſay, the light being emitted from the object in every direction, renders it viſible to an eye placed in any poſition; but the points of the image formed by a lens, emitting no more than a ſmall conical body of rays, which arrives ſrorm the glaſs, can be viſible only when the eye is ſituated within it's confine. Thus the pencil, which emanates from O in the object, and is converged by the lens to D, proceeds aſterwards diverging towards H, and therefore never arrives at the lens FG, nor enters the eye at E. But the pencils which procced from the points o and b, will be received on the lens FG, and by it carried parallel to the eye; conſequently, the correſpondent points of the image Q P will be viſible; and thoſe which are ſiuated farther out towards I and I, will not be ſecn. ſThis quantity oſ the image QP, or viſible arca, is called the ſield of view. Hence it appears, that if the image be large, a very ſmall part oſ it vill be viſible; becauſe the pencils of rays wiil for the moſt part fall without the eye-glaſs F G. And it is likewiſe plain, that a remedy which would cauſe the pencils, which procecd ſrom the extremes O and B of the object, to arrive at the eye, uill render a greater part of it viſible; or, in other vords, enlarge the field oſ vieu This is eſſected by the interpoſition ol a broad lens DE of a proper curvature, at a ſmall diſtance from the focal image. For, by that means, the pencil DM, which would otherwiſe have proceeded towards H, is refracted to the eye as delinecated in the ſigure, and the mind conceives from thence the exiſtence of a radiant point at O, from which the ras laſt proceeded. In like manner, and by a parity of reaſon, the other extreme oſ the image is ſcen at P, and the intermediate points are alſo rendered viſible. On theſe conſiderations it is, that compound microſcopes are uſually made to conſiſt of an object lens LN, by which the image is formed, enlarged, anu inv erted; an ampliſy ing lens DE, by which the field of view is enlarged, and an eye-glaſs or lens, by means of which the eye is alloued to approach very near, and conſequently to view the image under a very great angle oſ apparent magnitude. It is now cuſtomary to combine two or more lenſes together at the eye-glaſs, in the manner of Euſtachio Divini and M. Joblot; by which means, the aberration oſ light from the figure is in ſome meaſure corrected, and the apparent field increaſed. OP THE SOLAR MICROSCOPE. In this inſtrument, the image of the object is thrown upon a ſcreen in a darkened room. It may be conſidered under two diſtinct heads: 1ſt, the mirror and lens, which are intended to reflect the light of the ſun upon the object; and adly, that part which conſtitutes the microſcope, or VWnich produces the magnified image of the object, fig. 9. pl. 8. Let NO repreſent the ſide of a darkened chamber; GH a ſmall convex lens, ſixed oppoſite to a perforation in the ſide NO; A B a plane mirror, or looking-glaſs, placed without the room to reflect che ſolar ra; s a, b, c, &c. on the lens C D, by which they are converged and concentrated on the object fixed at E F. 2. The object being thus illuminated, the ray which proceeds from L will be converged by the lens GH to a focus K, on the ſcreen L M; and the ray which comes from F vwill be converged to I, and the intermediate points will be delineated between I and K; thus ſorming a picture, uhich will be as much larger than the object, in proportion as the diſtance of the ſcreen exceeds that of the image ſrom the object. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. From what has been ſaid, it appears plainly, the advantages we gain by microſcopes are derived, firſt, from their magniſying power, by uhich the eye is enabled to view more diſtinctly the parts of minute objects: ſecondly, that by their aſſiſtance, more light is thrown into the pupil of the eye, than is done without them. The advantages procured by the magnifying pouer, would be exceedingly circumſcribed, if they were not accompanied by the latter: for if the ſume quantity oſ light is diffuſed over a much larger ſurſace, it's force is proportionably diminiſhed; and therefore the object, though magnificd, will be dark and obſcure. Thus, ſuppoſe the diameter oſ the object to be enlarged ten times, and conſequently the ſurface one hundred times, yet, if the focal diſtance of the glaſs was eight inches, (provided this was poſſible) and its diameter only about the ſize of the pupil oſ the eye, the object would appear one hundred times more obſcure when vieu ed through the glaſs, than u hen it uas ſeen by the naked eye; and this even on the ſuppoſition, that the glaſs tranſmitted all the light which fell upon it, which no glaſs can do. But if the glaſs was only four inches focal diſtance, and it's diameter remained as before, the inconvenience would be vaſtly diminiſhed; becauſe the glaſs could be placed twice as near the object as beſfore, and would conſequently receive four times as many rajs as in the former caſe, and we ſhould therefore ſce it much brighter than before. By going on thus, diminiſhing the focal diſtance ofſ the glaſs, and keeping it's diameter as large as poſſible, we ſhall perceive the object proportionably magnified, and yet remain bright and diſtinct. Ihough this is the caſe in theory, yet there is a limit in optical inſtruments, which is ſoon arrived at, but which cannot be paſſed. This ariſes from the ſollowing circumſtances. 1. IThe quantity of light loſt in paſſing through the glaſs. 2. IThe diminution in the diameter of the glaſs or Iens itſelf, by which it reccives only a ſmull quantity oſ rays. 3. Ihe extreme ſhortneſs of the focal diſtance of great magnifiers, whereby the free acceſs of the light to the object we wiſh to view is impeded, and conſcquently the reflection of the light from it is weakencd. 4. I'he aberration of the rays, occaſioned by their different refrangibility. To make this more clear, let us ſuppoſe a lens made of ſuch dull kind of glaſs, that it tranſmits only one half the light that falls upon it. It is evident, that ſuppoſing this lens to be of four inches focus, and to magnify the diameter of the object twice, and it's own breadth equal to that oſ the pupil of the eye, the object will be four times magnified in ſurſace, but only half as bright as iſ it was ſeen by the naked eye at the uſual diſtance; for ſor the ſight which ſalls upon the eye from the object at eight inches diſtance, and likewiſe the ſurſace of the object in it's natural ſiæe, being both repreſented by 1, the ſurſace of the magnified object will be 4, and the light which makes it viſible only 25 becauſe though the glaſs receives four times as much light as the naked eye does at the uſual diſtance of diſtinct viſion, yet one half is loſt in paſſing through the glaſs. The inconvenience, in this reſpect, can only be removed ſo far as it is poſſible to increaſe the tranſparency of the glaſs, that it may tranſmit nearly all the rays which tall upon it; and how far this can be done, has not been yet aſcertained. The ſecond obſtacle to the perfection of microſcopie glaſſes, is the ſmall ſize oſf great magniſiers; by which means, notwithſtanding their near approach to the object, they receive a ſmaller quantity of light than might be expected. Thus, ſuppoſe a glaſs of only one- tenth oſ an inch focal diſtance, ſuch a glaſs wvould increaſe the viſible diameter eighty times, and the ſurſace 6400 times. If the breadth of the glaſs could at the ſame time be preſerved as great as the pupil oſ the eye, which ue ſhall ſuppoſe one-tenth of an inch, the object would appear magniſied 6400 times, and every part would be as bright as it appears to the naked eye. But if we ſuppoſe the lens to be only -4 of an inch diameter, it will then only receive of the light which would otherwiſe have ſallen upon it; therefore, inſtead of communicating to the magnified object a quantity oſ light equal to 6400, it would communicate an illumination ſuited only to 16co, and the magniſicd object would appear four times as dim as it docs to the naked eye. Ihis inconvenience can, hovever, be in a great degree removed, by throwing a mueh larger quantity of light on the object. The rhird obſtacle ariſes from the ſhortneſs of the focal diſtance in large magniſiers; this inconvenience can, like the former, be remedicd in ſome degree by artiſicial means oſ accumulating light; but ſtill the eye is ſo ſtrained, as it muſt be brougnht nearer the glaſs than it can well bcar, which in ſome meaſire ſuperſedes the uſe of very deep lenſes, or ſuch as are capable of magniſying beyond a certain degree. The fourth obſtacle ariſes ſrom the diſferent refrangibility of the rays of light, and which frequently cauſes ſuch deviations from truth in the appearance of things, that many have imagined themſelves to have made ſurprizing diſcoveries, and have communicated them as ſuch ro the world; when, in fact, they have been only optical deceptions, owing to the unequal reſraction of the rays. CONCLUS ION. After all that has been ſaid on optics, &c. the queſtion ſtill occurs, IVhat is light ? hov is it forned ? and ef œwhat ſulſtance ? Theſe are queſtions that have been canvaſſed and diſputed ſince the firſt origin of ſcience and philoſophy; and numberleſs are the conjectures which at different periods have ariſen concerning them in the ſchools oſ learning. Empedocles, one of the earlieſt philoſophers of Greece, taught that light was an emanation oſ certain luminous atoms, ſubtil cnough to pervade the inviſible pores of air, water, and other diaphanous bodies. Plato ſeems to have been, in every material circumſtance, of the ſame opinion and further maintained, that colour is no more than an extremely rare and ſubtil flame, capable oſ penetrating the denſeſt bodies. Empedoc les accounted for viſion in a two-fold way, that it was performed by the effluvia which proceed ſrom the object, and by the emiſſion oſ light from the eye, as from a lanthorn. The latter opinion is proved, by a paſſage cited by Ariſtotle; it is a beautiful remains of antiquity. I ſhall give it you from Sydenham's tranſlation: As when the trav'ller in dark winter's night, Intent on journey, kindles up a light, The moon, like ſplendor oſ an oil-ſed flame, He ſets it in ſome lantern's horny ſrame; Calm and ſerene there ſits the tender form, Screen'd from rough winds, and from the wintry ſtorm. In vain rude airs alſault the gentle fire, Their ſorces break, diſperſe, and they retire; Fences ſecure, tho' thin, the fair incloſe, And her bright head ſhe lifts amidſt her foes. Thro' the ſtrait pores oſ the tranſparent horn, She ſhoots her radiance, mild as carly morn. Forth fly the rays; their ſhining path extends, Till loſt in the wide air, their leſs'ning luſtre ends. So when the fire freſh lighted ſrom on high, Sits in the circling pupil oſ an eye; O'er it, tranſparent veils of fabric fine Spread the thin membrane, and defend the ſhrine; The ſubtil fame incloſing like a mound, Saſe ſrom the flood of humours flowing round. Forth fly the rays. and their bright paths extend, Till, in the wide air loſt, their Tuſtres end. * * Nor is this reaſoning of the ancients to be altogether deſpiſed, ſor there are various arguments and experiments to prove that the ſeat of ſenſe is not entirely paſſive in receiving images. but that it alſo directs a ray from itſelf, to every object it perceives. The action and re-action between objects and the ſcat oſ ſenſe is wholly reciprocal. A. Wilſon, M. D. Medical Reſearches. Deſcartes maintained, that light, as it exiſted in the luminous body, is nothing but a power or faculty of exciting in us a very clear and vivid ſenſation; and that the inviſible pores of lucid bodies are pervaded by a ſubtil and highly elaſtic matter, capable of being impelled by theſe bodies, and of producing on the organs of viſion, when properly formed, the perception of light. Sir Iſaac Newton ſeems to have formed no direct opinion on the ſubject; ſrom what he has ſaid we may conclude, he thought it conſiſted of ſolid particles of matter, when explaining more particularly the nature of light, he ſays, that it is refracted and reflected by an etherial medium, by the vibrations of which, it communicates heat to bodies, and is put into fits of caſy reflection and tranſmiſſion. In the peripatetic ſchool, light was conſidered as a ſubſtance, neither purely ſpiritual nor purely corporeal, and was therefore defined a materia media; and indeed, when we contemplate, with a philoſophic eye, the aſtoniſhing eſfects of light, ue find ſuſ mcient ground for accounting it of a nature widelv diſ ſerent from lumpiſh, roſs, inactive matter. That light, however, is material, cannot, as we have already ſhewed you, be diſputed with any degree of probability. The materialit not only ap pears from it's being propagated in time, but from it's not bending into ſhadow. The ſolar rays are not only capable oſf being collected by a burning-glaſs, but when collected, exhibit marks of a power altogether irreiſtible. If a diamond, the hardeſt of terreous bodies, be placed in the focus oſf a burning-glaſs, the light immediately enters it, tears it's parts aſunder, divides and diſſolves them. Here you erceive the lens acting upon the light, and the hight upon the diamond. Since, therefore, light both acts and is acted upon, as matter, we muſt allou it's properties to be material. The unparallelled ſubtilty of light, and the impoſſibility of ſubjecting it to chemical analyſis, render every inquiry into it's eſſence peculiarly arduous and diſſicult. Many and various are the phenomena which point out the moſt intimate and immediate connection between fire and light. You all know, that thoſe bodies which are heated moſt intenſely, are moſt luminous, and that the light of the ſun concentrated by convex glaſſes, produces a degree of heat almoſt irreſiſtible. Iere you perceive, that fire produces light, and light produces the moſt intenſe heat. If, therefore, the ſame cauſes produce the ſame effects, or, inverting the axiom, if the ſame eſſects proceed from the ſame cauſes, it muſt be inferred in the preſent inſtance, that light and fire are cither one and the ſame ſubſtance, or at leaſt in the immediate chain of cauſc and cffect. The connection between fire and light is ſurther evinced by the well-known eſfects of the latter on moſt bodies; innumerable experiments ſhew, that there is a certain degree of heat at which bodies become luminous, and that all bodies which ſuſtain that heat, without being converted into vapour, may univerſully be ignited. There are even ſome ſubſtances, uhich, though they evaporate at à degree oſ heat far below that at which they ſhould begin to ſhinc, mmay, by proper management, be ignited. It novw, I think, appears, that when Plato defined light c a rare and ſubtil flame, he came nearer the truth than later philoſophers have in general imagincd. Can you deſire a more convincing prooſ oſ the ſolid judgment and penetration oſ that ancient ſage, than that after the lapſe of ſo many centuries, and the vaſt progreſs made in the ſcience oſ nature, we are under the neceſſity of rejecting the theories oſ the moderns, to revive his long exploded doctrine, as moſt conſonant with facts and experiments. For, if to the arguments already uſed to prove the identity of fire and light, it be added, that light and heat diffuſe themſelves from a center outward, that they act in ſtrait lines, and are ſubject to the ſame laus of reflection, we can hardly withhold our aſſent from the Platonic doctrine. It may be further obſerved, that in general no light is excited until a decompoſition takes place, and the fixed, or latent fire, begins to be ſeparated from the bodies: light may be therefore conſidered as fire paſſing through certain ſtrainers well defined, and as exiſting in a more pure and ſimple ſtate, and being leſs incumbered with terreous gravitating matter, than fire. And if you ſurvey the various operations of nature, with that attention and accuracy that are neceſſary in the proſecution of phyſical inquiries, I think I may venture to aſiſert, that you will not meet with a ſingle inſtance from which it can appear, that light can Ee excited without the concurrence of the elementary principle of fire. I have now finiſhed another ſet of Lectures, and have given you an account of the known properties of light, and among many other things have explained to you the wonderful mechaniſm of the eye, whereby it is rendered the means oſ viſion; and ſhewn you what aſſiſtance it receives from glaſſes. It has here alſo been ſhewn you, that the particles, of which light is compoſed, are of different colours, and that the colour oſf each particle is laſting and permanent, ſo as not to be changed either by refraction or reflection; and that thoſe particles which differ as to colour, differ alſo as to reſrangibility; and that light, by being thus differently coloured, dreſſes nature in various beauties. In theſe Lectures I have explained to you the principles of the microſcope and teleſcope, inſtruments, by which the boundaries of human knowledge have been much enlarged. In this ſet of Lectures there are further prooſs, that carr, fire, and light, are the pouers in nature by which all natural motion and life are preſerved: the moſt ignorant are ſenſible of this truth, and it cannot be contradicted by the moſt learned.? From the diſcoveries laid before you in theſe Lectures, it is evident, cthat the works of creation are infinitely more glorious than they appear to be; that they are ſeen by us under thoſe circumſtances and diſadvantages which obſcure their true character and intrinſic ſplendor; that in proportion as our attention is ſixed upon them, their luſtre brightens, their excellencies become more conſpicuous.* I have occaſionally pointed out to you the application of light as a ſignificant emblem in the ſacred writings, in which the material elements oſ a viſible world are always uſed to lead you to the knowledge of one that is ſpiritual and inviſible. By due attention to theſe, you will be able to perceive the energies oſ the Divine Mind in all the various forms of outward nature, and acknou ledge that Gob alone is the beauty and benefit of all nis vworks; that, as they cannot exiſt but 1ν HIν and BY HIM, ſo nis impreſſion is upon them, and nis impregnation through them. Though the elements have a mixture of natural and phyſical evil, yet divine order influences throughout, and is an internal principle of good, which is alone all the beauty and benefſicence, the w hole àQhole glory and graciouſneſs that is in them; nor can they poſſibly exhibit any beauty or amiableneſs but what they derive from Gob. All things animate and inanimate co-operate in diſplaying his wiſdom and power; all unite in the univerſal ſong to the glory and praiſe of their beneficent CREATOR.  Air uttering tells his harmony in ſounds; The light reveals the fountain of it's rays, And like the ſeraph Kindles in his praiſe. All echoing the SUPREMEs deſign, BEAUTY OF LOVE, and SVMMETRY DIVINE END Or VOL. II. to the PLATES of VOL. I. OPTICS. PeuaTE. I. Fig. 1, ꝑ. 155. Fig. o, p. 177. Fig. 18, p Fig. 3, ꝑ. TOI. Fig. ũ1, p. 77. Fig. 79. p. Fig. 3 n. 164. PFig. 13, p. 1860. Fig. 29, p. Fig. 4. p. 1773. PFig. 13. p. 179- Fig. a1, p. 179. p 74. p. T87. PFig. 75, p. 180. p. 172. Fig. i5, p- p. P P P P P Fig. 5. p. 773. Fig. 7. Fig. 6, 787. Fig. 2ag, p. 185. Fig. 7, p. 773. PFig. ĩb, p. 185. PFig. 94, p. 16ô, 191. § a. Fig. 25, fue 8, p. 174. Fig. 17, Fig. 1, p. 181. Fig. 7, p. 217. Fig. 12, p. 210. i 782. Fig. 8, p. 267. PFig. ĩg, p. 187. Fig. 3, p. 185. Fig. ꝗ, p. 184. Fig. ĩ3, p. 191. i 1752. i .208. PFig. I5, p. 19ẽ. i 189. Fig. i5,ꝑp. 19â. Fig. 1, a ſmall Fig. 4, yortãble camc- Fig. 5, ra obſcura. Fig. 6, Fig. e, p. 206. Fig. 7OPTICS. PuaATE IV. Fig. 1, p. 2a18. Fig. 35, p. 219. Fig. . 189. Fig. a, nũ τi. 8 b aio Fie 2 b o1 Fig. 3, ?. 218. Fig. 7, p. 219. PFig. 11, p. 510. Fig. 4, ꝑ. 218. Fig. 8, p. 219. Fig. is, p. 512. Fig. 5, P. 219.- ĩlli OPTICS. PLATE V. Fig. 1, p. 227. Fig. S8, p. 222. Fig. 14, p. 233. Fig. 3, P. 227. Fig. O, p. 229. Fig. is, p. 234Fig. 3, p. 277. PFig. 10, p. 230. Fig. 16, p. 237. Fig. 4, p.226. Fig. 11, p. 230. Fig. 17, P. 235Fig. 5, P. 228. Fig. ĩa, p. 231. Fig. 18, p. 236. F. 8. 6, p. 228. Fig. 13, p. 233. Fig. 1ꝗ, p. 236. Fig. 7, p. 529. OPIICS. PLATE VI. Fig. 1, p. 215. Fig. 7, ꝑ. 254. Fig. 18, p- 379. Fig. 2, p. 257. Fig. 8, p. 304. Fi8. 13,*p. 485. Iig. 8, p. 247. Fig. G, p. 363. PFig. 14, P- 486. Vig. 4, p. 28. Fig. 10, p. 360. PFig. 15, p- 498Fig. 5, P- 236. Fig. 11, p. 372. PFi3. 10, p. 492Fig. 6, ꝑ. 252. PVig. 12, p. 3573. PFig. 17, p- 881, 495. OPTICS. PuLATE VII. Fig. 2, p. 455. Fig. 8, P. 503. Fis. 13, p. 387. tig. 3, p. 6. PFig. 95 p. 503. Fig. 14, p. 390. Fig.4.5.ard 6, PFig. 106, ꝑp. 507. Fig. 15, p. 396. p. 488, 480. F. 11, p. 507. PFig. 16, p Fig. 7, p. 500. lLig. 1a, p. 887. PFig. 17, p. 897. OPIICS. PuLATE VIII. Fig. 1, p. 513. Fig. 5, ꝑ. 542. Fig. 8, p. 549. lig. 2, ꝑp. 529. Fig. &, p. 5646. F8. Oꝫ Po 551. Fig. 3. p. 531. PFig. 7, p. 510. Fig. 10, p. 546. tg. à Pf 11. ERRATA in the FIGURES. Page 180, line 1, ſor ſg. 10, pl. 2, read ſig. 2, pl. 2. 104, 8 , sor fis. 13, pl. 2, read ſig. 15, becauſe there are tuwo ſig. 15 in this plate. 286,  18, ſor ſig. 1, read fig. 10. pt 3. 200, 15, jor ſig. 11, pl. 7, rcud ſig. 14ꝫ pl. 7. ù RIEE , ꝶ ſi ſu ſi SE. Pν; i l lSR ll * E -F I ſſum n . ꝗi ul nuù 2ſR 5o ſſ. VſE PV bi ſ ùſ I ſ I l l PRù l vuſſâj l ulãùũ 