æ. ,, -A N A L V  S I S O F ACOURSEOF LECTURES O N NATURAL AND EXPERIMENTAL P H I LOSOP HY, V I 7. . PROPERTIES or MAT. 7. ELECTRICITY, rn.t, 8. ELECTRICITY, MPECHANICS, ſſ 9.OPTICs, CHFMISTRY, 10. USE of the GLOBES, c L U und S. PNEUMATICS, &c. HYDROSTATICS,  nuand 12. ASTRONOMY. EIG H TH E D I TIO N. LlPF B A. WA LEK E R, MFe MRER OF THE DURLIS SOCIETY; LECTURER Ox PH I EOSOPY TO HIS ROVAL HIGHNESS TUꝶ DUKE OF GLOUCESTEX; ErOXx, WESTMINSTER, AND WINCHESTER COL LEGES, &c. 6 & - S OL D 1? TH E AUT HO R, ſ PRICE TVWO S H I L. L ING S. ,m rinted by C. BUckxrON, Oreat Pulteney. ſtreet, Golden-ſquare. As many who attend this Courſe may not have made PHILOSOPHY a previous ſtud it may be ſuppoſcd that many of its uſeful parts will eſcape the memory; 'tis therefore at the requeſt of thoſe I have drawn up this ſnort Analyſis, by a ſhort look at which, any particular propoſition or experiment uill eaſily be recollected. ---ccAA--- A N A L VY 3S I 3S O F A COURSE OF LECTURPES O ν NATURAL AND EXPERIMENTAL P H I L O S O P H V. LECTOUR E LI. On lke general Properties of Matter. Ax hundred and fifty years are ſcaree elapſed ſince the clouds of prejudice, which had long overſpread the world, began to clear up, and men were convinced, by cultivating the ſciences and attending to nature, that no ramessul conjectures could ever lead them to the truc cauſes of thoſe various phænomena that inceſſuntly, and every where, meet the obſerver's eye; but that the narrow limits of the humun underſtanding, conſine the courſe of our reſearches to one ſingle pathnamely, that o cxperiment, or the ule of onr ſcufes. Yet, in this ſhort period, natural philoſophy hath riſen to an high piteh or improvement, and may vith truth be ſaid to have mad. l mueh greater advanecs towards perſection ſince the cxxpp rimental method was introduced, than in the many before. aee; i L C hal B 2 ſL 4 Becauſe many bodies are reducible to water, this element has been thought, by many able philoſophers, to be the primary origin of all matter; and that bodies differ only as they contain more or leſs particles, or pores differently diſpoſed. We find, indeed, the decompoſition of bodies finite, being unable to carry it beyond a certain limit; if we attempt to go further, we are always ſtopt by ſubſtances in which we can produce no change, which are incapable of being reſolved into others, and which ſtand as ſo many firm barriers obſtructing our progreſs. To theſe ſubſtances we affix therefore, more properly, the name of principles, or firſt elements, and they are corth, air, fire, and water. & Mr. Cavendiſh has lately diſcovered a method of generating water by inflaming a mixture of common and inflammable air in a cloſe veſſel. The properties that are common to all theſe elements, are: Iſt, Diviſibility, i. e. the particles of each element are ſo ſmall, that they eſcape the ſcrutiny of our beſt glaſſes. A candle will fill a ſphere of four miles in diameter with particles of light in a ſecond of time. Two ounces of aſſa- fœtida, nicely weighed, may lie expoſed to the air, and have its particles carried off by it for a fortnight together, and yet it will not loſe the thouſand part of a grain of its original weight. Eight grains of gold will cover a wire completely 13,000 yards in length. A grain of copper diſſolved in a jill of aqua fortis, will cover as much poliſhed iron with a fine ſſin of copper as the aqua fortis will wet: Nay, Lewenhock diſcovered with his microſcope more living animalculæ in the milt of one cod-fiſnh, than there are men, women, and children, on the whole earth. 2dly, The matter of which theſe elements are formed is impenetrably hard. If we pound the moſt brittle ſubſtance to the moſt impalpable powder its original particles ſtill remain unhurt. If water has no bed of air to fall upon, it will fall upon the glaſs in which it is incloſed Iike a picce of iron nd makre a Ioud clicù; a eolumn of uir fulling on a plate of an air-pump will give areport as loud as a gun: Nay, clumentary ſire, iubtil as it is, ſi ikes the bones, in the electric ſhock, like a ſolid body; and lightning penctrates the hardeſt ſubſtunces. 5dly, Matter is inert, i e.cun neither move, nor ſtop, of itſelf. Aballon the uhirling-tuble, neither begins to move when the table moves, nor ſtops when the motion of the table is ſtopped. Give a ſudden puſh to a bowl of water, und the fluid will ſly over the bowl in a contrary direction; but if you turn ſwiftly round with the bowl in your hand, and ſtop ſuddenly, the water will ſſy over the bowl the way it was going. Ihc inertia inercaſes as the quantity of matter. A man lying with a large anvil on his brealt, will not be hurt when a blackſmith ſtrikes upon it with a large hammer, with all his ſtrength; but if he had an anvil only a pound weight upon his breaſt, the ſirſt ſtroke of thè blackſmith vwould Kill him. Ihe vis incrti of the l- rge anvil makes its reſiſtance equal to the ſtroke oſ the hammer, ſo that the anvil may be ſaid to itrike the hammer as forcibly as the hammer ſtrikes it H and hence the difficulty of putting large bodies in motion. Theſe are but ſmall inſtunces of thoſe three laws of nature which Sir lſuac. Newton found univerſal, viæ. That matter is perfecily indifferent to cither rſt er motion. adlv, That bocles move in proportion to the sJuoiree that aocts on them. And 3dly, That aoction and re-aetion ure equul, anud contrary. 4thlv, Matter aotiroct, and is atracted; ioe. All parts of matter have a tendency toward each other. A plumb line on the ſide of a mountain is drawn out of its perpendicular by the attraction of the mountain. Tuo cork balls, ſwimming on water, run together with an accelerated motion, and ſtie together. Water riſes above its level againſt the ſide oſthe bowl which holds it, and alſo in capillary or imall tubes: And henee the reafon why water riſes in ſpenge, ſund, between glaſs plancs, &c. for all theſc may be conecived s made up of capillury tubcs. Iwo plunes of lead, marble, glaſs, iron, &c. thruſt cloſe together, ſtick ſo, that exceſſive force alone can ſeparate them. Tis this attraction of cobeſion that makes all bodies cohere, or maintain any diſtinct form; and as ſome parts of matter attract more forcibly than others, iron becomes heavier, and more compact, than wood; gold and platina have more particles in leſs room than any other metal; lead is different from ſtone, becauſe its particles attract one another more forcibly; ſo that all that variety which we ſee in both mineral, animal, and vegetable ſubſtances, ariſes from the different combinations of the four elements, the different degree oÆ attraction in the particles of each, and in the different diſpoſition of the pores, or interſtices, that are between the particles of which they are compoſed. For the particles of the heavieſt and lighteſt bodies are all of the ſame weight, as may be proved by dropping a piece of gold, and a feather, down a tall glaſs that has no air in it to reſiſt their paſſage. Fire can deſtroy this coheſive quality in bodies, for a time, but makes no alteration in the original particles of bodies. It will inſinuate itſelf into gold, and ſeparate its particles, ſo as to make it into a fluid. Water and air are kept in a ſtate of fluidity by heat. Fire increaſes (perhaps cauſes) the repulſive qualities of all bodies. Metals ſwell with a ſmall degree of heat, as may be proved by the pyrometer. All nature is kept in motion by it; even blocks and ſtones ſwell by the heat of the day, and contract by the cold of the night. It gives water ſo repulſive a quality, that it flies off in ſteam. Alr is ſo ſwelled by it, that, to keep up its equilibrium, it is perpetually agitated by winds and ſtorms. Fire is the only eſſential fluid, and the cauſe of fluidity in other bodies, by ſeparating their parts. However, there ſeems to be a repulſive quality common through nature, independently of fire. Tis ſaid,  where the ſphere of attraction ends, repulſion begins. The north pole of à magnet, at one-tenth of an inch from a ſuſpended needle, attracts it; but at fivetenths from it, it repels it. A glaſs tube rubbed with a dry hand, will alternately attract and repeal feathers, leaf gold, and other light bodies. A ſmall needle will lie on the ſurface of water by its repulſion; flies run over it without wetting their feet, and a drop of oil will be ſuſ1 tained by its repulſion; without ever touching the ſurface of the water. The rays of light arce ſaid to he repelled from the ſurface of a Iooking-glaſs, &c. however I doubt the univerſulity of this principle. sthly, Llective attraction, or the tendency which one part of matter has to unite with ſome other par ticular part in preference to every other part of mutter, forms the grand baſis of Chemiſtry.Thus, watcr ruſhes into union with ſpirit, but not with ollAcids have the ſtrongeſt aſſinity to phlogiſton and alkaliAir attracts water with greater avidity than ſalt, ſo that freſh water is abſorbed b it from the ſurface of a ſalt ſca, &c. Ofſ the elective kind of attraction alſo is that of magnetiſm, becauſe it only attracts iron, ſteel, and itſelf, ſome hold magnetiſm and clectricity as relations, becauſe ſteel ſtruck Dy lightning, or a ſtrong ſhock of electricity, uequires polarity and magnetic attraction. One Magnus, a ſhepherd, firſt diſcovercd this wonderful ſtone from its ſticking to the iron in his ſandals, and from him it had its name: Its attraction is at two oppoſite points, called its poles, and if the ſtone was broke into a thouſand pieces, each piecc would have its attracting poles: This attraction is ſtrongeſt in contact, and diminiſhes by a proportion not yet fſound out; but that point of a ſtone which attracts onc end of a touched needle will repel the other. Flavius Gio, of Naples, about 350 vears ago, firſt diſcovered that a piece of ſteel rubbed on it, and then ſuſpended, had the property of pointing north and ſouth, and thencc applied it to navigation. An hundred years after, it was found by Sebaſtion Cabot to have varicd above II degrees calt. It continucd to vary towards the caſt at the rate of about one degrec in ſeven years, till the needle formed an angle with the meridian of 30 degrees. It then returned towards the weſt at the ſame rate, ſo that about the vear 1600 the line of no variation paſſed over England, the needle pointing then directly north and ſouth. Since that time it has continued varying towards the weſt, and with us ar this time the needle is ag degrees 48 minutes wesſt. Ir is prohable ĩit will continue to vary weſtward till it mule an angle with the meridian of 30 degrees, (us it did a- è ti rA2æ æ aurπ7-r  -Eù t 9]7 form a very ſtrong magnet. If a piece of iron, as a concuctor, be put between the two poles, the magnet will long retain its virtue, particularly if it hangs Iooſe ſo as it can turn north and ſouth. Lay four ſmall bars of ſtcel touching one another in a line, lengthwiſe; ilide one pole of a magnet from the right hand to the leſt over them ſeveral times, and they will be good magnets: But if then you ſlide the ſame pole over them from the left hand to the right, the magnetic virtue will be entirely taken from them. Fire and ruſt deſtroy the power of theſe magnets, and time will weaken them, if a conductor of iron or ſtecl do not form a magnetic circuit for the eſfuvium rto paſs through. ITo recal the decreaſed virtue of a magnct, hang a large ſand-bag to the iron adhering to it, and keep every day increaſing the ſand.To give the virtue to a énife, draw it over either pole from hilt to point ſeveral times. . By fire, is underſtood a complex idea of ſomething red, shining, that cxcites the onſution of heat, and rarefies or expands all knoun bodies. It is the moſt powerful agent in the decompoſition of bodies. It is the only eſſential Auid in nature, and the cauſe of ftuidity in other bodies, Dy ſeparating their parts; hence, even air itſcif may become ſolid when deprived of the fire it contains, as bodies of the moſt difficult fuſion becomce fluid when penetrated by a ſuſficient quantity of the particles of fire. u bodies become hot by the approach of ignited hodies, and by friction; but bodies that contain a ſufficient quantity of phlogiſton, only, are capable of influnmation. Phlogiſton is not fire, but one of the principles of inflammability; i.e. when it is comuined with various ſubſtances in due proportion, it renders them inflalmmable with air; Phlogiſton may be ſeparated ſrom one bodv, and given to anotlier : henee an inflammable body may be deprived of its inſlammability, und a body naturally not inflammable, may be rendered fo by combining it with a fuſficient quantity of phlogiſton. When expelled from bodies it is not annihilatedit only eſcupes from the burning body inro air, which gives proof of C its having acquired it, and is then ſaid to be phlogiſticated; and hence no inflammation will take place but in the common air. Combuſtion ceaſes when the air ſurrounding the burning body is filled with phlogiſton hence a fire is put out by blowing phlogiſticated air into it nbut enlivened by a current of freſh air. All bodies contain more or leſs of this wonderful principle for all bodies grow hot by violent friction; friction may be therefore ſaid to be a kind of fire-pump, that draws latent fire from the adjoining bodies to the place vwhere the friction is going on, and ſtrongly indicates that phlogiſton may lic in a concrete form in, and be a conſtituent part of all bodies, nay, Birgmon ſays, 100 ounces of charcoal contains' oꝗ ounces of phlogiſton, and but one of carth; metals deprived of their phlogiſton are heavier as a cales than as a metal; inflammable air is eight or ten times lighter than common air, &c. So little do we know of ſire, that any attempt at a theory of it muſt appear preſumptuous and premature; we find however that light, heat and elcctric fluid, have ſo many qualities in common with phlogiſton, that hereafter it may probably be found they are all but modifications of the ſame principle. Rubbing, or friction, in all bodies produce heat and electricity, and both theſe dilate bodies, help vegetation, germination, evaporation, motion of the blood, the growth of the fetus, and the hatching of eggs. Heat and electrieity both reduce, and melt metals; and bodies that receive heat with difficulty receive electricity fo, &&. May not the rays of the ſun be diluted phlogiſton? May not the velocity with which they proceed from the ſun prevent their abſorption by the alr, in their paſſage through it ? And as all bodies have more or leſs aſfinity to phlogiſton, may not this diluted phlogiſton be abſorbed by various bodies, and lie in a concrete form in them till called forth from them by friction or eombuſtion? Experiments that favour this hypotheſis are, 1ſt. Rays collected in the focus of a burning glaſs, produce on opaque bodies the moſt intenſe heat that is producible by the art of man. 2d. Living vegetables imbibe phlogiſton (as nutrition) from the alſ, 111 und part with it back again into the air in the act oſ combuition, boiling, or putrefaction; (for rotren wood, putrid fiſh, ignis fatui; indeed, all animal and vegetable ſubſtances ure luminous while decompounding by putrefaction)uwhich is but parting with the inflammable princple that was a conſtituent part of theſe bodies while in health. 3d. Bodies in the act of delivering phlogiſton to the air, or any other affinitive menſtruum are uenives ſully hothence the heat of a common fire, w here phlogiſton is transferring from the coals to the air: inflamed gunpowder, &&The heat of eſferveſcent mixtures, ſuch as diluted vitriolic acid, and iron filings  Copper and diluted nitrous acid:Iron ſilings, water, and ſulphur: Air carrying off phlogiſton ſrom the lungs in the act of reſpiration, and thereby producing animal heat: Pyrites and water producing the heat of the Bath waters, &c. which is but the water ſeiZing the vitriolic acid, and thereby expelling the phlogiſton of the acid into the air, for a mixture of vitriolic acid and water always produce an intenſe hent The production of fire by the eſcape of phlogiſton from phoſphorus, pyrophorus, &e. when expoſed to the air is another inſtance: and the aſtoniſhing flame ariſing from oil of turpentine when a mixture of vitriolic and nitrous acid is poured upon it, alurms, while it proves, that air is the natural menſtruum of phlogiſton, and that inflfammation will not rake place except in common air. 4th. A fire-brand expoſed in dephlogiſticated air blazres out with a vivid ſlame, while the air ſeizes its phlogiſton. 5th. Metals calcine but partially in ſmall quantities of confined air, that air is ſo ſoon ſuturated with phlogiſton;a current of air muſi paſs over melting metals or they will not calcine DQδir ſo cxpoſcd becomes phlogiſticated and diminiſhed. 6tli. Metals reduced to a cales by ealeination, or by a ſolution in acids, part with their phlogiſton during the proceſs; and a cales expoſed in inflammable air, and heated by the focus of a burning lens, imbibes or ſwallows up the inflummable air, and revives into a perfect metallThis extraordinary fact ſhews, that metals mav as it were be tulen in pieces and put together againfor if the phloſl - giſton that flies oſf from a calcining metal could be preſerved, and the cales of that metal be heated in it, the cales would ſeize the phlogiſton it had loſt, and become the very ſame metal it was before the proceſs. Hence we have reaſon to believe that inflammable air is the true elementary phlogiſton, and that it is this gas in a concrete ſtate in coals, candles, wood, metals, &c. that makes them inflammable. Phlogiſton in an active ſtate produces heatapproaching to a latent ſtate, cold. Hence the evaporation of volatile ſpirits, the mixture of ſalt and ſnowand ſnow and ſpirit of nitre, ſerve to concentrate or deaden the action of phlogiſton, and by theſe mixtures in cold weather and cold climates, quickſilver has been frozen into a ſolid metal. or that tendency which matter has towards the centre: By this power the earth is formed into a denſe ball, and every thing that lives upon it held ſaſt tco its ſurſace. A body left to the Power of this agent falls about a rood in the firſt ſecond of time; three roods in the ſecond ſecond ; five in the third; ſeven in the fourth, &c. agreeable to the odd numbers, I, 3, S, 7, O, II, 13. &c. For the vis inertie of the falling body, added to the power of gravity in every ſucceeding ſecond, accelerates it, as the ſquares 6ſ the times. Thus, at the end of the 4th ſecond the body has fallen about 1 roods, at the end of the 6th ſecond it has deſcended 36 roods, &c. This is proved by a projected ball falling from an horiæontal line one inch in the ſame time in which in falls 3, s 7Te &c. inches in the ſucceeding times; and by the ſuſpenſion of unequal weights over a pulley. Hence we find this power of gravity decreaſes as the ſquares of the diſtances increaſe, ſi. e. à ball, which weighs 9 Ib. on the earth's ſurface, would weigh only 1 Ib. at three ſemi-diameters of the earth above it.) For it is found that the moon falls from a tangent to her orbit in this proportion; ſhewing that ſhe;s actuated by the ſame law that makes a pebble deſcribe a curve when it is thrown from a ſling. For that pebble, if it was projected with proper force, and had a vacuum to move through, as the moon has, would go round the earth for ever as ſhe does. AMntion is rectilineal, i.e. all bodies put in motion by one force, endeavour to go off in a ſtraight line. Hence, . i j 1 i ? j 1f a coach in ſwift motion be turned ſuddenly, it Sverſets by endeavouring to go off ſtraight: But if a body be impreſſed by two ſorces, in oblique directions, it will obey neither, but go the diagonal of the ſquare. Hence a ball dropt from the maſt head of a ſhip. under ſwiſt ſail, falls on the deck as if the ſnip was at anchor: And a ball ſhot horizontally from a tall tower, obeys neither the powder nor its own weight, but comes to the ground in a curve formed of the two. We ſhall in due time ſee that the planets move by this wonderful law. The momentum of a falling body is as the ſquare root of ĩts height. Ex. Hang a pound wei ht on one end of a ſcale-beam, and if at the other cuss you let fall a certain weight from the height of one foot, it will juſt lift, or cant the pound up: But if you let the ſame weight fall four feet, on one end of the ſcale-beam, it will cant up two pounds weight hung at the other. If it falls nine feet, it will lift up three pounds weight at the other, &c. Fluids ſpout by the ſame law. A pipe of the ſame bore as another, but four times as far below the ſurface of the water in a ciſtern, diſcharges twice as much as the upper one; if it be ſixteen times as far beneath the ſurface, it will diſcharge four times as much as the upper one, &c. For the velocity with which a fluid ſpouts, at any depth below the ſurface, is equal to that which a body Iet fall that height would aquire. The momentum, or force, of a body, ariſes from its quantity of matter being multiplied into the velocity with hich it moves: Thus, if a batteriug ram be 1000 Ib. weight, and the velocity with which it ſtrikes a wall be 20, then is its momentum 20,000: But a cannon hall ſhall do the ſame execution, if its quantity of matter be no more than 1olb. provided it be thrown with a velocity equal 10 2000, for 10 x 2000  20, OOO, ſo that the momentum of both are equal. This may eaſily be proved, by laying 21b. weight upon a spring ; if it throws it one yard, it wvill throw 1lb. two yards; and 8lb. will be counter- noiſed by 41b. if it be hung on a balance at tgeve the diſtance from the fulerum. Hence the force, or power, of any machine, whether ſimple or compound, is eaſily computed; for when two bodics are ſuſpended upon any machine, ſo as to act againſt one another, if the perpendicular aſcent of one body, be to the perpendicular deſcent of the other in the inverſe ratio of their weights, they will balance one another; and therefore ſo much quicker as the power moves than the weight, ſo much is the advantage gained by the machine, and gives this mechanical anxiom, & That what is gained in power, by any machine, is loſt in time of working it. Sir Iſaac Neutous. All kinds of mechanical engines conſiſt, more or leſs, of theſe ſix poers, vi2. the lever, the heel and axle, the ſlem of pulleys, the inclined plane, the wedge, and the sereu. The licver is a bar of wood, or metal, turning upon a prop, or centre, (commonly culled the fulerum) and is uſed either to raiſe weights or overcome reſiſtances. There are three kinds of levers, and in each of them. the velocity of each point is directly as its diſtunce from the prop. When this prop is between the cweight and the powrr, tis called a lever of the fiſt bind. and ſo much as the power is further from the prop than the weight, (or its center of gravity) ſo much is the advantage gained by the power over the weight Iron crous, ſciſſurs, pincers, rudders of ſsbips, &c. are levers of the ſirſt kind. A lever of the ſsecond lhind. is when the aeight, or reſiſtance, is between the prop and the power, as in doors turning on hinges, knives that turn on a centre at the point; oars, & c. A lever of the third hind, is when the power is applied between the weight and the prop, us in rearing a ladder againſt a wall; moving our legs and arms by the power of the muſcles, &&. The bended lever disfers in nothing from one of the firſt hind, but in form, it is lice a hammer drawing a nail. In cach of theſe levers, ſo much as the power moves farther, or ſhorter than the weight, ſo ia the advantage, or diſadvantage, of each. The power of a compound lever is found by multiplying the power of each into one another. In the wheel and aexle, the advantage of the whcel over the axle, is as their diameters, i. e. if the wheel be four times as large as the axle, a man may lift four rimes as much by it, as by his own ſtrength, allowing for friction. This power is the principal part of a common crane. Upper pulleys that are fixed, only ſerve to change the direction of the power, and give no mechanical advantage thereto; but the under block of pulleys, moving with the weight, give an advantage proportionate to the number of ropes by which the weight is fuſtained; and which may be eſfimated alſo by ſo much as the power moves faſter than the weight. A running pulley doubles whatever advantage was gained by the other parts of a machine before it was applied, always allowing for friction, which in pulleys is very great. The wedge ſeparates heavy, or cohering bodies, with a force proportioned, as ihe thichneſs of its bhach is to the length; i. e. if its back be one foot, and the length twelve feet; then may the momentum of the ſtroke wiiich moves the wedge be one twelſth only of the weight, or cohering force, of the parts to be ſeparated. The inclined plane is half a wedge, and therefore its Power is, as its length is to its height; i. e. I ſhall roll a eylinder up an inclined road of twenty yards in length, and but one yard perpendicular height, with one twentieth part of the force that would be neceſſary to lift it perpendicularly that yard The ſercu mav be conſidered as an inclined plane wrapt round a cylinder; therefore as the power moves round the cylinder, while the weight riſes, the power has an advantage over the weight, as the length of one thread round the eylinder, is to the diſtance of one thread from onurtonieo i, S lutantd: i mned; and lo mh nte poner rur ſs ſ hrh ; Le ciher nus eis 15 alloine ſr t .Iſi uù ò nuùſenath tuusc h2ùſ mare; itraëe wich meres R Zaght. or colera t nl thersſore ſ ſIihlnl t1t n l. n ſenciliy i L 177 another; or as the velocity of the power is to the velocity of the weight. In a common jack we have all theſe powers together, if to an arm of the fly the power be applied; and ſo far as that power moves farther than the weight, ſo much is the advantage which the power has pver the weight. If machines could be made to move without friction, the leaſt degree of power added to that which balances the weight would be ſufficient to raiſe it: But as the ſmootheſt bodies are full of pores, and little eminences, theſe will lock into one another in rubbing bodies, and greatly retard the motion of a machine. The friction in the lever, and in the wheel and axle, is very ſmall: In pulleys it is very conſiderable: But in the inclined plane, the wedge, and the ſecrcu, it is very great. The allowance made for friction in machines conſiſting of ſeveral of the mechanic powers, is uſually one third; i. e. aſter calculating all the ſingle powers as above, and multiplying theſe into one another, from the laſt product I deduct one third of it, and the remainder is the true momentum or force of the machine. Friction is of two kinds: The rubbing friction, and the friction by contact; the rubbing of the locked wheel of a ecach againſt the road may repreſent the firſi; and the manner of its touching the road in its uſual motion the ſecond. When the ſirſt kind of friction can be reduced to the ſecond, there is a maniſeſt advantage given to the power of the machine, as is demonſtrated by the experiments with the friction wheels. heſe wheels are hung ſo that their peripheries form an angle, in which the gudgeon of the heavy wheel turns. IVater awheels, large grinding stones, and even awheel carriages, are hung in this way at a ſmall expence; but being apt to wear out very faſt, they are better fitted to ſmall weights moving with great velocity. And hence the friction balls in wheel carriages, eranes, &c. become ſoon uſeleſs. A narrow rubbing ſurface has much the advantage over a broad one, though they each ſuſtain the ſame weight, becauſe of fewer points and pores being in contact; xæC . uaærc L 18] hence the ſmaller the gudgeon or axle of a wheel the better, if it has but ſtrength to ſupport the weight. The friction in water that carries an under-ſhot mill, is much taken off by a ſloping pedal; the velocity of the flat-boards of the wheel ought to be one-third of the velocity of the water; the number of ſtaves in the trundle ought to be no even part of the number of cogs in the wheel that turns it; and the grinding ſtone ſhould not make above 60 revolutions in a minute. Beſides the mechanic powers, and various inſtruments to explain friction, momentum, falling bodies, &c. the machines uſed to illuſtrate this lecture are, 1ſt. A moveable crane. 2d. A mill to ſav marble. 3d. Ditto to ſaw timber. 4th. A common pile-driver. §th. Voulou's pile-driver. 6th. The equitable moving wind-mill, that cloaths, uncloaths, and turns itſelf to the wind. 7th. Drill-ploughs. 8th. Ventilators. qth. Wheel carriages. 10. Methods uſed in moving the great ſtone on which the ſtatue of Peter the Great is erected in Peterſburg. 11th. A compleat fortification. 1ath. Boulton, Blakev, Smeaton's and the common fſire or ſteam engines. 13th. Water engines of all denominations, viæ. common pumps, forcing pumps, rope pumps, Archimedes's ſcrew pump; bucket-engines, machines for draining, embanking, &c. &c. &c. Theſe, and many more, from their ſizæe, cannot be removed from the Winter Lecture Room, now in George Street, Hanover Square. PRINCIPLES Of CHEMISTRT. ALL bodies exiſting on the earth may be arranged under three heads, vi. the auimal, vegetable, and muneral κingdoms. The firſt comprehends all bodies endowed with life and ſelf-motion. The ſecond, thoſe which have life only, the power of growing, and propagating their ſpecies. The third, all bodies deſtitute of ſife and ſelf-motion. Bodies are alſo conſidered as ſimple or compaund.SImple bodies are ſuch as cannot be reſolved nto any thing more ſimple, ſuch as pure earth, pure water, &e. Compound bodies conſiſt of two or more of the primary elements, ſuch as an animal body, for carthy particles and various fluids form its compoſition. That branch of philoſophy which examines the properties of theſe bodies, by compounding or decompounding them, is callel CHEMISTR. A branch ſo cctenſive and importunt, that the ſuſtenance oſ life the arts and ſciences various manufactories nay, even trade and commerce depend upon a continual compoſition and decompoſition of natural bodies. SOLUTION is a property of fluids, whereby they imhibe cor incorporate themſelves with) ſolids, by ſeparating their partsThe ſca is a ſolution of ſalt in freſh water. Inkisa ſolution of vitriol and galls in water. Dilutednitrous acid disſclves copper; when the ebullition is over, the liquor will he a ſolution of copper. Diluted vitriolic acid in like manner gives a ſolution of iron. Ouickſilver diſſulves lead, tin, &c. Gold diſſolved in aqua regia is a ſolution of gold, &c. and camphor in like manner is diſſolved in ſpirit of wine, &e. Solutions in water, ſpirits, D o [ 2 ] acids, air, &c. are tranſparentbut mixtures are muddy or opaque. DISTILLATION is the application of heat to ſeparate ſluid and volatile parts from bodies; and to collect them in other veſſels by means of cold. Heat expands all bodies, and puts their particles into a repulſive ſtate; when this application becomes more powerful than the coheſion of the body, a decompoſition takes place. Seawater put in a retort, and expoſed to the fire, the water ſoon riſes in the character of ſteamthis ſteam-paſſing through a cold pipe is condenſed, and brought back again into water, but freſh, and the ſalts being leſs volatile, remain at the bottom of the retort. Liquors that have gone through a ſtate of vinous fermentation, are diſpoſed to part with ſpiritand ſpirit riſing in ſteam with leſs degree of heat than water, a ſeparation of the two is eaſily effected in a ſtill, by tempering the fire, hence the ſteam of the ſpirit paſſing through a long ſpiral pipe (immerſed in cold water) is condenſed: wlien the ſpirit is all come over, the water begins to riſe in ſteam, ; and may be received in a ſeparate, veſſel the earthy and colouring particles of the wine will at laſt be found dry at the bottom of the ſtill. SUBLIMATION is but a diſtillation of dry ſubſtances. Sulphur expoſed in a ſubliming veſſel, is melted vith a very gentle heat, and riſes in ſteam, forming flours of ſulphur on the ſides and top of the veſſel, anq is but the ſame ſulphur that was melted. Gum bengoin melted within a tall receiver, with a ſprig of roſemary in it, riſes and forms an hoar-froſt appearance on the Ieaves of the roſemary. Phoſphorus juſt covered with water, in a Florence flaſk expoſed over a lamp. ſublimes into the appearance of ſtars, and the aurora borealis. It riſes with the ſteam of the water, and ſtruggling to obtain the air, its menſtruum, forms heautiful coruſcations in the flaſk, particularly when ſcparated from the Iamp, and expoſed in the dark. fe ꝶ im-ſ, ùter uſs eannm ul ſle  leſs v. Le rrgp o ũ tac retut. Lijuor thet ina;5 letentit n ue gen1fe Ulgnt lſq n ſiam na lepuaton oſ ũy c - . 2 temperine the Hũh n2hfe ſινùſen tue lon ſysil àdi 2torſnun lil -Ue  daf be somnsct - t. ſ ſv ſinltla;à iſ., 15 mẽetd siorπnꝗ L ar] PRECIPITATION is performed in ſluid matcers only it is a diſuniting of two or more ingredients by the addition of another, which by its greater aſfinity, unites with one of the ingredients, and ſeparates the others from it, and by which they generally fall to the bottom of the liquor. Copper diſſolved in diluted nitrous acid, is precipitated by ironmuch of the diſſolved copper becomes revived by the phlogiſton of rhe iron, and forms a ſkin of copper on the iron; the reſt ſalls to the bottom of the liquor precipitated, &c. &c. SATURATION ſignifies the point at which the attractive and diſſolving power of any menſtruum ſtops, when filled with the matter it is to diſſolve.Solutions of ſalt or ſugar in water; of ſulphur in oil of turpentine; camphor in ſpirit of wine; ſilver in aqua fortis; water in air, &c. are tranſparent till fully ſaturated; if more be added, they ſink, in their natural form, to. the bottom undiſſolved, and the menſtruum is ſaid to be fully ſaturated. If water, ſpirits, oil, &c. be evaporated from the matter with which they are ſaturated, the matter aſſumes its natural form jcommon ſalt will aſſume a cubical form; ſalt-petre the form of a priſm, &c. &c. adhering to the bottom and ſides of the containing veſſels. AFFINITY. This term is of great extent in chemiſtry, and ſignifies the tendency which the conſtituent parts of bodies have to unite readily with sSOME ſubſtances in preference to others. Water and vinegar have affinity, becauſe they are eaſily mixed rogether. Water and oil l1ave no affinity becauſe they will not mix, but ſhew a kind of repulſion to one another. If mixture, A and B, ave a third matter, C, added to them, to which A has a greater attraction or affinity than to B, then will A let go B, and join in union with C, and B is precipitated, X. 1ſt. Solution of ſublimate mixt with oil of tartar. produces an orange coagulum; an acid (as the ſpirit of nitre) added, ſciæes the oil of tartar, (as an alkali, to which it has a ſtrong aſſinitv) the colour is diſcharged, and the liquor becomes pelucid. and. A Solution of blue vitriol mixt with ſpirit of ſul-ammoniac, produces a bluecoloured alkaline liquor. The nitrous acid, added, ſeizes the ſul-ammoniac as an alkali, diſcharges the colour, and the liquor becomes acid; if then an alkali be made predominant (as oil of tartar) the fine blue is again reſtored. 3sd. Acid ſolutions are detected by ſyrup of violets, which turns them red: but the ſame ſyrup turns an alkaline ſolution green. Hence red or blue flowers ſteeped in acid water, impart their colouring particles to the water, which becomes red: oil of tartar added, turns it green. 4th. Salts inſtantaneouſly chry ſtaliæe when ſpirit of wine is added to their ſolution in water, becauſe ſpirit and water have a greater affinity to one another than ſalt and vater. sth Inflammable alr is not iniammable of itſelf, any more than fixt air is efferveſcent; but it is a conſtituent part of a compound, which being let looſe, cauſes by its mixture with the empyreal part of the atmoſphere 1he phænomenon of nflammation. Hence phoſphorus (as a mine of phlogiſton) vhen rubbed between the folds of brown paper to increaſe its ſurface and give it a little warmth, takes ſire ſo ſoon as it becomes opened out to the air. 6th. Two thirds of nitrous acid and one third vitriolic acid mixed, and then poured on oil of turpentine, produces inſtant and tremendous inflammation! 7th. LEther dropt on water produces ice. 8th. Calcs's are revived, if while they. are in fuſion, inflammable air be blown upon them, 9th. Equal quantities of regulus of cobalt diſſolved in diluted nitrous acid, and ſea falt diſſolved in water, make an ink that comes and goes with heat and moiſture. 1oth. Inviſible writing. with a ſolution of ſugar of lead, is rendered bluck by a ſolution of liver of ſulphur, both in water. This phlogiſtic effect will take place through a thick hook, or even a ſtone wall. 1 1th. Hembergs's pyrophorus requires one part ſugar and three parts ullum, to be melted, ſtirred, and dried on an iron ſhovel till it becomes a blackiſh coal; then bruiſe it into powder, and put it into a long-necked bottle, and the bottle into a crucible ſilled with dry ſand, then place the crucible in a grudunl fire, till the whole becomes red hot, and heep it ſo an hour, or till a weak ſulphurous flame has iſſued out of the bottles neck a quarter oſ an hour; remove it by degrees, and cork up the bottle as ſoon as it will not burn it, or decant the pyrophorus into a dry bottle, well ſtopped from air. A little of this powder expoſed to moiſt air on brown paper, inſtantly takes fire. 10th. Vitriolic acid contains more lutent fire than water by one-thirdtherefore, when mixt, an equilibrium takes place, and the three parts are let Iooſe in ſenſible heat. Hence iron pyrites lying in water produces heat, and becomes ink with an infulion of galls; rain water running over quarries of ſuch pyrites above Bath, acquire the heat tor which thoſe waters are celebrated. 13th. Vegetables contain much nitre; the water thereſore in which potatoes, ſpinage, &c. are boiled diſſolves the nitre, and hence brown paper ſfoaked in ſuch water, becomes excellent mateh when cut in ſlips and dried. 14th. Silver diſſolved in diluted nitrous acid, (or luna cornea) is pre cipitated by copper; for the acid has a greater affinity to copper than ſilver, therefore the ſilver preeipitates, and form thoſe beautiful ramifications called the arbor Diuna. ACIDS are both in a liquid and concrete form, have a ſour taſte, and they efferveſce with alkalies. Vitriolic ncd is fluid, tranſparent, colourleſs, and without ſmell; like water, but mueh heavier. It is got generally from ſulphur, by diſtillation with water, to which it has great afſinity Nitrous acid is of a brown colour, emits brown vapours, has a pungent ſmell, readily diſſolves moſt metals, and is extracted by diſtillation from nitre or ſult-petre, moiſtened with vitriolic acid. It attacks the phlogiſton of metals, and has the greateſt affinity to it Muarine acid is extracted from common ſalt, it is of a ycllow colour, and ſmells like ſaſſron. ALKEKALIES, are ſaline bodies that combine readiIy with acids; in a concrete form they attract moiſture from the air, and become fluid: they have an acrid burning taſte, fuſe with a moderate heat; diſſolving earths uith a ſtrong heat: become gluſs, &&. Ruat minoral allaùl is obtained ſrom ſea ſalt; fiæt vegetuble alhali ſrom vegetahles, both ſtanding a great heat without diſſipation. Volatile altali is obtained from aànimal ſubſtances, by decompoſition and putrefaction, and flies oſf with a small degree of heat; hartſhorn drops are of this kind. Alkaline ſalts combined with oils form ſoap, &c. SALTS are every thing with a ſharp taſte, and ſoIuble in water. Scea ſalt, or hitehen ſalt, is a combination of marine acid and mineral alkali. Luna cornea is a ſalt formed by the union of ſilver and acid. Verdigriſe, ſalts formed by the ſolution of copper in vinegar. Æmmoniacal ſalts, are an acid ſaturated with volatile alkali. Sugar, an eſſential ſalt, containing vegetable acid combined with earth and oil. Potaſb, a fixt vegetable alkali extracted from the aſhes of vegetables. Nitrous salts are found in old walls, or places impregnated with animal and vegetable juicesthey are neutral, and produce nitrous acid and fixt vegetable alkali. ME T AL S. Perfect metals, or thoſe that cannot be decompounded, are, gold, platina, and ſilver. Imperfect metals, are, copper, iron, tin, and lead, which in ſire or ſtrong menſtruums loſe their metalline properties become an earth, or cales; but are revivable back to their original metals by phlogiſton; hence imperſfect metals are wholly compoſed of earthy matters and phlogiſton. Pure metals are always found in their metallic form; but the imperfect metals in the form of cales's or ores; theſe placed in a ſtrong fire acquire from the combuſtibles phlogiſton enough to become metals, and are then combuſtible themſelves in a ſtrong fire: Sparks produced by the ſtroke of flint and ſteel, are but particles of ſteel ſet on fire by the violence of the ſtroke. Gold is unalterable by art, is the heavieſt of all known bodies, expands ſo, that a grain may be beat into a leaf of ſifty ſquare inches, and a gold wire one tenth of an inch in diameter, will ſuſpend or ſupport 500lb. weight without breaking. Reduced into fine powder, it is eaſily attacked by acids, but its metallic nature is in no reſpect altered. Gold diſſolved by aqua regia, and then precipitated by volatile t pregnated weh animi utial, and poduce nthoſe that canuet e and ſlhr. Inyiid leai, which in tre or tilline propertes beeviratle hack to their nce imperict nets tters md plogilon i metalic om; dot le; or ores ti ſe quſbles i [ 25s ] alkali, and then waſhed and ſuſfered to dry, explodes by a ſmall degree of heat, with a quickneſs and violence faexceeding gunpowder. Ether poured on a ſolution of gold in aqua regia, and the mixture ſhookthe gold will leave the aqua regia and paſs into the ether. Cold will continue months in a hot fire without loſing any weight. Platina. This metal is found in ſmall, angular, ſhining grains in the gold mines of South America; it is near as heavy as gold naturally, but deprived of the iron with which it is generally united it is heavier. It diſſolves in aqua regia, but bids defiance to ſimple acids, or any fire, except chat of a large burning glaſs. Silver is the third unalterable metalit fuſes in a ſmall heat; is Copper, though an imperfect metal, comes near to ſilver in point of ductilitt. A wire, as above, ſupports 2 9ꝗlb. ſToiſt air tarniſhes, and even caleines it; this ru , or calx, is verdigriſe. Acids, alkalies, ſaline matters, and oils, more or leſs diſſolve copper, and the ſolution is of a green colour, and poiſonous ; hence culinary veſſels of copper ſhould be kept well tinned. A ſolution of copper in volatile alkali is blue when expoſed to the air, but loſes the colour when corked up; opened, it again becomes blue, &c.So water impregnated with too little copper to be diſcovered, turns blue with a few drops of volatile alkali. Copper is moſtly found combined with ſulphur in mines; and is eaſily ſeparated from other metals by ſulphur. It requires a ſtrong heat to melt it, emits pernicious fumes, and burns with a green or blue flame. It eaſily combines with orher metallic ſubſtances uvwith zink it becomes braſswith tin, bronzge, or bellmetal, &c. Iron is the moſt uſeſul, the hardeſt, moſt elaſtic, and, except tin, the lighteſt of all metals. Such a wire as above, ſupports 450]b. As an ore, or a calx, it is not attracted by the magnetbut when phlogiſticated by roaſting in the fire, ĩt is attracted. It is eaſily  mr  pr,m 4æ 8 H rm ſorb-Ccsedem incte  cresinc en 22 æ Eillſlih Hi i ù iiiſ ſ  ã n n, L 26 deprived of phlogiſton, by the cales of other metals, water, moiſt air, acids, fire, &&. and becomes ruſt, or crocus martis. lron, joined by ſubſtances that abound with phlogiſton, in a ſtrong fire, without the free acceſs of air, becomes ſicel, and ſteel made red hot, and ſuddenly cooled in water or oil, becomes ſo hard tempered, and brittle that edge-tools, files, &c. are made of it. In the act of heating it changes colour, and hence many ſteel ornaments are made blue. Iron has great aſfinity with ſulphur, and its fuſion is ſo much facilitated by it that if iron in white heat, be rubbed with ſulphur, it falls in liquid drops united with the ſulphur; and if 6olIb. of iron filings and ſulphur, made into a paſte with water, be buried a few inches under ground, it will.ſwell, grow hot, emit vapours and flame, and ſhake the ground about it lice an earth-quake. lron may be allayed with any metal except quickſilver and lead. Tin is the lighteſt, leaſt elaſtic, or ſonorous of any metal. A wire as above, ſupports solb. All acids diſſolve and deprive it of its phlogiiton. It melts with leſs heat than will make it red hot, and calcines into a grey powder called putty, cuſcd in poliſhing metals, glaſs, &c.) It allays with all metals, gives them brittleneſs; and its vapours impair the ductility of all metals. It amalgamates with quickſilver, and is then uſed to cover looking-glaſſes; compounded with lead it forms the ſolder of the plumbers. Lead is ſtill ſofter than tin; a wire as above only ſuſtains a9lb. Acids of all ſorts diſſolve itfumes of vinegar ruſts it into cubite lead. Calcs of lead is made into wafers; boiled in linſeed oil, it becomes the drying-oil of the painters. Lead kept in a ſtate of fuſion, with a current of air paſſing over it, ſoon loſes its phlogiiton, and becomes calcined, and is then called redlead : a ſtronger heat vitrifies this calx into litharge: and a ſtill ſtronger heat, reduces it into glaſs of icad, hich will run through the crucible like water through a ſieve. This glaſs facilitates the calcination of imperfect metals, and is therefore uſed to purify the perfcet metals. Adercury, or quichſitver, is like fluid ſilver opa- que and very heavy. By great cold it eimm he mude ſolid, and mulleable as lead. It riſes in vapoucs bv a ſmall deore of heat, and when theſe vapours are collected, they are ſound the very ſame quickſilver. Hence it is euſily diitilled, and by that meuns caſily ſcparated from lcad, tin, &c. Acids and alkalies cotbine with mercury. Vapours of mercury and marine acid mectin , form chry ſtals like ſlattened necdles, called corrolice ſullomate. Mereury ſhook in vinegar, exhibits a curious phænomenon; and it is luminous when ſhook in vacuo. Ouickſilver triturated with ſulphur, forims thiops mineral, and this frequently ſublimed, becornes cinnabar or the vermilion of the puinters. Cinnabar is alfo found a native in the mines, and may be conſidered as the ore of quickſilver. E A R T T S,. Earths make up the ſolid part of our globe; they are ſo intermixed, that it is dificult to come at their components, which are, 1ſt. Calcarcous carths, i e. lime ſtonce, chalh, ſtalactites, or ſtone icicles, marbles, or any earths that eilerveſce with acids; that fall in white powder when burnts that will not melt into glaſs by heat; but will melt when mixed with horax, or c cales's s, and aſſi ſt the fuhon of lcad, copper, and iron. Siliccous earthi, or precious ſtones, as the diamond, ruby, topaz, opal, agate, cornelian, ſlint, jaſper. Muany of theſc ſtrike ſire with, and even ſcratch ſteel; do not melt with the ſtrongeſt firc; and do not eſferveſcc with acids. Algillaceous earths, or clays that harden in the ſire, and uſed to make poreclain and el uy marles, that moulder in water, and cfferveſce with acids, uſed as manure. Adicaceons earths are compoſed of thin Icaves, or lamina, with thining ſurE 2 faces, and which divide into thinner leaves in the fire, and become brittle. Alveſtus earths Theſe do not alter in the fire; are flexible and ſtringy, capable of being ſpun into threads, or wove into cloth. Zeolites are harder than calcareous ſtones; melt eaſily in the fire with ſwelling and ebullition; and diſſolve with acids without efferveſcence. ù LECT UR E IV. P N E U M 4 Tτ I C S. THE air is a thin fluid, which encompaſſes the globe of the earth on all ſides, revolves along with it round its axis, and attends it on its annual journey round the ſun. If a peach be ſuppoſed to reprefent the earth, the air will be aptly ſignified by the down growing on its ſurface. This body of air, (together with the clouds and vapours that float in it) is called the atmoſphere; and it reaches about forty-five miles above the ground before it degenerates into too thin an æther to refract. the rays of light, or for any creature to breathe; this is known by meaſuring with a barometer the weight of the atmoſphere in a Iow valley, and on a mountain, and may be familiarized by ſuppoſing a thouſand fleeces of wool one piled above another, where the loweſt will be greatly compreſſed or ſqueezed together, the next not ſo much, the next not ſo much as that, &c. till we come to the uppermoſt, which will lie in its natural looſe ſtate. The air, by bein elaſtic, and partaking of the eurth's attraction, is neceſ-ſarily drawn into progreſſive ſtate like this. The air is ſo ſubtil that it pervades the pores of all bodies, and enters into the compoſition of moſt animal and vegetahle ſubſtances; yet it is a body, becauſe it excludes all other bodies from the place it poſſeſſes, if à Io confined that it cannot eſcape; hence rhe origin of ſl the divers bell, for if we ſink a bell in water with the ſ mouth open downwards, little Water will make its wa into it, and a perſon may deſcend and live at a conſideraol ble depth, if a veſſel of the ſame ind be kept conſtantly 9 ſupplying him with freſh air, and that made noxious by his breathing be let out by a pipe reaching from the upper part of the bell above the ſurface of the water. For Qr taken into the lungs, returns phlogiſticated, having brought off the ſuperabundant phlogiiton of the blood, which makes a digreſſion from the heart to receive purification from the air; and hence the blood returns thin, florid, and fit for circulation, while the expired air is ected into the general maſs phlogiſticated and unwholeome. The air has all the properties by which a ſluid is diſtinguiſhed, it yields to the ſlighteſt impreſſion, its parts move eaſily among one another, and animals breathe and move through it without any difficulty. Yet it has three ſingularities which diſtinguiſh it from moſt ãuids. I. It can be compreſſed into a leſs ſpace than it naturally poſſeſſes. 2. It can occupy a greater fpace than it naturally poſſeſſes. 3. It is of different denſity in every part upward. As the air is a body, it muſt needs have weight; this is proved, 1. By its preſſing the hand that covers the top of an exhauſted receiver. 2. By immerſing the ſtem of a bolt-head into a veſſel of water, and covering both with a receiver, then exhauſting the air out of both; c Jetting in the air on the ſurface of the water it forces it into the exhauſted bolt-head. 3. A bottle that holds a wine quart being emptied of air, and weighed, is found to be about 17 grains lighter than when it is full of air; ſo that a quart of air on the earth's ſurface is 17 grams. 4. If a wet bladder be tied over the top of an open recelver, then ſet to dry, and aſter this the air exhauſted from under it, the air's weight vill then burſt the bladder with a ſurprizæing report. §- On a moveable plate place a tall receiver, open its cock, and exhauſt the air out of it, then ſhut the cock, and immerſe the ſtem in which it is ſixed into a veſſel full of water; on opening the cock the air's preſſure on the water will force it into the receiver in a beau- [31 riful fountaim. 6. If a hole be made in the bottom of a cup, and have a bit of dry huzel or willow branch fixed into it, and this he put into a hole on the top of a receiver; when quickiilver is poured into it, and the air exhauſted, the quickſilver will be forced thro the pores of the branch by the weight of the incumbent air, and will fall in a curious ſhower into the receiver. 7. lfa tube of 32 inches long, and open only at one end, be filled with quickſilver, and then the open end immerſed in a jar of quickſilver, that in the tube will ſink to the height the quickſilver ſtands in the barometer; if this jar and tube be put under a tall receiter, and the air exhauſted, the quickſilver will deſcend out of the tube into the jar; but upon admitting the air again into the recciver, its preſſure will drive up the quickſilver into the tube, and ſupport it therein as it ſtands in the harometer, which proves that the quickſilver in the barometer is kept up ſolely by the weoight of the air. S. Iſ the air be exhauſted out of two braſs hemiſpheres oſ about 12 inches area, it will require a foree equal to 180 pounds to ſcparate them. To prove that theſe eſfects are not produced by ſuction, and that there is no such principle in nature, 1. Place a ſmall receiver at ſome diſtance ſrom the hole in the pump-plate, and cover it with a large one over the hole; on exhauſting the air the ſmall one will remain looſe, while the large one is made faſt to the plate; but on letting in the air the big receiver will be relcaſed, and the ſiall one preſſed down. 2. If a pump be placed in water under a receiver, and the air exhauſted, no water can be made to riſe in the pump. 3. If two moveable plates be ſixed upon a pump-plate, with communications between them that can be ſtopped by cocks, if the air is exhauſted out of a recciver placed on one of them, and then a receiver placed on the other, and the communication opened, half the air in the laſt will by its ſpring make its way into the firſt receiver, and both ſhall be ſixed on the plates. Rπ 21 L 32] Breathing is in ſome meaſure of the intercoſtal muſcles acti are diſpoſed in form of a ſemici lated with the vertebræ of the back behind, and connected with the ſternum before, which are the two center on which they move: The diaphragma is a partition drawn acroſs the body, dividing the thorax or cheſt from the abdomen or belly, it is a muſcle, and by its diſpoſition and ſtructure capable of expanſion, whereby it becomes concave downward, and of contraction, whereby it becomes flat; and by this motion alternately rarefying and condenſing the air in the crevices of the thorax, aud thereby deſtroying its equilibrium; to reſtore this the air wilſ preſs into the lungs, and when the diaphragma contracts, will be forced out again; hence the action of breathing, as is repreſented by the lungs-bladder, whoſe inſide has a communication with the external air, though it is incloſed in a thorax of glaſs with its bottom cloſed by a bladder, tied flaccid, repreſenting the diaphragma. performed by the power ng upon the ribs; they rcular arch, and articuThe elaſtic quality, or pring, of the air is thus proved, 1. If an almoſt empty bladder he put under a receiver, and the air exhauſted, the ſpring of the air in the bladder will then ſhew itſelf by ſwelling up the bladder, as if it was blown. 2. If a little of the ſhell be cut off from the ſmall end of an egę,. and the egg put under a receiver, on exhauſting, the bubble of air in the big end of the egg will expand itſels, and drive out the contents of the egę. 3. If a fiſh in water be put under a receiver, and the air exhauſted, its air-bladder will ſwell the fiſh ſo as to make it ſpecifically lighter than water, and of courſe the fiſh will be buoyed up to the ſurface. 4. If a cubic inch of dry wood in warm water be put under the receiver, aud the air exhauſted, large and innumerable bubbles of air will come out oſ the wood and make the water ſcem to boil; and in this manner may air be drawn viſibly out of the hardeſt bodies. s5. A withered apple in an exhauſted receiver will he plumped hàde has a conmuniouh it is indoled in a loſed by a dltder, ted Qti. of the ai is this pore, be put undet a rexie, CMIU. 5 up the badde a ſ it e ſhell he cut of ffon he eqg put unir  nle of ai in the hij ol ſdiie ort the aut . stel he put unc ſi 1s air-bladder wi' li uv lohter tn il 1ſ D ſole surte nttr be pul , him inſenſible ll 1 ſ 33] up, and look quite freſh by the ſpring of the air in the inſide of it; and if a freſh one be pricked all over with a bodkin, and put in water under a receiver, on exhauſting, it will appear as if it was roaſting by a fire. 6. If a tall receiver be exhauſted, and the neck of the veſſel joined to its bottom be half full of water, the ſpring of the air on the ſurface of that water will force it out into the receiver in a beautiful fountain. 7. If a little air be tied up in a bladder, and put in a convenient veſſel with great weights upon it, on exhauſting the air, the ſprihg of the air in the bladder will lift the weights, and ſhew that its ſpring is equally forcible with its preſſure; therefore, though a middle-ſi7ed man ſuſtains above 30,000lb. weight on his perſon, yet the equal ſpring of air within him makes of it. Heat and cold, or, if you will, the preſence or the abſence of ſire, are the uſual cauſes of the air's rarefaction and condenſation: If air be heated, it ſwells, ſo that the ſpace it poſſeſſed before it was heated will contain fewer particles thun it did in its cold ſtate. Wind muſt be the neceſſary conſequence of this; for by what means ſoever the equilibrium of the air is deſtroyed, its neighbouring parts will never be at reſt till the balance is reſtored: Hence the reaſon why air ruſhes ſo violently into a glaſs-houſe; into a cloſe room with a great fire in it into warm towns, &. When the ſun's heat is increaſed by the reflection of ſands, or the ſides of rocky mountains, &c. the air will be rarefied, and by the ruſhing in of the colder neighbouring air will be forced up into the higher part of the atmoſphere, as light ſmoke is up a chimney by the heavier air. If 2 large cloud keeps the ſun's rays from the air under it, but rarefies that all round it, a wind will ruſh from beneath the cloud in all directions. Upon this principle alſo we account for the trade winds which conſtantly biow from the eaſt towards the weſt about the equator; for as the ſun paſſes over the earth in that direction, and rarefies the air as he goes, by heating the earth, and bottom of the ſea (for tranſpatent bodies receive no heat from ſolar rays) the colder F ,,,, -nrr te ev nc r cpet ,anænm  e23: 4 ST I 34 air will ruſh after him. This effect is alſo increaſed by the greater centrifugal motion, which the equatorial parts of the globe have more than thoſe parts nearer the poles; by which the globe ſlides as it were from under the air, cauſing an apparent motion in it the contrary way to that on which the earth turns on its axisRHence alſo the monſoons; the day and night breeze, on the iſlands in the Weſt-Indies; the wind from weſt to eaſt on the coaſt of Guinea; and the currents of Florida, Gibraltar, &c. Tis unneceſſary to point out here how admirably theſe properties coincide with the general ſcheme of the creation. e lon 2lncal de genenal ehene of tit C 35] LECTUREV. P N E U M 4 T IC S. THAT the air may be condenſed or fqueezed into leſs room than it naturally poſſeſſes is proved, I. By putting a blown bladder in a receiver; if a forcing ſyringe be then applied to the receiver, and a quantity of air forced into it, the bladder will be ſurivel'd up by the ſuperior preſſure of the condenſed air. 2. If a copper ball be nalf filled with water, and a quantity of air forced into it as above, through a ſpouting pipe that reaches nearly to the bottom of the water, the ſpring of the condenſed air on the ſurface of the water will exhibit an amazing fountain. 3. The moſt formidable inſtance of condenſion is in the magaæzine, and walking-cane wind-guns; where the condenſed air has a ſpring capable of diſcharging 20 or 30 balls with one charge, one after another, with the ſame force as if charged with gunpowder. Ailr ſo ſqueezæed has a portion of its latent heat forced out, and the containing veſſel bescomes hot, like hammered iron. By compounding charcoal and nitre, the principles of infltammation are united; charcoal aſffording phlogiſton, nitre empyreal air, and ſulphur ſudden heat, by ignition. Hence flume diſplacing the air around it, cauſeth an exploſion, which does not take place in vacuo. Sound is cauſed by any thing that gives a ſmart ſtroke or a tremulous motion to the air; theſe waves ſtricing upon the outward ſhell of the ear, are from thence conveyed up the auditory tube, and ſtriking againſt the tympanum, or drum, are ſo increaſed, that in making their way up the labyrinth, it gives a ſhock to the auditory nerves, and, by their means, is conveyed to the ſoul the F 2 NT ærπνY- idea of hearing, or ſound. The artificial ear makes this verv evident. And the clock ſtriing in vacuo without being heurd, is a proof of air being a conductor of ſound. Muſical ſtrings, in tenſion, ſtruck hy a bow, a finger, the wind, &c. will divide themſel ves into imaginary frets, or bridges. vizæ. into halves, thirds, fourths, &c. a bridge, either real or imaginary, dividing a ſtring into ruvo equal lengths, each vibrating according to their weight) will be an octave to the whole ſtring, as half will vibrate twice as faſt as the whole; and hence every ſecond wave unites with the firſt of the whole ſtring, and gives a pleaſing ſenſation to the ear.A ſtring divided into rhree equal parts, each will vibrate three times while the whole ſtring viſ§ brates once; hence every third wave coming in contact produces a pleaſing ſenſation, and the chorꝗ is callcd a Twelftb. Two-thirds of this ſtring vibrates ihree times while the whole ſtring vibrates twice, and gives that ſweet chord called a Fiſth-. Seven-ninths of a ſtring produce the major Third  and three-fourths the Fourth Hence waves claſhing againſt one another without contact, produce diſchords in muſic, and ſerve as foils or reliefs to the counterpoint of according waves. Hence alſo the mechanical ſympathy of muſical inſtruments tuned in uniſon; one of which will ſound when the other does, by the waves it produces. An harpſichord replies to every word ſpoken in the room where it ſtands, when its ſtrings have no dampers upon them. Particular notes in an organ will ſhake the wainſcot, ſet dogs a howling. Hence alſo the various ſounds produced by the Eolian harp, when tuncd uniſon, and expoſed to a current of windthe ſtrings divide themſelves into imaginary bridges, and produce ocaves. ſiſths, thirds, twelfths, fiſteenths, &c. The maſterly perſormer on the violin aſſiſts this propenſity, by touching lightly thoſe aliquot parts of a ſtring where nature would make this imaginary bridge, and hence are produced thoſe notes called haermonics. When the atmoſphere is light, the noxious air pent up in the cavities of mines (communicating with the out- ſi o'3 ite ac ua ,ae Iha Fanb Honce  uùtuont cuma veùſoh er νbù; uu fuce a u intrements tonec ubnche other v chu qqlis to uU 2tùræ vhei dt i. Pricubit a th ſ ſnas ꝗ aſ; ſ ſſ ſ f i i l ] t 37 ward air) will, by its effort to reſtore an eqnilibrium, ſwell into the mine, and hence the ſuſfocating damp which is met with in mines when rhe barometer is low. This damp is made on the air pump by letting air into an exhauſted receiver, through the flame of charcoal, ſulphur, ftame of a candle, &c. into which if an unimal be put it ſuifers inſtant death. The fire- damp proceeds from the ſame cauſe, only that its particles are of the phlogiſtic or inflammable nature, as riſing from the ſulphurous, nitrous, or oleaginous ſtrata in the mine: Ihis, taking fire by the lights uſed by the workmen, will run like a train of gunpowder through the works; and as it is confined, the elaſticity occaſioned by the heat will cauſe ſuch exploſions as frequently blow up the mine. This damp is made on the pump, by letting the air into an exhauſted receiver through the flame of the oil of turpentine or other inflammable matters; after which, if a lighted candle be put in the vapour it will take fire. As the pores and cavities of all bodies are filled with alr, an animal put under a receiver, and the air exhauſted, will ſoon die; becauſe as the air is drawn out of the lungs, that in the thorax will expand and ſwell the animal. ſhrivel up its lungs, and therehy ſtop the circulation of the blood. Fixed air (thet wondrous antiſceptic] ariſes from the efferveſcence of any acid and alkaline mixture, and eaſieſt from chalk and diluted oĩl of vitriolLiquors fermenting diſcharge plenty of it, and it is found alſo in the common atmoſphere. It is a conſtituent part of chalk, marble, limeſtone, and all calcarious earth. Water imbibes it, and thence acquires the ſparkling appearance, acidulous taſte, and medical qualities of Pyrmont water. Though noxious when breathed, it cures the ſca ſcurvy, putrid inteſtinas, inflamed. or putrid ſores, &c. It is alſo ſaid to be a compound of phlogiſton, and dephlogiſticated air. Nitrous air is produced from the efferveſcence of copper fllings and the nitrous acid. It diminiſacs common air, Is v --e 38 in proportion to its purity: and their mixture produces a brown efferveſcence. Inflammable air, the pure and elementary phlogiſton, is eaſieſt procured from iron filings and diluted vitriolic acid; the acid ſeizes the earth of iron, and lets looſe the fixt phlogiſton, exhibiting it as elaſtic air. Ihis gus is imbibed by any metallic calx, in a ſtrong heat, and the calx becomes revived into its original metal. Lead in calcining loſes its phlogiſtonand becomes a calx called minium or red lead:This phlogiſton preſerved, if the calx be placed in it, and the focus of a burning lens heat the calx, it inſtantly begins to imbibe the inflammable air, ſwallows it up, and ſoon becomes the individual lead it was before the proceſs. This is taking a metal in pieces, and putting it together again; and intimates the inflammable principle to be the ſame in all bodies, viz. that inflammation in coals, candles, wood, &c. ariſes from letting looſe concreted phlogiſton from theſe ſubſtances into the air. Inflammable air being eight or ten times lighter than common air, riſes from bogs, and putrifying ſubſtances into the higher regions of the atmoſphere, and lodging there, frequently receives inflammation from lightning or electricity, giving ihunder its long progreſſive ſound Lightning the property of ſpreading over the wholèe hemiſphereand when by winds it is drawn into long ſtreaks acroſs the hemiſphiere, and receives from electricity inflammation at one end, the inſtlammation runs acroſs the hemiſphere, and we call the phænomenon falling ſtars, fiery cragons, meteors, Hill-o th wiſps, &c. A ſoap bubble, filled with inammable air, riſes in the atmoſphere like a cork in water, and is an air-balloon in miniature, riſing from its ſpecific levity, and was made by the Author twelve years before any balloon appeared in France. Inftammable air, when mixt with an equal quantity of common air, or a third of dephlogiſticated air, explodes when confincd in a gun, and inflamed by electricity, ſo as to duſcharge a ball with a force nearly equal to gunpowder. Copper and ſpirit of ſult produce an air (thro quickſilver) that is very noxious, -quickly abſorhed by water, and a cundle burns green in it. Water ſaturated with it is a ſtrong ſpirit of ſalt, and diſſolves iron with great rapidity. Altaline air is expelled by a candle from a gun-barrel filled with one-fourth pounded ſul-ammoniac, and threefourths quick lime mixed. Common air imbibes phlogiſton, which diminiſhes that alr by precipating the fixed air it naturally contains; and it becomes noxious in proportion to the diminution it is capuble of ſuffering. Hence phlogiſton is the beſt teſt of airunwholeſome as it is morc in it, and incapable of diminution; and wholeſome as it has leſs phlogiſton in it. For air imbibing this inflammable matter from the blood in its puſſage through the lungs, performs the office beſt when it has the leaſt phlogiſton in it. Hence candles go out in cloſe rooms, and animals die in them; becauſe air already ſaturated with phlogiſton can contain no more. Vitriolic acid air is produced by oil of vitriol juſt covered with olive oil in a vial, and diſcharged hy a candle through quickſilver. Ice inſtantly melts in this air and alkaline air put to it produces a white flaky precipitation. Fluor acid air is forced by a candle from a vial containing pounded ſpar and oil of vitriol, through quickſilver into water. The phlogiſton in the ſpar gives volatility to the vitriolic acid, ſo that, coming into contact with the water, they unite, and the ſtony matter of the ſpar precipitates in ſlakes, cruſts, &c. a truc ſilicious earth. Diephlogiſticated air, (called alſo Vital air; Empyreal alir; and the Oxyginous principle) ſeems to be derived from carth and the nitrous acid, and bids fair to rob us of a received element. It is expelled from nitre h æ l 30] in a glaſs retort by a ſmart ſire; alſo from red lead and ſpirit of nitre, out of a gun-barrel or a thin vial or an earthy matter void of phlogiſton, as pipe-clay, &c. In a given quantity of this remarkable air an animal will live near ſix times as long as in the ſame quantity of common air Acandle burns with an aſtoniſhing brightneſs in it, a firebrand crackles in it red hot iron melts in it and inſflammable air explodes prodigiouſly loud in it, &c. for dephlogiſticated air is one of the ingredients of inflammability. All ſubſtances, vegetable, animal, or mineral, mixt with nitrous acid, and expoſed to a proper heat, give dephlogiſticated airif the ſubſtances be firſt deprived of phlogiſton. But if the ſubſtances contain much phlogiſton, (in thoſe circumſtances) they give nitrous air. If but a ſmall quantity of phlogiſton, fixt air; but if no phlogiſton, the prodùce is dephlogiſticated air So when a ſmall quantity of phlogiſton exiſts in the ſubſtance uſed, the fixt and dephlugisticated airs generally come over together. PF rom the ſmokenputrid cffluviacalcination of metalsand breathing of animals, the air muſt be continually contaminated, and made unſit for human reſpiration. Providence has wiſely made the vegetable kingdom the cure for this evil, for plunts imbibe nouriſhment from putrid and phlogiſtic air at their leaves as may be ſeen by the ſuperior vigour in plants growing near great cities by their growing on walls without earthand by a green plant put in noxious air, which imbihes nouriſhment, and cures the air at the ſame time. The air ſo puriſied in leaves and plants, leaves them, and becomes dephlogiſticated, iſf the leaves and plants be expoſc in water in a tall inverted glaſs, and expoſed to the light. Reſpitation is alſo a phlogiſtic proceſs, aſfecting air in the very ſame manner as putrefaction, eſferveſcence of iron filings and ſulphurecalcination of metals, &c. -diminiſhing its quantity and ſpecific gravity, and rendering it unſit for reſpiration and inſlammationyet itill capable of being reſtored by agitation in water, or a contuct with vegetables. Air comes nearly in contuct with the blood in its paſſage through the lungs, giving phlogiſton to it when it wants, and taking phlogiſton from it when it has too much. Too much phlogiſton renders the blood black and thick but the air having acceſs to it, even thro' the veſicles of the lungs, renders it red again and dephlogiſticated air ſtill more perſectly ſo, both in and out of the Dody congealed as wellt as fluid, &c. That qater is preſent in air, is evident from ſccing it precipitate in a eloud as a receiver is exhauſting on the air-pump; from the dew on windows, or other cold bodies when water ſtands for ſome time in a hot room; from the wet hair of thoſe who aſcend the ſides of mountains; and ſrom its entering ſpunges and hygrometrical inſtruments when hung in air; from many more prooſs tis evident that air is a menseruum for woter. Air, lying on tater, and rubbing perpetually againſt it, ſrom this contact, and their natural attraction, the two fluids, mutually imbibe one another; (for air may be ſcen in water placed in an exhauſted receiver.j IThat an heavy body can riſe in a lighter one when its particles are ſeparated, and its ſurface by that means encreaſed, is certain from gold heing diſſolved, and of courſe hanging in aqua regiae, copper in aqua fortis, && M2Water riſes in air by the ſame law; and the ferment occaſioned by all ſolutions may be ſcen in the air along the ſurface of wet ground, on a warm day, in that quivering which the rays of the ſun ſuffer in paſſing through air and water not yet intimately mixed. Heat aſſiſis all ſolutions, hence the quantity of clouds and rain where the ſun is vertical:The drying quality of the air in ſpring, and the rains and fogs in winter; for ſummer's warmth aſſiſts in filling the air with water, and the winter's cold condenſes and brings it down in high latitudes; and as the higher regions of the air are cold, and thin, little aſſemblages of particles are diſ erſcd through the air and form clouds, about the height of the mountuins:Ihe winds, and thęir own attraction, aſſiſt this junctiontill they become hig enough to precipitate in a drop of rain: If the drop is froæen in its deſcent, it falls on the ground an hail-ſtone: If the eloud be frozen, then broken fragments of it deſcend in flates of ſuow. Fogs in an evening are occaſioned by the cold condenſing the vapours new raiſed from the ground before they are thus chemically united with the air.  e l HCEHC, - i 1 lꝓpui p.ppopo ſl LECTURE VI. H Y D R O S ꝗ 4 t I C S. TRHIS branch of philoſophy treats of the nature, gravity, preſſure, and motion of fluids in general, and of weighing ſolids in them. Water, like air, conſiſts of round and hard particles, as is proved by putting ſalt in water without increaſing its bult, by the round pores of aquatic plants and the Florentine experiment, which forces water thro' the pores of a copper ball: Hence 'tis evident rhere are vacuities in fluids, and that no fluid can be preſſed into a leſs ſpace than it naturally poſſeſſes, except air and steam. Fluids are ſaid to be perfect or imperfect, as their parts ſlide with more or leſs eaſe over one another, therefore quickſilver is the moſt perfect of all ſluids. Water being of the imperfect kind is ſeldom pure: It adheres to any ſubſtance it meets with, mixes with its particles, and thence becomes inpregnated with whatever ſtrata it runs over: If water has any thing alkaline in it, the syrup of violets turns it green; if any thing acid, the &prup turns it red; if it has run over iron stone, or iron ore, a ſolution of galls turns it blach, and if allum, oil of tartar turns it thich, &.Hence water impregnated with lime-ſtone, and ouſing ſlow amongſt moſſes, leaves, &c.as the wuter evaporates, the ſtoney matter adheres to theſe ſubſtances, and aſſuming their ſhapes, gives that variety of whimſical petrefactions we meet with in Derby ſhire, the dropping well at Knareſborough, &c. Water being incompreſſible will not be more denſe at the hottom than the top of the ſea; but will have the wonderful property of preſſing, upwards and sideways, as forcibly as downwards, in proportion to its perpendicular height, withG 2 , Coπenseπ Aæra2en sar  E r σ i : a * a 7 C 44 H out any regard to its quantity; ſor as each particle is quite free to move towards that part on which the preſſure is leaſt , and hence no particle or quantity of a fluid can be at reſt till it is every way equally preſſed. A fluid may therefore be conceived as made up of perpendicular columns of particles, and as divided into imaginary ſurfaces each an inch or more from one another, the loweſt preſſed with the weight of all the reſt, &c. hence the pipe fixed under the moſi ſurfaces will diſcharge the moſt water, &c. To prove that fluids preſs in all manner of directione alike, take four glaſs tubes, open at both ends, but bent into all kinds of angles; if theſe be put in water nearly 1o their tops, the water will riſe in them to its own level. Or take a veſſel full of water, with a hole at the bottom of its ſule, of the ſame ſize as one in its bottom, and the two holes will be found to diſcharge the ſame quantity of the fluid in the ſame time. That fluids preſs in proportion to their depth, without any regard to their quantity, is evident, 1. From a bladder tied flaccid over one end of an open cylinder of glaſs; if water be poured into it, the bladder will bulge downavards; but then if it be immerſed in a veſſel of water till the ſurface of the water within the cylinder be even with that in the veſſel, the bladder will then be fattiſb as if it were not preſſed at all, for indeed it is then preſſed equally. If the cylinder be plunged deeper, the bladder will be preſſed upuards, ſnewing that bodies ſwim merely hby the force of the pillars of water under them endeavouring to riſe to their level. 2. Lead is about I Iã times heavier than its bulk of water; if therefore a piece he held tight to the mouth of a eylinder, (open at both ends) hy a ſtring within the cylinder, and let down into water above II times its thickneſs, the ſtring may be let go, and the upward preſſure of the water will hold the lead to the eylinder; but if the cylinder and the lead be raiſed 2ill the lead is not 113 times its thickneſs below the ſurface of the water, it will then fall of and ſink. 3. If a cube of 34 inches, open at onc end, and filled with quick- L 457 ſilver, have its open end immerſed in a baſon ofquickſilver, hung ſo by ſtrings that it may be let doun into a deep veſſel of water, according to the depth the veſſel is ſuuſ, the mercury will rile a fourteenth part in the tube, and demonſtrate that quickſilver is fourteen times heavier than water. 4. If lend with a fiat upper ſide be laid on the bottom of a veſſcl, and a piece of flat wood be held on while the veſſel is filling with water; if no water ean get in between the lead and the wood to form an upeard preſſure, the wood will be held on the lead by its own weight and that of the water above it. s. If an empty bottie, juſt made ſo heavy as to ſink in water, be corked, and ſuſpended at one end of a balance, and, with its cork pulled out, be immerſed in water and ſilled, it will require as much eight in the oppoſite ſcale to pull it up, as will weigh all the water in it, which ſhews that fluids weigh juſt as much in their oron element as out of it. 6. Ii a ſmall tube 30 inches long, open at both ends, and to one end (bent to a right angle) it has a large blucder tied; if then the bladder be put in a box, and a board be laid on it with o5 or 30lb. weight upon it, and water be poured into the tube, the bladder will raiſe the ucights, though the bore of the tube ſhould be ſo ſmall as not to hold an ounce of water. 7. Tle presjure of a ſuid upen the botioms of all veſſels whatever, is proportional to their baſes and perpendicular height, without any regard 120 the quantities they contain; for if on a looſe piſton ſuſpended on a balance, a column of water of a foot be ucighed, it will be found to weigh as much as a column of water of the ſame height, though contained in a flunging veſſel that holds ten times as much. 8. If a /mall cube be joined to a very large one, and the whole be bent in the bottom ſo as the two parts may be either porallel, or muke any angle, water may be poured into either tube, and ĩt will juſt riſe as high in the other, even tho' one ſnonld eontain ten thouſand times as much as the other docs: Ihis alſo ſhews that fluids preſs in proportion to ticir perpendicular heights, without any regard to their cuantities; that water in pipes will aſeend to the levces of the æaù ſrom whence it cume; and that jcts or fountains 2q L 46] would riſe the ſume height, if not obſtructed by angular turnings, and the reſiſtance of the air into which they play. Smoke does not riſe into air becauſe of its poſitive levity, but becauſe it is lighter than the air where it is produced; hence if the ſmall neck of a bolthead, full of water, be mmerſed in a glaſs of wine, the lighter wine will aſcend up into the bolthead, and the heavier water deſcend into the glaſs. For the ſame reaſon, a body ſpecifically (or bulk for bulk) heavier than water will ſink in it; a body of the ſame weight will lie indifferently any where in it; and one ſpecifically lighter will of courſe ſwim in it. Smocke is forced up a chimney by the air in the room, preſſing to the rarefied air in the chimney ; hence, the patent ſtoves, contracting the fire-place, obliges the air to ruſh in with great violence, and thereby it overcomes more effectually any wind that forces the ſmoke down the chimney.&Kaitchen, or other open chimnies, are very liable to ſmoke with winds coming over, or boſoming againſt a taller houſe, church, trec, &c.becauſe the ſmoke riſing very ſſlow and languidly by its ſpeciſic lightneſs in the open air, or wide chimnies, is eaſily puffed down by the wind, if a ventilator or a feathered covering do not prevent it. If a ftick be counterpoiſed on a ſcale-beam by water, and after that immerſed in a veſſel full of water, it will cauſe ſo much of the water to flow over the brim as vwill be ſupplied by that in the oppoſite ſcale: Hence it is evident a ſbip diſplaces juſt ſo much water in the ſea as is equal to its own weight and cargo: And hence alſo the sirength of wood may be judged of; for if a piece of oak of a foot long be immerſed in a narrow veſſel of water, it will be found to ſink about eight-tenths of its length: Beech about ſeven-tenths; Mahogany ſcven-tenths, &c. A ſolid body, heavier than iis bulb in avater, will loſe juſt ſo much of its weight when ſulpended in it, as its bulle of water weighs : But the voight loſt by the ſclid is commu- 1eeand her:be it vu that ſors th ſroꝶ: er orhe opnenar αe nb wioui comis 1 BU, . i arqſ oxaat. r Wluè i ſewni.if a uuitl u,t ù i nal u ſu.. ſ, it uit o wite the hrm os Ve e nù u4unt oſ In the i a1 ùli nce leum b vact ꝗ I1 H8unce it b c E, tcsi, 2tâ m Eololllie] t L 477 uicated to the Auid. Hence if the weight of a body in air be divided by what it loſes in a fluid, the quotient will ſhew how much heavier it is than its bulk of that fluid, or its ſpecific gravity. By this trial, pure gold is found to be 19,637 times as heavy as its bulk of water: Guineq gold 17,793 times as heavy: Quichſilver 14 times : Lead 11,325 times: Standard sitver 10,535: Copper 9: Plate braſs 8: Stecl 7,85: Ion 7,645 : and block-tin 7,32. A cubic inch of braſs loſes 2333 grains of its acilai weight in water: In proof ſpirits it loſes 235 grains? therefore a cubic inch of water weighs 2333;, and a eubic inch proof ſpirits 235 grains: And the ſpecific gravities of pure ſpirits, proof ſpirits, and avater are as 840,923 and 1006. From henice may be conceived the great uſe of the hydroſtatic balance. A pipe fixed ſour times as decp helow the ſurface of a fluid as another of the ſame diameter, will diſcharge twice as much in the ſame time; if nine times as deep, it will diſcharge three times as much, &c. agreeable to the ſquare root of the depth: And the velocity with which a fluid ſpouts at any depth below the ſurface, is equal to that which a body Iet fall shat height would acquire. Pipes αaiſo diſcharge a fluid (when placed at equal depths below the ſurface) agrecable to the ſquares of their diameters, i. e. a pipe ionice the diameter of another will diſcharge four times as much of the fluid, in the ſame tume; thrice the diameter, nine times as much; four times the diameter, sixteen times as much, &c. The preſſure of water againſt banks, the ſides of containing veſſels, &c. is in the próportion of falling bodies, viæ if the presſſure againſt the firſt inch deep of the veſſel be one pound, it will be three pounds preſſure upon the inch below that; five pounds ngainſt the inch below that; ſeven pounds againſt the inch below, &c. ſo that preſſure againſt banks, flood-gates, &c. is as the ſquare of the depth, i e. if the preſſure be one pound againſt the uppermoſt inch, it will be four pounds againſt two inches deep; nine pounds againſt three inches deep; ſixteen pounds ãgainſt four inches deep; twenty-ſive pounds againſt five inches decp, &c. Fluide preſs, or reſiſt, according to their denſity, and hence a boat will carry more on ſalt thun freſh water. The hydromcter ſhews this very perfectly, it is buoyed up by sult and water mixed with vinegar, &c. but ſinks in auine, ſpirits, &c. according to their lightneſs, and hence it is uſed for trying the lightneſs or ſtrength of Iiquors. A ſvphon acts agrecable to that equal ſtute which naturc aifects through all her operations; it will not run unleſs the height of water in the oulcr leg be greater than that of the inner leg above the water in which it is immerſed; as the water falls therefore from the outer leg, it will make a continucd vacium, and of courſe the prſſure of the atmoſphere on the ſurface of the water vill force it through the ſyphon in a continucd ſtream, it lept free from that lodgment of air uwhich ſrcquently 1akes place on the top of the ſyphon. By the Tantalus cup, and sgsountain ot command, the cauſc of intermitting spi ings is explained thus: Clouds, being attracted by the mountains, give a eon2inucd ſupply to thoſe reſervoirs of water which are frequently found in the bowels of mountains, and which ſupply ſprings in general: But ſhould the channel from one of theſe reſervoirs be formed like a ſvphon, of courſe the ſpring which proceeds from it will ebb and fiou lile the ſca, as thoſe in Derbyſhire, Berkſhire, &c. Tnhe action of the common pump depends on the preſſire of the atmoſphere: When the piſton is drawn up, the coIumn of air upon it is alſo lifted, and a vacuum is formtd underneath it, the preſſure of the atmoſphere on the well will then force the water up the pump 33 feet, but not higher; which ſhews that a column of water of rhat height is cqual to the weight of a column of air, of the ſume rhichneſs, reaching ſrom the carth's ſurſace to the toꝶ ram i uil not rth l le su-t lis be areater ve the water in uhich t s s tiureiore ſrom the ur d cacm and of courfe  the ſurfice of the vater min ac ſirtom, ii oſ ù vhieh quty ſuen lij the Torul muir? ùe ciuſe of inam ehe nountin. c i oſ witer wſch §i 12 ; . s opntũns, u i t ii the chimiel on l ſhouſs l qoire lu ꝗ lipihy urs ręd la it ilil c. Sguhis &o æ L 49] of the atmoſphere. Therefore at any diſtance above the ſurface of the well leſs than 33 feet the piſton will work, and water from thence may be lifted to any height whatever, if the pump be ſtrong enough. In a forcing pump, the piſton is a ſolid plunger; it raiſes the water above the ſucking-valve as in the laſt, but when the plunger deſcends (as the water cannot return through the valve back again) it forces it into a larger air veſſel which communicates with the body of the pump above the ſuckingvalve; and as by this force the air in the veſſel becomes condenſed, its re-action on the water cauſes it to flow through a ſmall pipe in a continued ſtream. The engine for extinguiſhing fires conſiſts of two ſuch forcing pumps, with their air veſſels. The lifting pump can only be uſed in deep water, as its piſton is worked by a rod going in at its bottom, and faſtened to a frame coming up each ſide of the pump: This piſton has a valve opening upward, and it works below the ſurface of the water in which the pump is immerſed, and thence has no occaſion for the air's preſſure, or a ſucking-valve. Ihis pump is generally equipt with an air veſſel as the laſt. On this principle engines are made for ralſing water above the level of rivers or ſprings, as at Marli; but if three pumps are worked in any engine by a triple crank, and all of them throw their water into one pipe, there is no occaſion for an air veſſel, becauſe there will be alwavs one or other of the piſtons actiug, ſo as to i ſ force the water out in a regular ſtream. Archimedes ſereu pump raiſes water by its endeavour to fall'tis three or four hollow threads of a ſcrew wound round a ſolid cylinder; it muſt riſe out of the water ſloping, ſo as the threads may all ineline downwards; then, when 'tis turned round, water will riſe in it, but to no great height. The upright cylindrical mill, by Dr. Baker, is a tall tube of wood or metal, twenty feet high, and ubout ĩive inches diumeter; it ſtands on a point perpendicular, and has as to i ã - l CRsπra hũſe l 50] its bottom two or more horivontal arms, or tubes, fixed, of about ſix feet long, communicating with the upright, tube, and perforated with holes, one in each arm and on the ſame ſide in ench; through theſe holes the water which ſſows in at top ſpouts out, and by giving a puſh to the air, and preventing the water's preſſure on that ſide the arm, forces the whole machine round, and carries a pair of ſtones at top, or pumps, or any thing elſe capable of being moved by a circular motion. ù The buchet engine, for raſing water by pumps out of mines, &c. is well calculated for ſituations where the ſtream that carries it has three yards of fall, and is too ſmall to carry a wheel: The bucket hangs on one end of a heam like that of a fire engine; and at half the diſtance from thence to the fulcrum hangs the pump rods; on the other end of the beam hangs a counterpoiſe, rather heavier than the empty bucket, and a column of water on the piſton; but when the hucket is filled by the ſtream, it is heavier and deſcends; the bucket hangs on centres a little on one ſide its centre of gravity, ſo that one ſide is heavier when empty, and the other when full, und being unlocked by its deſcent, its unequal poiſe turns and empties it, and then it aſcends and opens a valve which again lets the ſtream into it, and makes it deſcend again. IThis motion works the pumps. Two forcing pumps, for ſupplying houſes with water, are alſo worked by an engine of ſimilar principles, but vith ſtill greater ſimplicity: A beam inclining downwards to each end from the center on which it hangs, has a trough cut in it, from a diviſion in the middle down to each end, where buckets are fixed for receiving the water that works it, and which flows into the trough, firſt on one ſide the diviſion and then on the other, as the ends riſe and fall: When one bucket deſcends, the valve in its bottom ſalls on the pin, which opens it, and lets out the water; mean while the ſtream is ſilling the other bucket, which, when full, deſcends in like manner, and each end works a forcing pump. r , em r  oes  TE HOEE R æ e TE E r2x L 51 The centrifugal machine cluims ſtill greater merit as to its ſimplicity; its ſhape is like the letter T, tis hollouw throughout, and its three ends arc open: Mhen the Ioweſt end is immerſed in water, and it is whirled round on that end, the air in the arms will be partly thrown out by the centrifugal force, and confequently the preſſure of the atmoſphere on the ſurface of the water into which it is immerſed will force it up the tube and throw it out at the arms; hence a continued vacuum is made, and of courſe a continued ſtream thrown out. The perpendicular tube muſt not be ahove 33 feet high, for reaſons already given. Two men uwiil diſcharge near three times as much water with this machine, in the ſame time, as with any pump yet invented. Several Models to shew hoto a Ship may pump herſels. The fire (or rather ſteum) engine is one of the nobleſt preſents that art has made to the neceſſities of manùkind! Waen the particles of water are ſeparuted by fire, they compoſe an elaſtic vapour, called ſtcam, this vapour is capable of occupying 14,000 times the space it did in its ſtate of cold water; tis of force ſuſficient to drive away the air, and it may be condenſed, or brought back to water again by cold. Hence a long hollow cylinder of iron communicates with a huge and cloſe boiler, half filled with water, by a neck which cun be opened or ſhut by a ſliding valve called a regulator- The ylinder is exactly filled by a piſion made air-tight, that hangs on one end of a beam of timber about 0 feet long, and ſuſpended on a centre like a ſcale-beam; at the other end of the beam hang the rods which work the pumps in the bottom of the mine, and throw up a part of the water into a reſeruoir on the top of the building: From this reſerusir there comes a pipe under and through the bottom of the cjlinder, that by opening the cock (called the injection cock) plays a jet of cold water into the ylincler to condenſe the ſteam; after whicl this water falls through a pipe (with a valve opening outward) and forms the horell Another pipe alſo, with a valve outward, called the ſuiſted valve, is ſixed near the bottom oſ the cylinder, H 2 and ſerves to let out the air or ſtram without letting it return. ſhe regulator or injection cock are alternately opened and ſhut by a picce of timber hanging from the large beam; and a ſtream is let into the hoiler, or ſtopped, by a floating copper ball in the boiler that regulates the height of the water. 1f now a large fire be put under the boiler, and the ſteam let into the cylinder by opening the regulator, it will drive out the air, and poſſeſs the ſpace itieif; but ſo ſoon as the injcction cock is opened, a jet of cold water will play into the Iteam in the cylinder, and condenle it into a few drops: hence a vacuum is ſormed in the cylinder, and the preſſure of the atmoſphere on the piſton vill force it down to the bottom of it; the ſteam then being let in again will counteract the air's preſſure, and with the weight of the pump rods on the oppoſite end of the beam, bring up the piſton to the top of the eylinder. This action is repeated fourteen or ſixteen times in a minute, and works the pump in the mine. As the friction of this machine is very great, inſtead of reckoning 15lIb. preſſure on every ſquare inch on the piſton, 8Ib. will be found nearer. If then the weight of a column of water, the depth of the mine, and the diameter of the pump be calculated, the neceſſary diamgter of the cylinder will be eaſily found. The fſire engine with the inverted piſton ſpares the expence of both a beam and building;, the cylinder, with its open end downwards, ſtands over the pit or ſhaft of the mine, the boiler ſtands by its ſide, the injccton well above it, and to its piſion the rump rods are faſtened. The regulator (of reat ſimplicity) is the injection coct alſo. When the ſteam ls let in at the top of the cvlinder, and condenſed by the ãInjection water., the upuard preſſure of the, atmoſphere forces the piſton from the bottom to the top of the cvlinder, and the we:ght oſ the rods, and ſtrength of the ſteam force it back again. This motion works the pumps. The cold cuater vacuum will do this buſineſs with ſtill leſs machiners and ræpence, where the water that works it ſhas a fall of 40 ſeet. With the bottom of the cvlinder here communicates a perpendicular wide pipe of 35 ſect Lęll Um s ſo.l: ſumꝶ ,;, . ſriupureonth in noſit, te femtùen en- Cotict end of he tem, uteu Tot iſſanc. This c hetànmiue, ad uoi; suoſ ihi mæhin ' nTornna. rulitt on every und neater. Ii os2q, the dqt on the 4. caturâ t 1 & .uueull; ù. 2LLſmrcs tue cxgrt [ 53 Iong, having a regulator at its bottom, and another at its top. Ihe piſton and beam are the ſume as in the common fire engine. The water being let in at the bottom of the cylinder will fill both the eylinder and the pipe below it; if then the regulator at the bottom be opened, the water will deſcend out of the cyinder, but not out of the pipe, becauſe it is then but a counterpoiſe for the atmoſhere: Thus a vacuum is formed in the cylinder, and the piſton will deſcend and ſhut the upper regulator; but when it reaches the bottom, it opens again, and as the eylinder fills, the piſton riſes. Thus action is given to the beam, and water applied in this way is perhaps a more powerful agent than it is in any other. -N. B. For ought hnow, theſe tuo engines are new, ane unknoun to the public. Watts and Boulton's ſteam engine condenſes the ſteam, without cooling the eylinder by a jet of cold water, and thereby ſaves fuel. The ſteam is produced in a boiler as uſual -it paſſes into a double cylinder, and forces down the piſton by its claſticity, for the rod of the cylinder works through a collar of leathers, and therefore the preſſure of the atmoſphere has nothing to do in this engine. When the piſton is at the bottom of the cylinder, the ſteamcock opens, and by the double cylinder, ſteam enters both above and below the piſton, ſo that it riſes in ſtagnate ſteam by the weight of the pump rods acting on the oppoſite end of the large beam. When the piſton arrives at the top of the cylinder, a cock opens that communicates with a vacuum formed in a pond of cold water; this draws the ſteam from under the piſton in a moſt perfect manner; and leaves the piſton liable to the preſſure of the ſteam upon its top: and as ſteam ma be made of much ſtronger preſſure than the atmoſphere, this engine is proportionably more powerful than the common engine. ; Theſe, and many other hydraulic machines for various pur poſes, are too cumbrous to be removed from ihe ſtationary lecture-room. ſ leeth E L E C T R I C I T 7 ELECTRICITY and phlogifion., having many properties alike, many think them only modifications of the ſame principle. Iron loſing its phlogiſton by vitriolic acid, Ioſes by the ſame proceſs its electricity; proved by nſulating the proceſs, when a wire communicating with the efferveſcing mixture, will betray ſigns of negative electricity. This moſt ſubtil fluid, ſeems more or leſs inherent in all matterbut ſome bodies conduct or tranſmit it, whilſt others ſtop its progreſs from one body to another. Gilaſs, hair, ſilk and gums are non-conductors, and called cleciries: but metals, water, green wood, and moſt animal and vegetable ſubitances are conductors, and are called non-clectries. 1. If a long tube of glaſs be rubbed with warm ſilk, an atmoſĩphere of this fire will be formed all round it, and if a finger approachesthe tube, the fire will come viſibly oſf the tube into the finger with a ſnap: The reaſon is, the friction collects the ſire, from the earth (its grand reſervoir) and the ſpark is the effort it makes to diſperſe itſelf again, and thereby teſtore its equilibrium. 2. Ifthe ſame tube electrified, approaches, a feather hung by a ſilk thread it will attract the feather once, but if lield to it again will repel it. The ſilk will not conduct the electric fire, the equilibrum is therefore eſfected between the tube and the feather on the firſt appronch; on the ſecond. the atmoſphere of the tube preſſing on that of the ſeather drives the feather from it, ſfor two hodies poſſeſſed of the ſame electricity univerſully repel one another;) but if the feather be ſuſpended by a ſlaxen thread, the electrified tube will always attract it, becauſe the fire can make its eſcape up the thread, and thereby leave a continued inequality between them. A large glohe or cylinder of glaſs, with a baſil-stin cuſhion covered with an amalgama of quickſilver and tinfoil, or æink, or aurum moſaricum ſpread on black ſilk, ſaturated with mercurial ointment, to produce the friction; a prime conductor to take off the electric atmoſphere from the glaſs, and depoſit it in a giaſs receiver covered in and outſide with tinfoil to within two inches of the top, and a wheel to put the cylinder in motion, is called the electric machine, or fire pump. An eclectric machine of great power is alſo made of oil'd or gum'd ſilk drawn between rubbers of cat's-ſκin with the fur on. When a machine is put in motion, it diſturbs the equilibrium of the clectric ſire about it, and from thence the whole of its phænomena proceed, as may be proved by experiment. 1. If a perſon touch the electrified conductor, the fire will eſcape from it through the perſon into the ground with a flaſlh and report. 2. Iſ any number of perſons take hands, and the firſt perſon holds a chain which communicates with the outſide of the receiver, and the laſt perſon touches the communication with the inſide when the phial is charged, the fire will reſtore itſelf through all the company at the ſame inſlant, giving each a ſevere ſhock at the wriſts and elbows, in its paſſuge back again to the outſide of the phial. 3. If a perſon ſtands on a ſtool with glaſs fect, and holds a chain faſtened to a conductor, on turning the machine, and touching him, ſparks may be brought out of every part of his perſon and cloaths, and if he touch warm ſpirits or gunpowder with his finger, they will take fire; which ſhews that the electric fire is chicſly pumped from the earth, and cannot return to it again through glaſs. 4. Ifa ball be hung on the conductor, and a plate of bran or lea gold be placed under it, on electrifying the ball, the brant will be alternately attracted to and repèlled from it in a beautiful ſhower; here, the particles of the bran are carriers as it were of he electric fire from the ball to the plate: And if two : i ll 2 rvrm,-. , L 56 ells be hung on the conductor, one by a flaxen thread, and the other by a ſilk thread, (having from it a chain to the table) if a ſmall clapper be hung between them on a ſilk thread, it will carry the fire from one to another and thereby ring both. s. Electrified feathers ſpread out their threads radiently; if a round body be held to them they cling to it and depoſit their fire; but if a point be held near them they ſnrink at once; hence the reaſon why the wire conductors riſing from the ground above the tops of houſes, terminate in points to receive with more eaſe the lightning from the clouds, and thereby prevent its miſchief. 6. If wires fixed like the ſpokes of a wheel be ſuſpended on their center, with their points bent all the ſume way, and in the plane of the circle; on being electrified, the effluvia flowing from the points will ſtrike ſo forcibly upon the air as to force the wheel round with great rapidity: Hence a ſimply and pleaſing electric orrery. is put in motion, and various mills and other devices. 7. Iater and ſult (like the eylinder and cuſhion) will collect the electric fire when put in motion; for one is an electric, and the other a non-clectric body; hence the ſen itſelf becomes as it were an huge clectrical machine when violently agitated by winds, collecting on its troubled ſurface the fire from beneath, and looking in the night as if it was all in flames. Clouds raiſed from a ſca ſo circumſtanced, muſt needs contain more of the electric fire than clouds raiſed from the land, or calm ſea; if therefore two clouds meet, franght with unequal portions of this ſire, the cloud more electrihed will depoſit its abundance in the cloud leſs electrified. and with a flaſh of lightning reſtore the equilibrium; this fire driving to a diſtance the air that ſurrounds itthe ſtroke formed by the return of that air is thuuder. Some think nutrid fiſh, others animaleula, or an eaſt wind, the cauſe of the luminous appearance of the ſea. If a cloud attracted bv a neighhouring mountain contains more electric fire than the mountain. the lightning will dart from the eloud to the mountain and vice versà; ence if an electric eloùd comes too near a tower, tree. 5, Enom Hil - - . Ivn tu2 eæ. r ꝓa Miſ, 3 RIESSE. ſ- ũ lhe te ſpoles of te nù their points une oſ thecicle; n ꝗ trom the points nil orce the uheel round r and leaſingelechic ous mills and other lnder ind culion) inmotin; ſor one Iãnctolt; hentt tun el cal mutu ollcting on ititronnd looking in the Cuds nilel ſum à contiin more of the ſnd. or cln n the land. of imot uith iii risc ril depolt Minκſũ ſS, l L s7 i hoæſc, & c. and ther are not wet, the fire will deſeend óõn them in an effort to reſtore the equipoiſe, and if greatly obſtructed in its paſſage to the earch, will perhaps break them all to pieces; to ſtand under a tree or ſhed, is therefore dangerous in a thunder ſtorm; and ſhews alſo the extreme utility of having a wire from the top of ant tall building., down which the equlibrium will be reſtored vwithout danger; ànd if the wife does not touch the ground, a finger at that time applied to the wire, will receive the electric flab much ſtronger than by a machine. A tite ſent up intę the thunder-cloud by a wire, having a key tied to its nd, and held by a ſilk ribband, will extract the fire from the cloud; it will come down the wire, and ſtream off the key to the ground in a beautiful, but alarming torrent of fire. ill Tis thus, by weight and meaſure, the ALMIGHT has appointed ſclf-phyſic for the diſorders of his works If a capillary ſyphon be made to decant water, it will fall from it in small drops, but if the water be electrified it flows from the ſyphon in a ſuift ſtream. Hence 'tis found that a perſon poſitively electrified, (i. e. having more electric fire thrown into him thar his natural quantity, by ſtanding on a cake of wax, or a glaſs-footed ſtool, and touching an electrified conductor) has his pulſe accelerated. This acceleration has been found of great ſervice in obſtructions, rheumatiſms, palſies, &c. and the electrical ſhock has heen ſtill more ſucceſsful in removing paralytic complainis, deafneſs, tooth-uch, numbneſs, &c. Sparks drawn from chilblains, ſwellings, &c. have a great effect, and the aura from à wooden point has diſperſed the cataract of the eye. illll The electrical fluid ahuays goes the nenreſt, and chuſes the beſt conductors. A chain hung on a wall, and made part of the circuit from the in to the outſide of the charged Leyden vial, is luminous when the vial is diſcharged, I . 1 , E t 56 and ſhews the road taken by the electrical fluid: but if a ſtraight wire touch the two ends of. the chain the chain will not be luminous, for the fluid will run inviſibly thro' the wire, as being the nearer road. If the wire be then removed, and a ſtick put into its place, the chain again becomes luminous in the diſcharge, as the fluid will rather go a longer diſtance than paſs thro a bad conductor. The electrical fluid poured on the inſide coating of a Leyden vial, propels an equal quantity from the outſide. i. The outſide coating of a vial being pieces of tinfoil not touching one another, the fire will be ſeen darting from one piece to another, till the charge is compleated: when diſcharged the fluid will return, and make the whole outſide luminous. 2. A bottle, coated on both ſides, having a cap cemented on its neck, with a valve, and from that cap a pointed wire going ſtraight into the bottle: If this bottle be exhauſted of its air, (but not to a vacuum) it will be found a good conductor; and when the cap is held to the prime conductor, flames like the Aurora borealis will iſſue from the point of the wire to the inſide coating, and charge it; but while an imperfect communication is made between the negative outſide and the poſitive inſide, the point receives the fluid, and exhibits only a ſtar on its point: Hence a receiuing point always exhibits a ſiar and a delivering point flames in an imperfect vacuum. Rarified air being ſo good a conductor, may not the ſun's heat and the great centrifugal motion of the equatorial parts of the earth, make the air there ſo thin, as to become a conductor of that electric matter of which the earth is the known reſervoir? and being thus thrown up into the upper regions of the atmoſphere, may it not make its way towards the poles, where the ſmall degree of centrifugal force is friendly to its reception? Aiming therefore at a point, may it not be ſo far concentrated and condenſed, as to become viſible. and make thoſe radient corruſcations we call ſtreamers  for electric matter ſtreaming through highly rarefied air exhibits the very ſame appearance. b,3 k- aASÆ æ M gæQ*. L 59] 5. On the cover of a large Leyden jar, fix a ſmaller Jar, ſo that che onutſide coating of the ſmall jar may have a metallic communication with rhe inſide coating of the larger;the outſide coating of the ſmall jai becomes a conductor to the inſide of the big one, when held to an excited prime conductor; if when chargud, one knob of the diſcharging rod be applied to the negative ſide of the large jur, and the other applied to the Xnob communicating with the inſide of the ſmall jar, a flaſh will iſſue from the contact (being the natural clectricity of the inſide coating oſ the ſmall jar) and by which the cquilibrium of its two ſides becomes deſtroyed. Electricity will then riſe ſrom the inſide of the large jar upon the outſide of the ſmall one. This balunce is again reſtored by forming a metallic communication between the in, and outſide coatings of the ſmall jar. By repeating theſe twenty or thirty times, the whole charge of the lower jar will be taken piccemeal out; and prove that what electricity is poured on one coating of a jar propels a like quantity from the other. 4. If a rod of wire, 18 inches long, having a light hnob at each end, and ſuſpended on an inſulated point, be placed ſo between the knob of a charged jar and a metal pillar, that when one knob touches the pillar, the other may be ſix inches from that of the jar, then will the rod vibrate between the jar and the pillur, taking out the electricity ſo by little and little as to acquire ten minutes to compleat the diſcharge. s. If a Leyden vial be charged on an inſulated ſtool, having two pith bulls hanging by fine threads projecting from its in and outſide coatings, the balls communicating with the poſitive conting wil ſeparate; if then a finger touch the wire on vhich they hang, theſe balls will cloſe, and thoſe will open which communicate with the negative coating; touch that wire and the negative balls cloſe, and the poſitive balls open, &c. for an amazing number of times ſhewing. that though glaſs will not conduct electricity, the clectrie influence can operate through the thickneſss l 2 c,;- m22 æu3 fuol l 1 i πa2 ,, Trs -comæν of glaſs. 6 To ſuperinduce electricity on a Iooſe coating laid on plate-glaſs, touching the coating with the kEnob of a charged vial, then ſhake off the coating., and clap an inſulated metal plate on the place, touching it at the time of contact, then lift up the plate, and it vwill give a ſpark to the knuckle; place it on the glaſs again, and touch and remove it as before, and it will give another ſpark, and continue to do ſo as long as the àpparatus is kept elean and dry; making perpetual electricity, by which vials may be charged, inflammable air guns fired, &cN. B. The. plate of glaſs muſt have a fixed coating on the oppoſite ſide to the Iooſe one, and of the ſame ſize. This apparatus is called Electrophorus; and-often inſtead of glaſs, a plate is made of ſulphur, ſhell-lac, roſin, &c. To prove that the natural electricity of bodies may be diſturbed by the near. approach of excited electrics, Iet two projecting arms of inſulated wood have ſlips of tinfoil glued on themm from end to end, and pith balls hanging from one end of each; if the two arms be placed in a line, with the hball end of one touching the end without balls of the other, and an excited electric be held within an inch of the end without balls, then will all the four balls part;at that inſtant, if one ſtand be ſeparated from the other, the balls of one will be found in a negative and the other in a poſitive ſtate, the balls fartheſt diſtant from the excited electric will be in the ſame ſtate as the electric, and of courſe repelled by it; the neareſt attracted, &c. Hence .if any part of an electrical cloud comes near the earth, it will diſturb the slectricity in the earth, and drive it away; but if any other part of the cloud comes within the ſtriking diſtaneè of any conductor to the earth, -the cloud will be diſcharged, and. the diſturbed electricity will return with  a force that frequently proves fatal to animals in its way. b lli ililù Ells] li . S lli Elii .. . - Electricity is applied to inflamed eyes, tumours, &c. by a chain coming from the prime conductor ending in a point Qcnſer âlã.  ſò π HEE - - u-L 6r of hard wood; the point is held near the part by a glaſs handle, and an aura iſſues from ĩt on the ſore, that often performs a cure. 2. Parulyric and rheumatic patients mye relieved by ſhocks ſent through the ſide affectcd. 3. Ob ſtructions are often cured in the female ſex by poſitive electrinication, i.e. by placing the patient on an inſulated ſtool, communicating with the prime conductor, and keeping her electrified for half an hour together, occaſionally drawing ſparks from her. ,, a I eæ) LECTUR E IX. O P T IC S. b Hail holy light! Offspring of heaven: Firſt bornt? Or of th' eternal coeternal beam; May I expreſs thee unblam' d è MILTON. T HIS modeſty of the poet becomes the dignity of ſo divine a ſubjectLight is the bleſſing which gives poignancy to all others, therefore the ſcience of optics, which immediately treats of it, muſt reflect part of its luſtre and importance. Plato defines light,  a rare and ſubtil flame;ꝰ and perhaps it is but diluted or very rare phlogiſton, or flame in a ſtate of great thinneſs or rarefaction. May it not be the inflammable principle perpetually let looſe from the ſun, and occaſionally from other luminous bodies May not theſe phiogiſtic particles flowing from the ſun, enter into the texture of other bodies, give them the power of inflammability, and become fixt in them, till let looſe by the contact of bodies in actual inftammation 2Or finally, that the concreted rays of the ſun in hodies having affinity with them, may give them the power of inflammability univerſally, and that colour in bodies may ariſe from a chemical rejection of the colour reſlected to the eye, while all the reſt are abſorbed into the body? Some believe light to exiſt even in the abſence of a luminous body, and that it is only a luminous body that puts it in motion. The moſt general, and probable opinion is, that it flovs immediately from the luminous body in ſtraight lines, in all maner of directions, and conſiſts of particles ſo infinitely ſmall, as to exceed all human comprehenſion. A proof of rhis ſmallness is, that a candle will fill a ſphere of four miles n diameter, without the leait ſcnſible loſs of its ſuhitance: nd if a row of candies ſtand parallel to a bla-& paper, with n pin-hole in it, cach candle (through that hole) will make a ſeparate ſpeck on the puſte-bourd a little behind it. Theſe particles by ſtriking the retina of our eyes, excites in our minds the idea of light: And when they fall upon bodies, and are by them reflected to our eyes, they excite in us an idea of the colour and ſhape of theſe bodies. In a room perfectly dork, if the hand (or any thing) be put into light, and then taken into the dark room, it will be luminous ſome time, as if covercd with phoſphorus. Calcined oyſter ſhells taken out of the light into the dark room, exhibit the colours of the rainbow, &c. ſhewing that light ſtriking upon bodies, excites their latent light, and makes it viſible, as one candle is lighted from another. Or that light ſticks to bodies plunged in it, as water does to the hand. We cannot ſee through the bore of a hended pipe; which proves that light moves in ſtraight lines in cvery medium of uniform denjitp. But when they paſs obliquely, out of one medium into another, which is either more denſe, or more rare, they are refracted, or hent towards the denſer medium, more or leſs, as they fall more or leſs obliquely on its ſurface. To prove which, put a shilling in the bottom of an empty veſſel; ſtand ſo far from it that the veſſel may hide the ſhilling; if water be then poured into it the ſhilling will again be ſcen. - - & Hence we are deceived in the depth of water: A ſtraight ſtick put into water will appear crooked; and hence the ſun's rays being broken by paſſing thro' our atmoſphere, we ſee him in the horion, before he riſes, and aſter he ſets in it. When rays fall perpendicularly on any medium, they paſs ſtraight through without any refraction. n  , C 64] SGilaſs is generally ground into eight difſerent ſhopee for opticial purpoſes. 1. A plane glaſs, is a flat, and even on both ſides, and of an uniform thickneſs; will refract the rays of light, but not collect them into one. focus. 2. A plano-convex, is flat on one ſide, and a portion of a ſphere on the other. When parallel rays fall directly upon it, they paſs through it, and are ſo refracted, as to unite in a point called its focus, juſt ſo far behind it, as is equal tò the diameter of the ſphere of which it is a part. 3. A double convex, is convex on both ſides: Parallel rays paſſing through it converge or meet in a focus, at half the diſtance they do through the plano-convex; and as the heat of all thoſe rays are collected in that focal point, it will burn, melt or calcine all opaque bodies. 4. A plano-concave is flat on one ſide and concave on the other. S. The double eoncave is hollow on both ſides, and parallel rays paſſing through diverge or ſpread out agreeable to the laws of refraction. 6. A meniſcus-glaſs is convex on one ſide, and concave on the other. 7. A ſluted plano-convex, or multiplying glaſs, has its convex ſide ground into ſeveral flat ſfurfaces. And, 8. The priſm has three fiat ſides, and viewed endwiſe appears like an equilateral triangle. Thepriſm held obliquely to a ray of light in a dark room, will eſfect its ſmalleſt porticles the moſt, and ſhew them to be a fine violet colour; it will aſſemble the next in ſize cloſe to the firſt, and ſhew them to be of an indigo colour; the next hlue; the next green;, the next yellow; then orange; and at laſt the red, which conſiſts of the largeſt particles, and therefore by the momentum of their motion, the leaſt capable of being attracted out of their way. Tis wonderful that theſe colours occupy ſpaces on the ſcreen on which they are thrown by the priſm, exactly proportionate to the diatonic ſcalè of the ſeven notes of muic  If in the rays ſo divided a double- convex lens be put, it will bring them into onc point that ſhall be perfectly white; which accounts for the eohite appeurance of light. As white is therefore a compoſition of all colours, ſo hlack is a privation of them all, and properly no colour, and ſuch a blank exiſts in the ſpace above our atmoſphere: In looking up thereſore we ſee what is called the biue ſty, a colour na- turally reſulting from the mixture of black and hite through which we look; or perhaps blue is the natural colour of the atmoſphere, ſo that diſtant mountains look blue, by being look'd at through a medium of that colour. All bodies appear of that colour whoſe rays they reflect moſt; as a body is red when it reflects the red rays, and abſorbs the reit. Two, or more, colours that are quite tranſparent by themſclves, become dark when put together. Thus, if ſpirits of wine be tinged red, and put in a ſquare bottle, every object ſeen through it will be red becauſe it only ſuffers the red rays to paſs through it, and ſtops the reſt. If another bottle be tinged blue, all ohjects viewed through it will be blue for the ſame reaſon: But if the two bottles be held together, the object can no more be ſcen through them; for whatever rays paſs through one bottle to the eye will be ſtopped by the other, &c. Rays of light ſuſfer different degrees of refraction, by falling more or leſs obliquely on the briſm or convex lens, &e. and are thereby ſeparated as above; this happens to them in paſſing through drops of fulling rain: For being resected towards the eye from the ſides of thoſe drops which are fartheſt from the eye, and again reſracted by paſſing out of theſe drops into tlie air, they come in refracted directions to the eye, and make all the colours to appear ſucceſſivel in the form of a fine arch in the heavens, which is called the rainbow : All drops paſſing through an ideal plane in the ſhower, refract a certain colour to the ey epaſſing through another a little Iower they refract another, &c. ſo the bow appears permament while the ſhower laſts. Light is reflected by the repellent quality of bodies, and flies back from poliſhed ſurfaces, like a ball thrown againſt an hard and ſmooth plane: If a ſtick ſtand perpendicularly on that plune, and the ball be thrown obliquely on the plane near its foot, it will rehound on the other ſide the ſtick, and form an anglè with it, equal to that in which it was thrown. the fieſt of theſe is called the angle of incidence, and the other the ungle of reflection. If upon a plane looking glaſs a ray falls from any object, if a perpendicular be erected there, and the eye go oſf ſuch a K  R  Rn  e. ſ 66 diſtance as to form the ſame angle on the other ſide of it, the object will be ſeen in a ſtraight line behind the glaſs, for it is an axiom in optics, that we always ſee objects in that line of rays that come to the eye lasſt. Hence I ſee my whole perſon in a glaſs but half its length; for the rays from my feet ſtrixing upon the bottom of the mirror, will sorm the angle of reflection in my eye the ſame as if it was the whole length, &. Hence alſo the effects of diagonal mirrors, opera glaſſes, cameras, &c. Parallel rays falling on a concave mirror will be reflected alſo agrecable to thoſe angles, and meet in a point at half the diſtance of the mirror, from the centre of its concavity; if the rays proceed from an hot ſun, his image will likewiſe be found in that point, and burn. The rays which proceed from any ſmall terreſtrial object, come diverging to the mirror, and therefore will not be converged to a point at half the diſtance of the mirrors ſurface from the centre of its concavity, but nearer to that ſurface; the image will be leſs than the object, but will be ſeen inverted, and hanging pendant in the air, quite diſtinct by an eye placed oppoſite the mirror. If the object be in the centre of the mirror's concavity, the image and ohject will be together, and of equal bulb: Therefore when the object is more remote than the centre of concavity, the image will be leſi than the object, and between the object and mirror: But when the object is nearer than the centre of concavity, the image will be more remote, and bigger than the object. The angles of incidence and reflection alſo account for the small image in a convex mirror. The human eye is lodged in a bed of fat, and ſecured in an hollow orb of bone tis moved by muſcles which act on its outſide like pullies, and conſiſts of four coats, and 1hree humours. The coat, in which the back part of the eye is contained, is called the sclerotica; it is a large portion of a globe, very ſtrong, and of a non-elaſtic nature; that part which completes the globe on the fore-part of the eve, is the cornea; it bulges a little forward out of that Thape, and is a fine tranſparent membrane. Next vithin the ſclerotica is that called the choroides, which L 67] ſerves as it were ſor a ſoſt liuing for the other; and within this, is ſprend a ſine expunſion of the optic nerve, like a net, called the retina, upon which arc puinted, as in a camera chcura, te imciges of all ucll enbightened objects. The iris is compoſed of two ſcts oſ muſcular fibres, uhich dilate, or contract the hole in it, called the pupil, ſo as to adapt it to a itrong or weak light. The adnata, or ccnjuncti. a, is the white of the eye, a fine membranc that fods under the yelid, and joins to it. Under the cornca is a fine tranſparent fluid like 2ater, and thence called the aqueous humour: It gives the protuberent figure to the cornea, and goes through the pupil. Behind this lies the ervſtalline humour, ſhaped like a double-convex glaſs, tranſparent as eryſtal, of the conſiſtence oſ hard jelly, and which converges the rays that paſs through it to a focus on rhe retina. It is incloſed in a fine tranſpurent membrane, from which procecd radiant fibres called the licamentum ciliare, all round its edęe, and joined to the ourward edge of the iris: Theſe ſibres, by a power of contracting and dilating, alter the convexty of the ceryſtaline humour, and ſhiſt it a little buchuqrd or foreerdn the eye, to ſuit it to the difſerent diitunces of objects ſan admirable proviſion.) The crysicelliiie humour is bedded on the Citreous humour, which fills the whole of the other part of the orb oſ the eye, and is trunſparent like glaſs, this is the largeſt of all in quantity, and is much of a conſiſtence with the white of an egg. The optic nerve comes from the brain, through the sclerotica and choroides, on that ſide the eye next the noſc; and is incloſed on the outſide the eye by coats proceeding from the pia and dura mater, and of which the sclerotica and choroides are but a continuation. Theſe are the parts of this wonderful orgun. Rays from any enlightened object ſtream upon the rethua, and there paint it invertedly, as may be ſeen b cutting off the three conats from the back part of a freſſ . a piece of white puper over that part: Iſ the eye is then held before any br ght K 2 bullocks eye, and putting object, an inverted picture of it will be painted on the paper. The optic nerve incloſes a blocd-veſſel, which renders ohjects inviſible that fall on it; how wiſcly therefore is it placed on one ſide of cach evel that the ſame parts of an imuge which fall on the optic nerve of one eye ſhould not fall on the cſher If three patches are placed at a foot diſtance fram cach other on a wall, if the right eye be covercd, and the leſt look ſtedfaſtly at the right-hand pateh, the middle pateh will diſappear, becauſe it falls on the artery in the optic nerve. The nearer any object is to the eve, the larger is the angle under which it is ſecn; thereſore an object looks twice larger at one than at tuo miles diſtance. Hence the uſe of convex gluſſes, which, by increaſing this angle, make minute objecis viſible, and when the humours are grown ſo ſlat in decayed eyes. that the picture falls behind the retina, can bring the rays to converge ſo that the picture ſhall be brought back as it were to the retina, Hence alſo the reaſon that the 1oo round eye requires the double concave glaſs, by its divergency, to remove the image from the vitreous humour forward to the retina. The ſsimgle microſcope is only a ſmall convex glaſs having the object placed in its focus; and the eye at the ſame diſtance on the orher ſide. Its magnifying power is thus calculated: A good eye cannot ſee any object diſtinctly at leſs than ſix inches diſtance; if this be divided by the focal diſtance of the glaſs. the quotient will be how much the diameter of the object is multiplied. The double microſcope conſiſts of an object glaſs and an eye glaſs, between which the image is ſormed and magnified, by having the object a little further from the ohject glaſs than its principle focus; this image, brought ſo near, is viewed by the eye through the eye glaſs. If each glaſs magnifies ſiæ tmes (as by the laſt culeulation) then is the object maαnified thirtu2jix times by both. This inſtrument is equipt with a mirror, which, by the angle of incidince TPB.πæ. L 69] and reſieœtian, throus up light on the underſide the object; which object being pluced in the focus of a moveable lens, has its upperſide enlightened alſo. The ſolar microſcope is placed in a round hole in a ſhutter that only admits, into a dark room, a ſmall cone of rays; that theſe rays may be ſent ſtraight through the tube, a plain mirror on the outſide is ſo ſixed, as to reflect them in; they then paſs thro' a large convex lens; after which, they fall upon, and enlighten the object, which is placed in the focus of a ſmall magnifier, through which they carry a large inverted image of the object to a white ſheet, placed at any diſtance for its reception. A refracting teleſcope may be made of to convex glaſſes, vizæ. an ohicct glass and an ęe glaſs, if the focus of the eye glaſs be in the ſame part of the tube where the image is formed by the chieci glaſs: but then the image will be inverted and therefore 'tis only ſuituble for celeſtial objects. Ihe magniſying power of this teleſcope is as the focal diſtance of the object glaſs to the focal diſtance of the eve glass: Therefore if the former be divided by the latter, the quotient will expreſs the magnifying power, and ſhew, that if the focal diſtance of each avere alike, the magnifying power of the teleſcope would be nothing; and that this magniſying power will inereaſe with its length, for the greater the focal diſtance of the object glaſs, the leſs may be the focus of the eye glaſs. A refracting teleſcope, that will ſhew objects in their natural poſture, muſt have tuwo equal convex glaſſes added to the eye glaſs, and all three muſt ſtand at double their focal diſtances from one another. As theſe three do but as it were compoſe one eyce glaſs, the magnifying power of this teleſcope may be calculated as the laſt. Dollond's potent teleſcope is formed on the ſame principles, only its object glaſs is much larger, and is compoſcd of two joining gluſſes of different denſitics, one a ꝓluno-conαave, and the other a double convex that fits into Tπ. Tũπſ7 I i ; l [ 7] the other's concavity. Theſe make the field of ew lurger, and, by taking oſf the coloured rays, the image becomes bright, and quite diſtinct: For as the rays which paſs through the edge of a convex glaſs are more unequally resfracted than thoſe that paſs nearer its middle, they don't meet in the ſame point, but form a cirele of priſmatic coIours round the image: In the common teleſcope theſe are partly taken off by a black plate fixed in the tube, with an hole through its centre; but the patent glaſi does this much more effectually. The reflecting teleſcope exceeds all others in its magnifying power and portable ſiæe; and its outward figure conſiſts of a great and ſmall tube, ſcrewed into the end of one another. At the bottom of the great tube is placed the large concave mirror, with an hole through its middle. Parallel rays from celeſtial objects falling on this mirror, are reflected back by it, and form the image a little ſhort of the ſmall concave mirror which faces the hole in the large one. From this image the rays diverge to the ſmall mirror, and are from thence reſlected parallel, and inverted into the ſmall tube, through the hole in the Iarge mirror: here meeting with a convex lens, they are ſo refracted as to form the imago in the s/mall tube. The image being now brought ſo near, requires nothing but a ſingle, or compound eye glaſs to ſend it duly magnified to the retina. Rays from any terreſtrial object will not come parallel but converge a little; hence the image is formed nearer the great mirror, and therefore a ſcrew is fixed to the ſmall mirror, on the outſide the tube, to adjuſt it to it; and alſo to the greater or leſſer convexity of different eyes. Dr. Herſchel's reſlector is formed on the Newtonian plan, viæ. its great mirror is not perforated, and therefore its image is received by a plane mirror placed diagonally within the tube, and which fends that image through the magnifying or mieroſcopic part fixed perpendicularly in the tube. The excellence of this inſtrument conſiſts in the parabolic curvature and poliſh of its great mirror, which forms the image of the object Iooked at ſo perfect, that a magnifying power of 6500 can be applied to it. -c [ 71 This inſtrument is carried to ſtill a greater magnifying and diſtinct power by a mirror of near s feet diameter, and of 340 fcet focal length, without any obſtructing mirrors, ſo the light even from the moon is too ſtrong for a naked eye to look at through it. The diagonal mirror, for viewing prints, is a pleaſing inſtrument. If a plane mirror he blaced at an angle of 45 degrees qbove a print lving horiæontal and inverted, it will turn the rays reflected from the print into an horizontal direction to the eye: If then a large convex lens be placed between the eye and the mirror, the picture will be prodigiouſſly magnified; and if an aſſemblage of shell-nork environ the view between the print and the mirror, the picture will have a beautiful frume to it. The camera obſeurae is formed on the ſame principles.  gb mnerp A diaegzonal mirror is ſet at the ſame angle againſt the 6 . hàl hèl landſcape, and reflects it downward through a conceæ len; into a dark box, where it is painted on a quhite paper placed in the focus of the lens, and on which a hand put into the box may draw the landſcape to the minuteſt exactneſs. The opera glaſs is alſo formed of a ſmall diagonal murtor. which ſcnds the rays through a convex glaſs to the eye. Through this a gentleman may look at a diſtant lady in the company, and the lady know nothing of it. The magic lanthorn is formed on the ſume principles as the ſelur micreſeope, a candle ſupplies the place of the ſun: and having its rays tinged with the colours of iranſparent fiqures painted on glaſs, throws them through two contex lenſes on a white wall in a dark room, prodigiouſty magnificd. Argand's Lamp has improved this inſſrument very much, as well as the lucernal microſcope, common illumination, the ſea lights invented by the author, &c. LECTURE X U S E of the G LO B E S. WIHEN a ſhip approaches us at ſca, the firſt part of her we ſee is her upper ſails, after that we ſoc her lower ſails, and then the hullTis evident ſhe moves on a round ſurface or we ſhould ſee the whole at a time. In ſailing from capes we loſe ſight of them firſt at the bottom, then the middle, and at laſt the top disappears. Iheſe eſfects are in all parts of the world. Several perſons have ſailed round the earth. And all the bodies in the ſyſtem are round. Hence we conclude that the carth is a globe alſo. The earth's roundneſs is no more aſfected by the largeſt mountains, than the roundneſs of a common globe is by a few grains of duſt thrown upon it; for they bear no greater proportion to its bulk. It is 7, 970 miles in diameter: Near 100 millions of miles from the ſun: Moves round him in 3065 days 5 hours and 49 minutes, at the rate of 6o, ooo miles an hour; and turns round upon its axis every 24 hours, from weſt to caſt, which makes all the heavenly bodies ſeem to turn round the contrary way, or from eaſt to weſt. The particles of which the earth is compoſed would fly into confuſion, if not held together in the form of a globe by the power of gravitation. Tis this power uwhich gives qucight to all bodies, or that tendeney they have towards the center of the earth. Hencce the general 1p of the earth becomes its whole ſurface, and the general bottom its center. The Antipedes are therefore as much on the top as we. But as the parts of the earth are looſe, the violent motion it has on its axis will in ſome degree overpower even the force of gravity, and accumulate more matter round the Equator, becauſe the centrifugal force is greateſt there; hence the true figure of the earth is an oblate ſpheroid, or like an orange, 35 miles inore in diameter at the equator than at the poles. This was proved by an actual menſuration, and is explained by the whirling rings. This oblate figure proves its diurnat motion; if it was at reſt it would be neceſſurily a perfect ſrhere. We perccive not this motion, becauſe the air in which we live, partaking of the general gravitation, is carried round along with the earth. Whaen a ſhip turns round, if we look out at the cabin windows, we believe ourſelves at reſt, and the neighbouring country turning round us; ve are deceived in like manner in the motion of the earth. Where there is no reflection from contiguous objects, a globe can but be one half enlightened by a luminous hody, hence, if a globe turns round, there muſt be a ſucceſſion of light and darkneſs, or day and night, to its inhabitants. Had a globe no other motion, there could be no variety in its ſeaſons or length of days. As gravity decreaſes according to the ſquares of the diſtances, it follows that if one body move in an oval round another as its centre of motion, the ſquare of its periodical times will be as the eube of ts diſtance from that body; this holds preeiſelv with regard to the planets and their moons. The lanets ſometimes appear to ſtund ſtill, ſometimes to go baskwards; this muſt always be the caſe where one body moves nearly in the ſume plane, and circular within the orbit of another moving body.The eclipſes of Jupiter's ſatellites appear later to us by 16 munutes at one time of our vear than at another. Tis matter of obſervation, that all the planets revolve round the Æ ſun. From all which we are certain that the earth goes round the ſun, and not the ſun round the earth. We know the path our earth deſeribes in the heavent, by obſerving that which the ſun ſcems to deſcribe in the oppoſite part of the heavens. We find one ſtar without any apparent motion, ſituated 23 degrees and a half from the axis of this orbit, and which is occaſioned by being nearly oppoſite to one of the poles of our carfh, and thence called the polar ſtar; hence we diſcover that ſublime contrivance the inclined axis of the earth, which keeping always parallel to itſelf, occaſions the different ſeuſons, and different lengths of day and night; diffuſing equally, over the face of both hemiſpheres, the bleſſings of the ſun. The axis ſo diſpoſed will neceſſarily bring the northern and ſouthern parts of the earth alternately to the ſun, therefore when it is ſummer in the north it will be winter in the ſouth, and vice versâ. So far on each ſide the equator as the ſun at any time of the year ſhines vertically, is called the corrid æone, and it is bounded by two imaginary lines; that to the north is called the irepic of cancer, and that to the ſouth, the tropic of capricorn. When the ſun ſhines vertically over the firſt, he muſt ſhine 23 degrees and a half further than the north pole, and will not therefore ſet for many days together to the inhabitants of the north frigid æonebut it will be then total darkneſs (the ſame time) to thoſe of the ſouthern ĩJrigid æone, hence the poles muſt but have one day and one night in the year. Theſe two zones (as they are called) are bounded by lines alſo, the north called the artic, the ſouth the antartic circle. The intermediate ſpaces between the torrid and frigid ones are called the iemperate gones. In the northern hemiſphere the vernal equæixæ (or equal day and night in the ſpring) is about the aoth of March; and the autumnal equinoæ is about the 23d ofſ September; in the ſouthern hemiſphere the contrary L 16] At the equinoxes the ſun ſhines over the equator; at the ſbſisces he ſhines ag3 degrees and a half from the equator. The meridian of any place is a ſemicirele paſſing through it, cutting the cquator at right angles, and terminating in the poles. Ihe earth's circumference is 360 degrees, each near 70 Engliſh miles, and as the earth turns round on its axis in 24 hours, each meridian revolves 15 degrees in an hour, for 24 x 155 300. Therefore every place to the caſtuard of another has its hours iooner, if weſtward, ſo much later. The longitude of any place is the number of degrees between its meridian, and the meridian of any place, from ulhence the longitude is reckoned, and is deemed caſt or teſ uecording as it is ſituated. The eclipſes of Jupiter's iatellites aiford a method of finding the longitude, thus: Suppoſe an eclipſe of any ſatellite happens in London at ſix in the morning, and that it is ſeen at another place at four in the morning, the difference of time is two hours, which anſwers to 30 degrees weſt of London. Theſe obſervations the motion of a ſhip hinders from being made at ſcu; and hence may be perceived the extreme utility of a regular time-keeper. The latitude of a place is ſo many degrees as it is from the equator; if to the north, it is ſaid to be in north latitude; if to the ſouth of the equator, in ſouth latitude; hence by the lines of latitude and longitude, the face of a globe is covered with imaginary ſquares, by which the ſituntion of every ſpot on the face of the carth is as exactlv aſcertained as the parts of an eſtate are by its hedges and ditches. The rational horiæon of a place extends 9o degrees from the place on all ſides. The ſenſible horiæon is the boundary of the obſerver's ſight on all ſides. L 2 The ecliptic is that circle in the heavens through which the earth makes its revolution round the ſun; and it is diſtinguiſhed by conſpicuous aſſemblages of ſixed ſtars, called ſigns or conſtellations, ſuch as Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, &c. The xodiac extends to eight degrees on each ſide of the ecliptie, and with it round the heavens. . ll li The four continents of the earth are, Europe, Alia, Africa, and America. The oceans are the Northern, the Atlantic, the Ethiopic, the Indian, the Pacific, and the Southern Oceans. The unknown parts of the earth contain 160, 566,276 ſquare miles; the inhabited parts 38,990,569, i. æ. Europe 4,456,065, Aſia 10,768,823; Africa q,654,807;, America 14110,874- In all 199, 556,845. which is the number of ſquare miles on the whole ſurſace of our globe. When a round ball has the different countries, kingdoms, towns, and rivers delineated upon it agrecable to thelr ſituations, itis a repreſentation of the earth. Iſ an hollow ſpherical ball could have the fixed ſtars properly marked on its inſide, with the ſun, moon, and planets, it would be a repreſentation of the heavens to an eye placed in its centre; but this being inconvenient, the fixed ſtars are placed on an opaque globe, and the ſun and planets repreſented by patches placed on the ecliptic, becauſe they are continually changing their places. THE moon is no planet, but only a ſatuilite, or an attendant on the earth. The farther any planet is from the ſun, the more occaſion it has for ſuch an help to its light; hence Mercury and Venus are without moons, as being near the ſun; but Jupiter has four, and Saturn five, (now known to be ſeven) becauſc of their diſtance from it. The moon's face abounds with great inequalities, and hence ſhe reflects a more chaſte and agreeable light than if her ſurface was ſmooth. She always kecps the ſume face towards us (ſome ſay becauſe the quality oſ that ſide of her is more adapted to cateh the attraction of the earth than the other) and conſequently muſt turn once round on her axis, while ſhe gocs oncc round the earrh in her orbit. Her periodical revolution, or time of going round from one point of her orbit to the ſume point again, is a7 days 7 hours 43 minutes But her ſynodical revolution, or time from change to change, is 29 days 12 hours 44 minutes;this difference is cauſed by what the earth has advanced in the ccliptic during that time, which is aq one-tenth degrees. (llluſtrated by the Orrery and Ferguſon's paradox. The moon's mean diſtance, found by her parallux. is 240,000 miles. Iler diameter is 2180 miles, and ſhe moves about 2290 miles every hour. The moocn has no light of her own, but only reſtecs the beams of the ſun, as a poliſhed body does the light of a candle, hence, as ſhe is a globe, we muſt ſometimes ſee mere ſometimes leſs of her enlightencd ſide, viæ. when ſhe is between us and the ſun, her dark ſide is towards us, and thercfore ſhe diſappears; as ſhe advances forward we ſce a ſmall part of her enlightened ſide, and call it the netw moon; becauſe next cvening ſhe is got a few degrees farther to the eaſt and we ſee morc of her illumin'd ſide; everv evening we find her advanced till ſhe riſes in the eaſt in oppoſition to the ſun in the welt, and tl'e.ò her whole enlightened face is towards us, and we ſay ſhe is at the full; her decline is from the ſame reaſons; and a ball over a gate enlightened by the ſun conveys a clear idea of hoth. (Ullluſtrated by the Orrery.) The earth is a moon to the moon, waxing and waning as ſhe does; it appears rꝗ times as large to the lunarians as the moon does to us, affording them both an uſeful and an amazing ſpectacle, for its continents and ſeas may he plainly perceived by them, as well as its rapid motion round its axis. (Proved by the Orrery.) The planets as well as their ſatellites being enlightened hy the ſun, muſt caſt ſhadouws towards that part of the heavens oppoſite to the ſun. Was the earth bigger than the ſun, its ſhadow would ſpread and extend far heyond the orbit of Mars, and conſequently eciipſe him, for he is but 402 millions of miles from rhe earth, when they are in conjunction; but the earth's ſhadow never reaches him, thercfore it muſt end in a point much ſshort oſf that diitance; another proof how much the ſun is bigger than the earth: But the moon is eclipſed when ſhe ſalls into the carth's ſhadow. which, for the reaſons ubove, can never happen but when ſhe is at the sæl. hecauſe that is the only time when ſhe is oppoſite to him; but was ſhe a luminous hey ſhe could not be darkened by the earths ſadow. (Proved ly a realſun and moosn) ùeclie s ron the ſime e enlighene b the un luInateq th ſ ũſ Watũs t; anwarng anl vanin as ſirge to the lonarans them both an uſelul and nnent n ſe ma be wall njid neton hum) hnulis ens ni lut fovoni the trbi oDi Be ſs hut bevſ? ; isi qu tiey art iiii L 7] The ſun is eclipſed when the moon paſſes directly between him and any part of the earth; this can only happen at the change of the moon. (Proved in libe manner. ) Was the moon's orbit in the plane of the earth's path round the ſun, ſhe would be eclipſed every time ſhe came to the full, and would eclipſe the ſun every time ſhe came to the change; but one half of her orbit is on the nortb ſide of the eclipſe, and the other half on the south ſide of it, and muſt therefore cut the ecliptic in two oppoſite points, called tne moon's nodes. The angle of this orbit with the ecliptic is 5 degrees and one third. (Shewn on the Orrery.) When the moon is at full, above 12 degrees from either of theſe nodes, ſhe paſſes clear of the earth's ſhadow, and cannot be eclipſed; and when ſhe changes above 18 degrees from either of them, ſhe paſſes either above or below the ſun, and therefore cannot eclipſc him: But if ſne be at full or change within thoſe diſtances, then an eclipſe happens, and if ſhe be in the node, the eclipſe is central. (Explained by the Orrery.) If theſe nodes kept always in the ſame ſigns of the ecliptic, the ſun and moon would always be eclipſed in the ſame places and at the ſame rime every year: but the eclipſes fall back every year from the eaſt fo the weſt, in ſuch a manner as to prove that the moon's orbit moves backuwards 19 degrees one-third every year, ſo that in 18 years and 225 days there is a pericd or reſtitution of the ſame eclipſes; and they then appear in the ſame places and the ſame time as before. (Illustrated by the Orrery) The earth and moon are chained to one another as it vwere by their mutual attraction, which, like the ſun and . planets, is in proportion to their quantities of matter. If an heavy and light ball be tied to the two ends of a ſtring a yard long, and toſſed up into the air, they will form to themſelves a centre of gravity. On this centre of gravity the earth and moon revolve in equilibrio, and its diſtance from their centres is inverſely as their quantities of matFHlB ter, vis. 6c0 miles from the earth's; conſequently the centre of gravity forms the real orbit, and makes the carth 12000 miles nearer the ſun at the time of full m.on, thun at the time of change. IThis is demonſtrable by the ſun's appearing ſo much larger at the full than at the change of the moon. ſProved by the whirling tables.) i The further any part of the earth is ſrom this centre of gravity, the greateris its tendency to fly oſſ in a tangent, 2bherefore the ſide of the cartb which is turned away from rhe moon has a greater centrifugcl motion than its center has: and this centre a greater than the ſide next the moon. At the carth's centre, the moon's attraction balances the centriſugal force, but muſt be ſironger than the centr.ſugal force oſ the ſide of the carth nent her, and weaker than the centrifugal force of the ſide fartheſi from her. As the moonss attraction is greater than the centritugal foree on that ſide of the carth next the moon. of courſe the tide will riſe on that ſide: But as the centrifugal force on the oppoſite lide is greuter than the moon's attraction, the tide uill alſo riſe on that ſide, hence the reaſon of rivo tides in a5 hours. (Proved by the tide table.) The ſun agitates the water in proportion to the moon, as 3 to 10 therefore, when the ſun and moon dra ii the ſume direction. they cauſe a ſpring tide, and this happens at the change of the moon. lſ the carth had no moon. the ſun would cauſe a ſmall tide in its oceans, therefore at the full of the moon ſpring tides happen as well as at the change, for the ſun's centrifugal tide being reinforced by the moons attraction. and the moon's centrifugal tide bv the ſums attraction, ſpring tides happen both at full and change of the moon; but at the quarters. when thev attract in contrary directions. they deſtroy the effects of ech other in a degree, and then we have neap iides. At the equinoxes the ſun and moon being both on or neur the equator, their attraction is more in a ilne than at mott other ſeſons. hence the prodigicus tides which genetally tollow theſe ſenſons, Loth in the ur und ſen à'pluna l i ſ C 81 alſo falling in conjunction with the ſun and moon, will increaſe the tides ſtill more. (Shetun by the tide tables.) The air being a fluid mueh lighter than water, is more affected by the moon's attraction. Hence at the full and change the barometer is moſt affected; and ſome ſay lunatics are more aſfected at thoſe ſeaſons. To the inhabitants ſituated at a conſiderable diſtance from the equator, the different parts of the ecliptic riſe at very different angles with the horiæon. In northern latitudes, the ſigns Piſces and Aries riſe with the malleſt angles; irgo and Libra with the greateſt; therefore when the moon is in Piſces and Aries ſne muſt riſe nearly at the sſame hour for ſix or ſeven days together. In uwinter the moon is in thoſe ſigns about che time of her firſt quarter, but as ſhe muſt then riſe about noon, that riſing is not taken notice of. In ſpring the moon is in them about her change, but as ſhe then gives no light, her riſing is alſo unnoticed. In ſummer ihe riſes in Piſces and Aries, in her third quarter, about twelve oclock at night, conſequently the phænomenon is ſeldom rhen regarded; but in autum: thoſe ſigns are oppoſite to the ſun, and therefore the moon muſt be full in them, and, very uſefully for the farmers, riſes in their harveſt immediately after ſunſet for ſeveral evenings together, and thence acquires the name of the harveſt moon. ſProved by the Orrery and Globe.) M A S T R O N O M 7. HE planets are retained in their orbits by the pocer ef gravity.but as the ſun is by far the largeſt body in our ſyſtem, if no other power acted on them they would be draun down to the ſun. All bodies therefore that move in curves, as the planets do round the ſun, muſt be acted upon by tavo principles; and motion being rectilincal, we ſuppoſe the Almighty gave each planet this kind of impulſe at its creation, ſo that between one power drawing to the centre, and another acting perpendicular to it, the planets are impelled in eliptic orbits round the ſun, as a pebble tied to a mill-ſtone, and thrown from the hand, would revolve round the mill-ſtonc. An idea of this is given by a ball impelled ſingly in a ſquare in two directions. one perpendicular to the other; when they both act they give the diagonal of the ſquare, &c. Our ſyſtem muſt be conceived as within the concave ſphere ſeeming to be formed by the fixed ſtars, and the ſun as near the centre of it, an huge globe of fire, near a million of miles in diameter, and near 100 millions of miles from the earth, according to calculations made from the tranſits of Venus. He turns round on his axis in ag days and 8 hours, as may be ſeen by ſpots on his face and was no doubt intended to give light, heat, and vegetation to the ſix primary and ten ſecondary planets which revolve round him. All theſe planets move round the ſun from weſt by south, to eaſt, in orbits nearly circular, and almoſt in the ſame plane. The comets move in all manner of directions, in orbits which are very long ellipſes, much inclined to one another, and to all the orbits of the planets. The tails of comets are only thin vapours; for if they were flame no ſtar could be ſcen through them. The time in which any planet goes round the ſun is the length of its year, and the time on which it turns round on its axis, is the length of its day and night taken together, as repreſented on the Orrery. The neareſt planet to the ſun is Mercury; he goes round him in 87 days 235 hours, is about 3000 Engliſh miles in diameter, and diſtant from the ſun 42 millions of miles; he moves in his orbit about 100 thouſand miles every hour; the length of his days and nights are unknown, being but 56 times the ſun's apparent diameter from him; he ſets and riſes too near the ſun for any obſervations to be made of his ſpots. Venus goes round the ſun in 224 days 17 hours, her diameter is near 7,900 miles, her diſtance from the ſun is 79millions of miles, her hourly motion in her orbit is 69 thouſand miles, and ſhe turns round on her axis in 24 days 8 hours of our time. By her axis inclining 75 degrees from a perpendicular to her orbit, (agreeable to the older aſtronomers), ſhe has tuo ſummers and two winters at her equator. Her orbit alſo deviates three one-half degrees from the plane of the ecliptic, ſo that ſhe has two nodes, or places where ſhe croſſes the ecliptic, one in the r4th degree of Gemini, and the other in the r4th of Sagittarius. If the carth happens to be in thoſe ſigns when ſfe is, then we ſce her tranſit over the ſun's face, a phænomenon which happened the 1ſt of April, 1761, and gave the aſtronomers M 2 the opportunity of calculating the ſun's parallax, viæ. Il 7' 40 and of conſequence his diſlance, as well as that of the planets. The carth is the next planet in the order oſ the 1y ſtem. Mars, ſtill higher in the ſyſtem, is 167 millions oſ miles diſtu-t ſrom the ſun, moves at the rate of 47,000 miles an hour, goes round the ſun in 678 days, and turns round on his axis in 253 hours 39 minutes and 22 ſeconds, at a medium, according to Dr. Herſchel's obſervations on a ſpot on the face of Mars; though he obſerves his motion not to be regular. He is about onefifth as large as our earth; his red appearance is ſuppoſed to be occaſioned by a groſs thick atmoſphere with which he is ſurrounded, and which is ſuppoſed to ſupply his want of a moon. Tupiter, the largeſt of the planets, is 570 millions of miles diſtant from the ſun, and above 400 millions from our orbit; he moves round the ſun in about 12 years of our time, at the rate of 30,000 miles per hour; he is near 9,000 miles in diameter (i. e. near 1000 times as large as our earth) is accompanied by four moons, ſome bigger and ſome leſs than the earth, which revolve round him as our moon does round us; and the faint ſubſtances on his face, called his belts, arc ſuppoſcd to be parts of his atmoſphere drawn into lines by his cxceeding quick revolution on his axis, which is once in ꝗ hours 49 minutes. Saturn, the ſecond in magnitude, and hitherto conſidered the moſt diſtant of all the planets. is φ40 millions of miles from the ſun, mnear 706,000 miles divmeter moves at the rate of I8, cCo miles an hour. but is too remote for his ſpots to be ſeen. ile is equipt with riee moons, (Dr. Ilemchel has ſeen two more) beſides a li Iuminous ring which allo reſiccts the ſuns light ſtrongh ſ i ? L 85 upon him. This planet is near 30 of our years in maling his revolution round the ſun. The Gesorgian Planct (or rather the Herſehe) ſo called by its ingenious and indefatigable diſcoverer Dr. Ilerſchel; was firſt ſcen near one of the fect of Gemini; its year is calculated to be 823 of ours, its diſtance twice thut of Saturn from the ſun, and its ſiæc 100 timcs as large as our carth. Theſe calculations are the lateſt and moſt accurate that have been made; they are given in round numbers, to eaſe the memory, and are founded on mathematical as well as occular certainty. By an attempt at the ſame kind of calculation to ſind the diſtance of the fixed ſtars, 'twas found that the avbole ciameter of the earth's orbit would not mahe a parallax or angle with the ncareſt of them Their diſtance therefore muſt be inconceivably great. Light diminiſhing as the ſquares of the diſtances increaſe, the ſun's rays therefore cannot enlighten the fixed ſtars,; and a teleſcope which magnifies 400 times does not ſenſibly magnify them; 'tis therefore highly probable they are ſuns likc ours, ſhine by their own unborrowed luſtre, were not intended for our ſervice, but to give light, heat, &c. to ſvſtems of worlds of their own, formed probably for the ſume purpoſes as ours, though too remote for our eyes aſſiſted by the beſt glaſſes to perceive. We find the worlds of our ſyſtem covered with continents, ſeas, hills, & Who can doubt therefore but they are inhahited, as well as all the worlds of the other ſyſtems? How much too hig is this idea for the human imagination By the lately improved teleſcopes thirty thouſand of theſe ſuns have becn found more rhan the naked eye can perceive  Were our glaſſes ſtill better, we ſhould, no doubt, find more tis not improbable there may be ſtars ſo diſtant that their light has not reached the earth ſince the creation. Many of thoſe ſtars appear double, and coloured green, blue, red, violet, &c. Let us on the wings of imagination then launch into the immenſity of ſpace, and behold fyſtem beyond ſiſtem, above us, below us, to the eaoft, the weſt, the north, the ſsouth Let us go ſo far as to ſee our ſun but a ſtar among the reſt, and our ſyſtem itſelf as a point, and we ſhall but even then find ourſelves on the confines of creation How inadequate then muſt be the utmoſt ſtretch of human faculties, to a conception of that amaæing Deity who made and governs the whole! Should not the narrow prejudices, the littleneſs of human pride ſoften into humility at this thought! de ifeq g;bſe lofta ino hunliy EXPLANATION Of ſuch uncommon WORDS as cannot, without affectation, be omitted in this COURSE. A BE SORB, to drink in. Chryſtallixation, ſalts ſnooting Acid, ſour. into their uſual forms. Accelerated, haſtened, hurriedſCylinder, like a rolling ſtone. forward. D Accumulate, to heap up. Adheſion, the ſticking together. Denſity, compactneſs, cloſeneſs. Diagonal, the line running beAfinity, related to, having anſ tween oppoſite corners of a affection for. ſquare. Altali, fixed ſalt or ſubſtances Diverge, to ſpread out. efferveſſing with acids. E Analogy, likeneſs, proportion. Alpparatus, inſtruments for experiments. Elaſtic, having a ſpring. Attraction, a drawing together.  Electrometer, an electrical gage. Axis, an axle on which any Efferveſcence, a ferment or diſthing turns. tharge of fixed air, u waxing ot. Ellipſes, an oval line or ſurface. F Ebullition, a bubbling like boiling water. C Capillary, ſmall as an hair. Calcs, the earth or cinders of a metal. Fibre, a ſmall ſtring. Centrifugal, a direction given tol Flaccid, lax, looſe, or flabby. a body different from that in- Fulerum, a prop or point of elining to the centre. ſupport. Centripetal, tending towards the Frigorific, chill, or cauſing cold. centre. G i Cobeſion, clinging or ſticking together. Collateral, lying ſide by fide. Compreſs, to ſqueeze together. Concave, ſpherically hollow. Condenſe, to bring the parts of matter cloſe together. Contact, touching each other. Convex, ſwelling ſpherically ] ſmmerſe, to dip or plunge in. Gravwity, weight, or the tenden cy one body has to another.H Hemiſphere, half a globe. Hermetically ſealed, tube cloſed with melted glaſc. Hypotheſis, a ſuppoſition. I outwards. Impel, to drive onwards. AConverge, to draw towards al Incompreſible, not to be ſqueezed point. l into leſs compaſs. Incidencc, Incidence, a falling or lighting on. Iuſulote tqturor ùkem iſtand. Interſticues, intervals, or intermediatè Ipuces, Latèral; ſideway. Longitudinal, lengthwiſe. e.. - M. Rerract, to incline, or break. Reſervoir, a ciſtern, or head for a reſerve of water. Reverberate, to beat back, to echo Rotation, returning about. ISaturation, abſorption, drinking in, &c. Seerete, to ſeparate. Medium, a means of convey ance. Seuſorium, the ſeat of perception Ddontentum, the moving foree of à body. iũũlli N. . Nomenclature, a ſyſtem of relalative numes given to chemical fubſtances. O. Oblique, crooked, ĩncÆuing. Oròir, the tract deſeribed by a plemet round the ſun. Oxùgihous Priuciple, dephlogiſticated atr. P. Partic Iùt , exceedmę fmull parts. Percuſſion ,ſtriing, or the eſtects of a ſtrohe. P7 Perſorate, to bore through. Diſton, u moveable plug, juſt fitting a pipe. in the brain. Solution, a ſolid diſſolved in u fluid. Species, ſort or kind. Specific, peculiar, bulk for bulk Spiral, like a rope coiled round. Subterraneous, within the earth. Sublimætion, diſtillation of dry ſubſtances. Subhon, a bent tube, or crane. Syſtem, compoſing a general ſtructure. T. Tangent a ſtraight line touching the circumference of a circle. Tangible, capable of being felt or handled. Tenacity, a elinging together. Tenſion, a ſtretehing out. Phecnomenon, an appearance in Tranſit, the paſling of a pluner nature. Pi&ilog:ſton, one of the principles eotſ inft1in nubilio in bodics. Pores, ſmallinterſtices in hodies. Prepo. nelerte, to Ucind be heãviẽr. Projectile; a body in motion, caſt or throw n. QR. Ratess; to thin, to make denſe marter u cùker. before the face of another, ol the ſun. Tube, a pip Fucuun, a ſpace devold of air. alve, atrup door, letting a fiuid cõme thro' but not returr. Pelocitĩ, the moving ſpeed. I òte. , the point at the top oſ any tliing. Elbrate, to ſuing as s apendu lum. Rceſdectiun ctbounding back, re- Conduldting. motiing in waves. t turn: nę. XLeocipr vel, mutuul, relative. Ir IN F ts corran ùo a latisuãti,somne, lolut: le, ſubject 0 V apor e or ſlv oſ. I . unRada . 