ECONOMY OF NAT PLAINED AND ILLUSTRATED ON THE PRINCIPLES JERN PHILOSOPI E Y G. GREG ORY, D. D. AUTHOR OF YS HISTORICAL AND MORAL, IN THREE VOLUMES. TH FIFTY-SIX PLATE OND EDITION, vith conſiderable VOL. II. LOND ON: R J. JOHNSON, NO 72, 5T. PAVLS CHVE Boor VI. OF MINERAL SUBSTANCES, AND THE STRUCTURE OF THE EARTH. C n A P. LDpage . Of Salts in general. Introductory ObſervationsDefinition of Salts Salts simple and compoundWhat are called ſimple Salts are in reality compound BodiesOxygenous Principle. C H a ?. II. Alkalies.page j. Mineral fixed Altali; where foundVegetable fixed Altali; how obtained —U of the fixed Altalies in ihe ArtsUſe of Altalis in mating GlaſsProctſs of making Soap.Volatile Alkali; how obtained; a compound Body Altaline Air. C H A P. IIIpage 10. Acids. OF Acids in generalVitriolic Acid; how obtained, &e.Nitrous Acid; how obtained Muriatic Acid; how obtnined, and its Uſe in the Arts. Flour Acid; diſſolves Glaſi ; enployed to make Etchings on GlaſiAcid of Borax Phoſphoric Acid —Acid of Amber. C n A P. IV.—page zo. Neutral Sahts. The Union of an Acid and Altali deſroys ihe corroſive Quality of each.— Neutrãl Salis do not communicate the ſaline Quality to cther Bodies Cryſialline Form; how decompoſed. z CH A P. A ?m a CuH AP2. Vpage 2æ2. Vitriolic Salts. Glauber's 8ali  hoav decompoſed ;3 Solution of it leſt to cool eryſtallines on being sbaken.Vitriolated TartarVitriclated dmmoniat. C u A P. VI.page 26. Nitrous Salts. Common Nitre; Phenomena attending its Deflagration avith inflammable SubſtancesNatural Hiſtory of NitreCubic NitreUnion of nitrous Acid avith various Earths.Nitrous Aimmoniac. Cn A P. VII.page 33. Muriatic Salts. Sal Digeſivus.  Common Salt—ZRocæ Salt—Natural Hiſlory of Salt.Salineſi of the OceanUſes of common Salt in the drts Sal AmmoniacNatural Hiſtory of Sal Ammoniac. CH A P. VIIL-—page 44Combinations of the other Mineral Acids. Sparry TartarSparry SodaDBorax; its Properties; its Uſe in the ArtsCombinations of neutral Salts &ith Metals. Cn a r. IX.page 47. Earths in general. Diferent Kinds of Earth—New Earths diſeovered Definition of EarthsExcepiionsOther general Properties of EarthsCaliæreous EarthMagneſia. BarytesClayFlint. CH 2 P. X.page 52. Calcareous Earths. ChaltLimeſione. Marble. Marle.  Calcarecus s par.Iceland CryſtalsPetrifactions Parts of Animals found in Marle, &e. Gytſoms.Great Varicties. AlabaſierFibrous Stone.Mineral Glaſi SeleniteGypſecus SparDPlaiſter of Paris; how prepared Fuſible or Derbyſhire SparSpars ; how formed.Beautiful Appearances in diferent CaverusMetallic Combinations with calcareous Earth. CH A P. XIpage 64. Magneſian Earthss. Hagneſia; how obtained. —Etſim Salt. Soap Rock.French Chalt Serpentine StoneMicaTaltMuſcovy GlaſiAſeſtosMineral Cloth. Dountain LeatherMount ain Flax.Mountain VWood Cn a rp. XIIL.page 69. Ponderous Earth. Rarytes a scarce Mineral; found in two Stiates. Criſtatunoderous SparCawh.Liver Stone. Cu a r. XIII.page 71. Argillaceous Earths. General Account of Clays or ArgilsAlum; its CompoſitionNatural Hiſiory of AlumAction of ihis Subſtanuce on other Bodies Uses of Alum in the ArtsLac Lunæ.Porcelain Clay Manner f mating different Kinds of Pottery.Stone WareVYello, or Quees Ware. China. Lithomargaerra Lemnia Zole Zeolite/Lapis Laxuli—Tripoli. Brich ClaySlate. CH AP. XIV./page 85. Siliceous Earths. General Arrangement of Flinty SubstancesGens.—Diamond Ruby. —S8apphire Topax Emerald HyacinthAmethyſt Garnei. C7ourmalinOpalCompoſition and Properties of precious Stenes. CQuartæ.Roc CryſralsPebblesFlintsLapis Nephriticus. Ca?s- Eye.Hyãrophanes. Explanation of the Phenomena of the Hydrophanous StoneMoon- Stone Chalcedonyj Onyx. Carnelion. Sardonyx.Aate, Common Flint. Chert Sand and Gravel Vaſper Feldt Spar Labrador Stone Schirl ana Whetſtone. Art of making GlaſiPrince Ruper?'s Drop anà Philoſophicql PhialCurious Phenomenon. CH A P. XV./page 59. Of the Stronthian, Jargonic, and Adamantire Earths. The Scottiſb or Stronthian Earth diſeovered by Dr. CrawfordOFf ihe Jargonic EarthAdamaniine Earth—All of iheſt ſcarcæ I Minerals. CH A P. XVIpage ioI. Compound Earths. Definition of this GenusVaricus compound Stonts. CH a Pp. XVII.—page 104. Volcanic Products.LaovaDifſerent XindsProgreſs of a River f LavaCompound Parts of Lava.Pumice StoneZBaſaltes.Trapp.Terra Puxgolana. C H A P. XVIII.page 109. Metals. Uſes of MetalsTheir PropertiesWeight, Opacity, Malleability, Ductility, Fuſibility.Mix avith each other. Their Inflammability, CcCalcination.Entire and Semi-metalsPerfec? and imperfect. ANatural Hiſtory of MetalsWorking of Mines Aſſaying. Spualting. Union with Acids.Action of other Subſtances on Merali. C H A P. XIX. page 120. Arſenic. Natural Hiſtory of ArſenicMode of reducing it to the metallic Form. VWbhite EnamelOrpimentRealgar. I Uſe in Medicine. A dreadful Poiſon; how to detect it in the BodyA Remedy for thq Poiſon of Arſenic. CH AP. XX.page 124. Molybdena. Short Account of this Semi-metalMay be reduced to an AcidA searce Mineral. C n a r. XXIpage 126. Tungſtein. The Ore of Tun” ę ſteiu eonfounded with that of TinWhere found Mode of reducing it to the reguline or metallie State. C H A P. XXII.page 128. Manganeſe. Natural Hiſtory of Manganeſelis Effects on Glaſi Regulus or Metal.Blacht WaàdManganeſe contained in VegetablesUſes in the Arts, C u a r. XXIII.page 131. Nickel. Natural Hiſtory of NictelMetal how obtained. Detonates avith NitreHas a ſrong Repulſion for Silver, and Attraction sfor Sulphur,—A uſeleſs Mineral. CH A P. XXIV.page 134Cobalt. Natural Hiſiory of CobaltAnalogy betaeen this Metal and the blue colouring Matter of Vegetables.Mode of aſſlaying itMines of CobaltSmalt, or Povvder Blue.Uses of Cobalt in the Arts. Curious sympathetic Int. Changeable Landſcape. Union with other Metals. C n a r. XXV.page 139. Biſmuth. External Qualities of BiſmuthA powerful Diſſilver of Earths. Pearl White, a pernicious CoſmeticCurious ExperimentA metah lic Compoſition, which melts in boiling Water.Varicus ũes vi Biſmuth in the Aris. CH A P. XXVI.page 143. Antimony. Natural Hiſtory of AntimonyRegulusSnow of Antimony Catination of Antimony.Combinations with Acids. Butter of Antimony.Antimonial Wine.Uſes of Antimony in MedicineFlorus AntimoniiGlaſi of AntimonyCrocus of Autimony.Sulphur of AntimonyTartar EmneticJames's Povder. C u AP. XXVIIpage 159. Zinc. &eneral Deſcription of this MetalPhiloſuphers IVool Union avith Acids tVhite VitriolDetonation of Zinc with NitreCombiA nation with Metals Pewter—Its Uſe in Fire-works.Natural Hiſtory of ZincCalamineDBlack JackBraſi, hrw made Tutty—Pinchbect. C H A P. XXVIIIpage 156. Of the newly diſcovered Semi-Metals. SylvaniteMenachinite—Uranite. and Titanite, C nH A P. XXIXpage 1539. Iron. Extenſive Utility of this MetalIis PropertiesNatural Hiſtory of Iron Eagle- Stones Blood-Stones.  The Loaãſtone.Emery OchresSmelting of IronForging of IronMating of Steel Yempering of SteelCaſt SteelGreat Diſpoſition in Iron to unite with other BodiesGreen Vitriol, how procured. Pruſſian Blue. Ink.Inflammation of Sulphur and IronTnning of IronPretarations of Iron uſed in Medicine. C H A P. XXX.page 175. Tin. General Properties of TinGranulated TinNatural Hiſtory of Tin.— Its Union avith the Acids Uſe of Tin in improving the red Dyes Smoaking Liguor of Libavius.Aurum MifiuumCombinations of Tin avith other Metals.Diſſerent Species of Pewter.Putty Application of Tin in dyingUse in Medici ne. CE AP. XXXIpage iòI. Lead. General Properties of Lead. Red Lead.Litharge. Natural Hiſlory of Lead Slictenſides Curious PhenomenonSmelting Lead Ores. VUnion with Acids Plumbum CorneumVhite Lead  h/ow madeSugar of Lead. Union ith other MetalsCommin Solder. DUVes of Lead —Great Danger from leaden VeſſelsDevonſtire ColicMeans of detecting Lead in LiquorsMedical Uſes of Leaq. VUſis of its Calces in the Aris. C n a P. XXXIIpage 1ę⸗. Copper. General Properties of Copper.Iis Natural Hiſiory—Turquoiſe Gem.  Snmelting and refining of Copper.Antique Statues preſerved by the Green RuſtUnion with Acids. Blue Vi itriol. Colouting of Guus. Cuprum Ammoniacum—VerdigrisUnion avith Metals hite CopperPinchbech—Gun MetalDBell Metal Metal of ancient StatuesBronæe.—Speculums of Reſlecting Teleſcopes. Pot Metal. Tinning of Cotter. C  A P. XXXIIILpage 204. Mercury. Great Attraction of ihis Metal for the Matier of Heat—SQuickfilver; rendered ſolid ; malleableGeneral Properties of QuichſilverH>drargyrus calcinatusNatural Hiſtory of Mercury.Cinnabar Native VermilionAction of Acids on this Metal "Turbith MineralRed PrecipitateæWhite PrecipitateCorroſive Sublimate CalomelKeyſer's PillsEthiops MincralVermilionAmnalgamsGold made brittle By MercuryMode of gilding Metals Uſe of Quicſiluer in extracting the precious Metals from the Earth. Mating of Looking Glaſſes.Conditions neceſſary for the Operation of Mercury on the human Body. C H A P. XXXIV./page 215. Silver. Character of the perfect MetalsGeneral Properties of SilverVegetation of Silver.Natural Hiſtory of SilverAlying of Siluer. CupellationLunar CauſticFulminating Silver Luna Cornea. Dianas TreeGreen GoldStandard Silver Coin,Plating avith Silver ; how performedFrench Plate. Cn ar, XXXV.page 227. Gold. Ceneral Properties of GoldGold calcined ty Electricitv Extreme Ductility of ihis MetalNatural Hiſtory of Geld.Procæſes for ſeparating Gold from other Substunces QuartationThe Touchstone.Aqua Regia Reaſons why the digerent Aids act on metallie BodiesFulminating Gold, Purple Poder of CaſſiusGolden CoVt, how deſirveàd by Meſes Union of Guld avcith other Metals Standard Gold Coin of different Countries. C H a P. XXXVI.page 238. Platina. Natural Hiſtory of this curious MetalIts PropertiesThe moſi tondorous Body in NatureIts Hardneſs and InfuſibilitySoluble only in Aqua Regia and oxygenated muriatic Acid. Its Union with other Metals Crucibles formed of it—Might be applied to various Uses hich ro other Metal can anfwer. C H A ?P. XXXVIILpage 743. Of inflammable Subſtances in general Ignition and Combuſtion defined Acids formed by the Combuſtion of Inflammable Subſtances. Flane, how produced The Cbjest of the greſent Inquiry linited What Subfances are commonly termed infanmable. CH A P. XXXVIIL.page 248. Phoſphorus. PE-3horus of KunelLight from putreſcent SubſtancesCuricus FactsLight from the Sea Water, &c. Lights about the Beds of Sich Perſons.Phoſphorus exhaled avith the SceatPhoſphoroted ydrogen Gas. C n A P. XXXIX.page 256. Sulphur. General Proterties of Sulpbur.Natural Hiſiory of Sulphur.Union avith Earihs. "lith Alhalies.Liver of Sulphur.Artificial ſulplureous Vaters/ Uſes cf Sulphur. C H A P. XL.—page 259. The Carbonaceous Principle. ature of the Carbonaceous Principle In what Subſtances principally rcuud. —CharcoalLanp black. Strong Attraction of the Carbonacecus Principle for OxygenlIts Uſe in ihe Reduction of Meiuli—DPlumbago, or Black Lead.—Its voricus Uſes in the Arts. C H A P. XLI.page 254. Pitcoal. Diferent Species of CoalNewcaſile CoalCulm—S-Slate Coal Cannel Coal.  Killenny CoalBovey CoalPeat. Cohe. Coal TarNatural Hiſiory of Coal.Obſervations relative to ihæ Deluge. C H a P. XLIIL.—page 274. Naphta, Petroleum, Barbadoes Tar, &c. Nature and Properties of Naphta. Burning Fountains.pPetroleum Mieneral Piteh, or Barbad:es Tar.Lake Aſphaltes Aſphaltum; bhow collected Elaſtic BituminComponent Principles of theſe Subſtances. C u Aa P. XLIIL—page 277. Jet, Amber, Ambergris, and Mineral Tallow. General Properties of JetlIts Nature and OriginAnber.— dcid of AmberNatural Hiſiory of Amber.Different Opinions of its OriginAmbergrisIis Natural HiſtoryMineral Tallow. CH a r. XLIVpage 282. Of the Diamond conſidered as an inflammable Subſtænce. Natural Hiſtory of DiamondsVarietiesInternal Structure Experiments proving the inflammable Nature of the DiamondExperiments of M. CadetOF D ArcetVital Air neceſſary to the Combuſtion of the DiamondExperiments of LavoiſierFurther Experiments. Experiments of Mr. Tennant—The Diamond proved to bæ eryſtallized Charcoal. C  A P. XLV./page 297. The Structure of the Earth. rhe Curioſity of Man on this Topic limited by the Weakneſ of his PowersThe Body of the Earth diſpoſed lin StrataDeclivities of MountainsDiſpoſition and Order of the StrataCaldy Iſland here Metals are uſually found.Probable State of the Earth at its CreationLaws by avhich Alterations avould be produced. Foſſil Shells, &e. accounted for.Formation cf Iſlands, c.Otbher Irregularities of the Earths Surſace extlainedl. 35a8 -a rE C H a P. XLVL.—page 313. Mountains. Diſiincion betaveen Hill: and MountainsMountaius primæval or sicondaryGranite Mountains only suptoſed in general primævall. §Some Lime-ſtone Mountains primæval—Alluvial Mountains. Entire and ſtratified Mountains,Mountains homogeneous and hezerogeneous Confuſed MountainsVolcanic Mountains. Height of Mountains, how meaſured Computed Heights of the moſt remarable MountainsLine of Congelation in different Parts of the World. C n A P. XLVIL—page 315. Volcanoes. General OLſervations on Volcanoes Their Conneũtion with the Sea. Immenſe Force of ſubterraneous Fires exemplified in various Inſiances. 7heory of VolcancesGreat Depth.Traces of Volcanoes in Aifferent Paris of the World—Deſcription v AtnaEruption of Veſuvius, in 1794Cu A P. XLVIII.page 36z. Earthquales. Craneſtion Eet cen Earthquakes and Volcanoes Earthquahes cauſed ty ihe Progreſs of Steam betaveen the Strata of the EarthSigns of 21rcaching EarthquatesGreat Earthquate at Liſton, in 1755. kLarihquakes in Calabria, in 1783. Boor VII. OF WATER. CH A P. ILpage 379. Of Water in genera. WVater a Comprind Body.Three States of W- aterLateri in a fuid StateFlrentine Experiment. "VapourExperiments aſcertaining the Force of VapourSteam Engine. Ice.Phencmena of FreexingOf Thawing/Water expanded in the State of Icelnmeuſe Force exerted by Water on paſſing to that State.Why Ice is not perfectly tranſparent. Cu a Pp. II.page 40I. Hydroſtatics. Diſcoveries of Archimedes in this Branch of ScienceOf the Moderns. LHoa Fluids are acted upon by the general Laws of Gravitotion. Particles of Fluidi act independently of each otherExperiment aſcertaining this PrincipleFluids preſs equally in all Directious. Cautions neceſſary in conſiructing Aqueducts, &e. to guard egainſi the lateral Preſſure of Fluids. All Parts of ihe ſame Fluid in Equilibrium avith eaeh otherSurfaces of Fluids always in a Plane parallel with the HorizonPreſſure cf Fluids in proportion to their HeightHydroſtatic ParadoxEffects of Gravity on Fluids ef different DenſitiesAction of Air on the Surfaces of FluidsUſ: of a Vent Peg.7The ValenoisThe SiphonAction of Fluids on silid Bodies immerſed in themWhy certain Bodies ſink aud others swim in certain FluidsZBodies that ſiim diſplace a Bult of Water equal to themſelves in Weight but nit in Magnitude7he ſame Body avill ſint in one Fluid, avhich avill fucim in anotherhe Ilyãrometer.Fahrenheit's Hydrometer Recapitulation of the Dotrines reſpecting specifie GravityHow to make a Globe of Iron ſvim en the Surface of WaterBoats mode of Copper. Cn A P. IIL.page 427. Hydraulics. OF ihe Diſeharge of Fluids through ſmall Apertures.Uhe Diſtharge of Fluids through ſuceęſſive Pipes Artificial FountaiusPumps The Raiſing Pump.The Forcing Pump.7Vhe Suching Pump. The Compound Pump.The Fire EngineMotion of Waier in Conduit PitesOſcillatory Motion of Water in a SiphonOſcillatory Motion of IVavesMotion of Wheels acted upon by Water; and Conſiruction of Water Mills. C H A P. IV.page 473Of te Ocean. Salineſ of the Ocean.Different Opinions as to the CauſeProbable Reaſons avhy the Seu has been always ſaltTemperature of the Sea at different Degths. Modes of rendering Sea- water freſb. C H A P. V.page 48I. Of Rain. Recatiiulation of Doctrines relative to ſpontaneous EvaporationVapour by ſome ſuppoſed to conſiſt of hollo VeſiclesRainDifferent Theories of Rain.—Snow.Hail.Rain which Vii in eoming in contact with the Earth.Laorge Hail-ſtonesFogs.De.Hoar Froſt.lInſtances of partial; freexing hen the general Temperature is above the freexing Point. CH a Pp. VLpãge 49I. Of Springs and Rivers. Origin of SpringsDiging of WellsNature of Springs Marſbes. Ctheap and eqy Mode of draining themIntermitting Springs RiversThcir Source, &c. C n A P. VIIpage 504: Hot Springs. Probable Cauſes of theſe Phenomena.Abcund moſt in volcanic RegionsHot Springs in Iceland, near Mount HeclaAit Geyſor. In the Iſland of IſchiaAt ViterboExplanation of theſe PhenmenaDBurning Well in Lancaſbire Explained. Cn a rp. VIII.page 509. Mineral Waters. ipacity of Water as a SolventSubſtances commonly found in Mineral Waters.Fixed AirMineral AcidsAltaline ſaltsNeutral SaltsEarthy Subſtances. Sulphur.Metals Mode of examining and analyzing Mineral WatersChemical TeſtsAnalyſis of the moſi celebrated Mineral or Spa WatersAix-la- Chapelle. BathaDBriſiolBuxtonCheltenhamEpſomHarrowgate MatlockPyrmont.Scarborough.SpaLReſlections on the Usſe of Mineral Water in general. PPEND IXTable of syecific Gravities - -327 a E N B . - - . HIE . Ellt iil . . EEE ' . /  F MINERAL SUBSTANCES, AND THE S TRUCTURE OF THE EART A. C H A P TE RPI. OF SALTS IN GENE RAL. Introdutory Obſervations. Deſinition of Salts Salts ſinle and conpound.U hat are called ſimple Salis are in reality compound BodiesOx;gencus Princitle.  H E earth which we inhabit, though preſenting to our ſenſes an almoſt infinite variety of objects, is yet compoſed, as was already intimated*, of but few ſimple materials. It is the moſt pleaſing occupation of the philoſopher, to purſue the Proteus nature through her various and aſtoniſhing transformations: to develope thoſe intricate combinations, which conceal from the eyes of common obſervers the elementary principles of things; to anatomize matter; and even to explain, as far as we are able, the proceſſes by which ſubſtances, apparently contrary to each other in their general properties, become united, and form new bodies differing again in their moſt eſſential qualities from thoſe of which they are compoſed. In purſuing this really intereſting inquiry, the plaineſt and the cleareſt method that preſents ĩtſelf to my mind, ĩs to notice ſeparately each peculiar and elementary ſubſtance, and afterwards to examine the efſects of its combinations with other bodies. In treat* See book I. chap. æ. of elementary ſubſtances. ing of mineral ſubſtances naturaliſts have generally claſſed them under four principal heads, ſalts, earths, metals, and inflammables. Perhaps modern philoſophers might adopt an arrangement more conſiſtent vith recent diſcoveries; yet novelty in claſification but ſeldom facilitates the labour of the ſtudent, and it is commonly ſafeſt to follow a beaten track in ſcience, unleſi it leads to error. Thoſe ſubſtances are denominated ſalts which are fuſible, volatile, ſoluble * in water, not inflammable, and ſapid when applied to the tongue. The moſt ſimple ſtate of ſalts, is a maſs, white, brittle, and in ſome degree tranſparent. Salts in certain degrees of heat are fluid and tranſparent, like oll. They differ in their degree of fuſibility and volatility. Some aſſume the form of vapour in the ordinary temperature of the atmoſphere, others in a great degree of heat remain fixed ?l. Previous to treating oſ the particular ſubſtances of this claſs, it will be proper to make æ few obſervations on the formation of ſalts in general. Salts are either ſimple or compound. Siraple ſaltæ are diſtinguiſhed into alkalis and acids; and ſrom the union of an acid and an alkali are produced compound ſalts, which are alſo called neutral, becauſe by this  The diſtinction between ſolution and mixture hæs been already ſtated; but it may not be improper to remind the reader, that in ſolution the body which was ſolid is ſo completely in union with the ſluid or menſtruum, that the compound is completely tranſparent, though not always colourleſs. Common ſalt, ſor inſtance, with water, makes a colourleſs ſolution; but blue or green vitriol makes a blue or green ſolution with water. A mixture on the contrary is always muddy, and if left to ſtand, a ſediment will be depoſited. The pont of saturation i is when the fluid will hold no more of the ſolid body in clear ſolution, but zrecipiiates it, or lets it ſaull to the bortom.  Not volatile, or riſing in vapour. combination the characteriſtic properties both of the acid and alkali are loſt, and a new body is formed, vhich is extremely inert, in compariſon vith the two ſubſtances of which it is compoſed. Several of tie earths, and ſome of the metals, are alſo capable of being united with acids, and the compound forms a ſalt more or leſs perfect. Alkalis and acids, at the time they Sbtained thv name of ſimple ſalts, were ſuppoſed to be really ſuch; modern diſcoveries, however, have now led to a different concluſion, and left no reaſon to doubt that all the acids, and at leaſt one of the alkalis, are compound bodies. Tht doctrine of the formation of acids is now fully elucidated; the proceſſes of combuſtion, and. of the calcination of metals, which were formerly attributed to the expulſion of an imaginary ſubſtance, called phlogiſton, are now proved. to be only the formation of acids; or the union of the principle of acidity or oxygen contained in the ætmoſphere, with ſubſtances, the particles of which have, in ceitaln circumſtances, a ſtronger attraction for that principle, than it has for the maetter of heat. The chief circumſtance which favours the union of the principle of acidity, or, as it is called by the French chemiſts, oxygen, with other bodies, is a proper degree of heat; which, by removing the particles oſ bodies further from eachother, diminiſhes their attraction, and allows room for the entrance of air into their interſtices. In the calcination of metals, and in combuſtion, the oxygen gas of the atmoſphere is decompoſed, and while the- ſis is attracted by the inflammable ſubſtance or metal, the matter of heat is diſengaged, and becomes ſenſible. Bodies, however, may be acidified or oxygenated vithout being expoſed to the air; and this is perſormed by Placing them in contact with bodies which are already united with oxygen, but which have a weaker attraction for that principle than the body which is to be acidifiel. It is upon this principle that metals are deprived of oxygen, or reduced to the metallic ſtate, by heating them in contact with charcoal, tallow, &c. In this caſe the inflammable ſubſtance having a ſtronger attraction for oxygen than the metal has, becomes oxygenated; while the metal, by being deprived of this principle, is reduced to the metallic ſtate. Metals and combuſtible bodies may alſo be oxygenated in the humid way, by ſubmitting them to the action of acids. In this proceſs the acid furniſhes the oxygen, and is therefore decompoſed. The oxygenation of minerals in the bowels of the earth is probably chieſly effected by the decompoſition of water, which is a compound of hydrogen and oxygen. A proceſs of this kind is continually carried on beſore our eyes; the ruſt which iron acquires by being expoſed to damp air is an oxygenation of that metal. Other metals, however, have leſs attraction for the principle of acidity, and this is remarkably the caſe with the perfect metals, platina, gold, and ſilver, which thereſore do not become ruſted by expoſure to air. In treating of ſalts, I all firſt give an æccount of the alkalis, next of the acls, and laſtly of their combinations, or the neutral ſalts. I ſhall defer ſpeaking of the earthy and metallic ſalts til the earths and metals C H A P. II. A L  A L I SS. Mineral fixed Albali ; where found. Vegetable fixed Altali; hom cbtained Use of the fixed Alkalis in the Arts. Uſe of Altalis in making Glaſi Proceſi of mating SoapVolatile Alhali; how obtained ; a conpound BodyAlaline Air. M INE RAL fixed alkali, ſoda or natron, is the It i ſalt which is ſound recorded in antient hiſtory under the name of nitre. It is ſaid to be found in Egypt in tolerably pure cryſtals, and alſo in Perſia, where it appears in a form reſembling that of hoar froſt. Even in Europe jt is found in ſmall quantities in mineral ſprings, and alſo on the ſurface of new walls, in the form oſ a damp and dewy eſfloreſcence. In a compound ſtate it is found in abundance; it makes half the weight of common ſalt, and is alſo occaſionally found naturally combined with other acſds. The mineral alkali cannot be obtained from the native ſalts contalning it, without great labour and expence: what is uſed in the arts is procured by the burning of certain plants growing near the ſea-ſidee The crude mineral alkali in commerce is called ſoda or barilla. Alkalis are either mild or cauſtic: the latter is their moſt ſimple ſtate, as vhen mild they are united with the carbonic acid, with which they form æ kind of neutral ſalt. Though the carbonic acid has leſs aſfinity vith the alkalis than any other acid, vet it is dificult to ſeparate it entirely.. The uſual methed of accompliſhing it is to diſſolve the mild alkali in water, to add to this Iolution ſome quick-lime, and then to filtrate the liquor, and evaporate it in cloſed veſſels; the ſaB line ſubſtance left aſter evaporation is an 2lkali almoſ entirely deprived of carbonic acid. This proceſs is founded on the greater attraction which the carbonic acid has for aò- lime than ſor the alkalis. The VEGETABLE fixed alkali, pot-aſh or kali, agrees in ſeveral circumſtances ith the former.. It is acrid vhen applied to the tongne, requires as great a degree of heãt to melt it; and in a very ſtrong heat flies off totally in vapour. It differs from the foſſil alkali in having a muũch ſtronger attraction for water, This alkali may be cryſtallized, but not ſo eaſily as the foſil. Little of the vegetable alkali has been found in a ſtate of nature, and that only as entering into the compoſition of nitre. It is obtained in conſiderable quantities from the aſhes of almoſt all land vegetables, by infuſing them in water; the liquid, when ſtrained from the dregs, uill then contain the ſalt in a ſtate oſ ſolution, and by evaporation we obtain the ælkali in a ſolid form. It is alſo eaſily obtained from a ſubſtance called tartar, which is depoſit: d by wine. The properties and uſes of the vegeta ble alk ali are very ſimilar to thoſe of the minera. The fixed alkalis are employed i in ſeveral of the arts, and particularly in thet of making glaſs; for though many ſubſtances will fuſe the vitrifable earths, and reduce them to a ind of glaſs, the alkalis are found the moſt effectual and convenient. In the ſoap manuſæctory alſo the alkalis are a principal and eſential ingredient. Common ſoap is indeed a combination oF fixed alkali in a cauſtic ſtatè vith fat and oily matters. A very fine ſpecies of ſoap is formed by the union of mineral alkali ith oliveoil, or oil of ſueet almonds. In the making of this ſubſtance, the alkali is firſt rendered cauſtic by boiling it with half its meight of quic-lime, vhich abſtract: 3 : E aits its carbonic acid or ſixed air by ſuperior attraction. What is called ſoap-ley is a ſolution of the cauſtic allali in water, which ĩs evaporated to ſuch a degree of denſity as to be able to ſuſtain a new- laid eg”2. To moke the finer ſoap. a part of this ley or lixivium (to ipealk in technical language) is to Le diluted, and mixed with an equal quantity of olive-oil. The mixture ĩs put on a gentle fire, and agitated, by which the union is acceleratedc When the mixture begins to unite well, the reſt of the lixivium is to be added to it, and the whole is to be digeſted with a gentle heat, till the ſoap is completely made. Good ſoap of this kind is white and firm when cold, and is not lizble to become moiſt on expoſure to air; it is entirely miſcible with water, to which it gives a milky appearance, vithout exhibiting any particles of oĩl on the ſurface. In the making of ſoft, liquid, green, or black ſoaps, cheaper oils are employed, as oil of nuts, of hemp, oſl fiſh, &c. but tallow is the ingredient uſcd in our common haerd ſoap. Oll or ſat may be ſepaerated ſfrom ſoap by the addition of an acid, without being much altered in its properties. On this account, waters which contain any acid, either in a diſengaged ſtate, or combined with any ſubſtance except fixed alkali, decompoſe ſoap, and will not completely mix vith it. In this decompoſition, eſpecially that effected by the vitriols of lime and magneſia, which are frequently contained in water, the vitriolic acid unites with the fized alkali of the ſoæp, and forms vitriol of ſoda, or Glaubers ſelt; and the lime or the magneſia combines with the oil, and ſorms a kind of ſoap ſcarcely at all 5lubie, which ſioats in a whitiſh curd-like maſſes on the ſorface oſ the water. The voLarinæ allali or ammonia is ſeldom or never found in a ſimple ſtate. It is met with ĩn nature only compounded with other bodies, in nitrous ammoniac, or in common ſal ammoniac, which is ſometimes found in the neighbourhood of volcanoes, or coal mines which have burnt ſor a long time. The volatile 2lkali of commerce is chieſly produced ſfrom bones. This alkali is very different in iĩts properties from the other two; its volatility is ſo great, that under the ordinary preſſiure of the atmoſphere iĩt is continually ſlying off in a very pungenrt vapour. It is ſold in the ſhops under the name oſ ſmelling ſalts, ſal volatile, or ſpirit of hartſhorn. The proceſs of putrefaction in animal matters, and in ſome vegetables, particularly cabbages, throws ĩt off into the air, together with other volatile matters, which in ſome meaſure diſguiſe its ſmell. Volatile alkali is now proved to be a combination of two other ſubſtances, namely, the baſes of the azotic and hydrogen gaſſes. M. Berthollet has found by analyſis that1,000 parts of volatile alkali conſiſt oſ about 807 parts of azote, combined with 193 of hydrogen. The volatile alkali of the ſhops, that is in its mild and concrete ſtate, hen heated to a certain degree, aſſumes the form of vapour, but by a diminution of the heat returns again to the concrete form. Volatile alkali, however, deprived of the fixed air which rendered it mild, is capable of receiving a permanently elaſtic form; in which ſtate it is called alkaline air. When a mixture of alkaline air and marine acid air vas made by Dr. Prieſtley over mercury, a beautiful vhite cloud was formed, and a diminution in the bulk of the airs took place. The cloud having ſubſided, vas found to conſiſt of common ſal ammoniac, or a union of the volatile alkali with the marine acid. ſioned a whitiſh cloud, vhich ſoon diſappeared, leaving only a little dimneſs on the ſides of the veſſel. Fixed air admitted to alkaline air, produced a depoſition of the common or concrete volatile alkali, in the form of ublong and ſlender cryſtals, which croſſed each other, and covered the ſides of the veſſel like a netvork. Inflammable air admitted to alkaline air, produced no particular appearance. Water abſorbed the alkaline air, and left the inflammable air as before. Azotic gas ſeemed to have no effect on alkaline air. Alkaline air is abſorbed by water, in the proportion of of an ounce meaſure of air to I grains of rain water; and the water is by theſe means made prodigiouſly ftronger than any of the volatile ſpirit of ſal ammoniac A C IDS or acits in general Vi riolic t hem oLiaind, & c.Nitreus Acid; how obtaineãd. NMuriatic Acid 7 how obtained, and its Use in ihe Arts.Fluor Acid; diſſles Glaſi 3 emplyyed to matæ ZEtchingi on Gleitid of Borax—DVuqſphoric Acid. dAcid of Anber. , cIDS are very active ſobſtances, and vhen concentrated are highly corroſive. They have ſo ęcneral a tendency to unite with other ſubſtances, chat they. are never obtained pure except by art. They are generally fluid, which ſeems, however, chieſly to be owing to their ſtrong attraction for water, of which few of them can be entirely deprived, and which they copiouſly attractfrom the atmoſphere. One cf the marks by which the preſence of uncombined acids may be aſcertained, is their property of changing to a red, the blue colour of infuſion of violets, vhich alkalis change to a green. Acids are diſtinguiſhed i into mineral, vegetable, and animal; the fobjeẽt of this book will at preſent confine us to  thoſe of the firſt claũ. The acids ſound in the mineral kingdom are the carbonio acid or fixed air, the vitriolic, the nitrous, the mu: ĩatic, the acid of ſpar, the acid of borax, the acid of phoſphorus, and the acid of a mber. The carEONIC acid has ali ready been treated of under the head of gaſſes. The viTRIOLIC àcid takes its name from vitriol or copperas, from which it was formerly extracted by diſtillation. In he; new chemical nomenclature, ĩt is vith i I / - . Chap. 3.] Vinr ialic or  dud of Subur- UII with much more propriety called the acid oſ ſulphur, es it is now found to be a combination of thet inflammable ſubſtance with oxygen. The pungent and ſoſfocating fumes which are produced by the inflammation of ſulphur, are an acid which is imperſect from a deſciency of oxygen; and which cannot be condenſed without the aid of water. The vitriolic acid can never be eutirely deprived of vater, but admits of -he greateſt concentration of all the æcids, and may be reduced to a ſtate in which ĩts ſpeciſic gravity ĩs double that of vater. The denſe and ſluggiſh appearance of the concentrated vitriolic acid has given riſe to the jmproper name of oll of vitriol, under which it paſſes in the ſops.. M. Lavoiſier makes a diſtinction bet etween this acid, as it exiſts in an imperſect and gaſſeous ſtate, and as it exiſts in the form of a tranſparent and ponderous liquid combined with water. In ĩts former ſtate he call; it, acide ſulphureux (ſulphureous acid) in the latter, acide ſulphurique (ſulphuric acid). A ſimilar diſference of termination is employed to expreſs the different ſtates of the nitrous acid, according as it is imperfectly or completely ſaturated vith oxygen. A difference of termination ĩs alſo given to the combinations of acids, aceording as they are perfectly or imperſectly ſaturated with oxygen. Thus the combinations of the ſulphureous acid, are called ulphitei; thoſe of the ſulphuric acid , Julphats, &e. The vitriolic acid now uſed in commeree is prepared in the following manner: —A quantity of ſulphur and ſalt-petre, groſly mixed, are placed in a veſſel within a ſmall room, lined with lead, and containing a few inches depth oſ water at bottom. The ſulphur is lighted, and the room cloſed. The ſaltpene ſerves to maintain the combuſtion, by the oxygenous genous gas which it affords; and the æcid fumes which are produced are abſorbed by the water. The proceſs is repeated till the water is thought ſuſficiently acid. The volatile fumes are then diſſipated by expoſure to air, and the acid is concentrated by diſtilling oſf the ſuperſluous water. The vitriolic acid is ſaid to have become concrete by cold, but it probably was not in its moſt perfect ſtate. It eaſily parts with ĩts oxygen to inſlammable ſubſtances; if oil is mixed with it, it is converted into a dark, viſcid ſubſtance, and emits ſulphureous and pungent vapours. The vitriolic acid has been thought to exiſt in the atmoſphere, but this is a miſtake. It is diſcovered in ſome waters, but in ſmall quantity; it exiſts in ſome ores of metaæls, and makes one oſ the conſtituent parts of gvrſum. The nrrRoUS acid is æ fiuid of conſiderable weight, but does not admit of ſo much concentration as the vitriolic. In its moſt perſcct form it is quite tranſparent and colourſeſs, but in its ordinary ſtate it is of n orange tawny colour, and when expoſed to the air it conſtantly emits orange: coloured fumes, which are noxious. It very readily parts with its oxygen to mlammable ſubſtances and metals; æand when mixed vith uil of turpentine, it explodes and flames. The  attracts the oxygen, and burns, while the azote is ſudderly ſet at liberty, and occaſions the exploſion. 1 VWher nitrous acid is ciluted with an equal weight of uœer, it ĩs called aqua fortis. The ritrous acid is conſiderably diFuſed in nature. All that is ſold in the ſops is obtæincd by diſtilling ſalt- petre with the A7otic and oxygenous gas were mixed together by Mr. Cavendiſh, and the electric ſpark was paſied through them. In theſe trials a diminution of bul as always obſerved; indeed five parts of oxygenous gas being added to three of common air, almoſt the whole diſappeared. By continuing his experiments, he found that an acid was produced, and that acid was the nitrous. The MuRrRIATIC acid, in ĩts ordinary ſtate, is a vellowiſii- coloured fluid, and emits fumes which do not give the air a red tinge like the nitrous acid, but produce an appearance of miſt. Theſe fumes are noxious to the Iungs, and ſmell like burning ſoot, The muriatic acid is diſtinguiſhed from the vitriolic and nitrous in the ſtrong adheſion of its comporent parts, which is evinced by its not parting with oxygen, and of courſe its having little action on inflammable ſubſtances. So ſtrong indeed is the attraction between the principles, whatever they are, which form this acid, that they have never been ſeparated. Its baſis thereſore is wholly unknown to. us, and we have no other evidence than analogy to lead us to conclude that, like other acids, it contains oxygen. M. Berthollet conjectures the radical of the muriatic acid to be of a metallic naturee. The muriatic acid is by far the moſt abundant of all the acids in the mineral kingdom; it is naturally combined with lime, magneſiæ, and natron, or the foſil alkali; wirh the latter it forms the immenſe beds of ſal gem or rock ſalt, and the ſaline matter which gives ſaltneſs to the ocean. As the muriatic acid can only ſubſiſt in the gaſſeous ſtate in the ordinary temperature and preſſure of the atmoſphere, it is neceſſary to uſe vater in order to condenſe it. But the ordinary muriatic acid is capable of being combined with an ædditioral quantity of oxygen, by being diſtilled with the mineral ſubſtance called maænganeſe, or with certain preparaticns of lead Muriatic or Actd of Sea Sall. IBeok vI. and mercury, hich readily part with oxygen The acid reſulting ſiom this preceſ; and which is called oxy genated muriatic acid, can only, like the former, exiſt in the geſſeous ſtate, and is abſorbed in a much ſmaller quantity by vater. When the impregmtion of water by this gas is carried beyond a certain point, the ſuperabundant acid precipitates to the bottom- of the veſſel in a concrete form. M. Berthollet has hewn that this acid gas is capable or being united with a great number of Tſalifiable baſes, the neutral ſalts which reſult foom this union are capable of deſlagrating with charcoal, and ſome of the metallic ſubſtances: theſe detonations are very violent and dangerous, from the greãt quantity of the matter oſ heat which the oxygen carries along with it into the compoſition of the oxygenated muriatic acid. The muriatic acid in the oxygenated ſtate has alſo à remarkable power of rendering vegetable and animal matters hite. The reducing of this principle to practice has, indeed, been produẽtive of a very eſſential improvement in the art of bleaching, and for this too we are indebted to M. Berthollet 2. BY various experiments he was enabled to aſcertain that the oxygenated or dephlogiſticated marine acid, as it was at firſt called, only differs from the common marine acid, in containing a ſuperãbundance of oxygen, with which: it very readily paerts. He diſcovered further, that oxygen has a remarkable property of deſtroying the c/lours of vegetable matters; that even the dew hich falls from the atmoſphere, and that hich comes from the nocturnal tranſpiration of plants, were impregnated vith oxygen, ſufficiently to deſtroy the colour of paper, ſlightly tinged with tincture of -  Annales de Chymie. ‘ turnſole. The ancient prejudices concerning the dew of the month of May, a ſeaſon when the tranſpiraton of plents is moſt abundant, he conceives to hæve originated in a ſimilar obſervation. Attributing, thereſore, in his own mind the common effect of whitening linen in bleach-yards to the action of ox7gen, he was led to imitate that proceſ v applyi ing leys, and the oxygenated muriatic acid alternately, a and by theſe means was enabled to make linen, &c. permarently white, by a very quick and aſy prcceſs. Obſerving further that it was the practice in common bleaching, to make the linen, &c. in the finiſhing, paſs through ſour milk, or a very weal mixture of the vitriolic acid with water; he alſo tried the paſſing of the cloth through a very dilute ſolution oſ the vitriclic acid, and obſerved thet it was conſequently rendered of a clearer white. Tne oxygenated acid may be employed either in aerial form, or diluted with wæter; and the latter appemrs to be the moſt convenient mode of applying it. The effect ſeems to reſult entirely from the action of the oxygen which the acid parts with to the cloth, and which has a power of deſtroying vegetable colours. Perhaps the fading of dyed ſtufſs on being expoſed to the action of the light and æir may be accounted for on the ſame principles. The acid which M. Berthollet employed in bleaching he found had parted with all ĩits ſuperabundant oæygen to the cloth, and was reduced to the ſtate of the common muriatic acid. The ſoap- leys ſeem to act in two ways; by neutralizing any of the ſuperfluous acid which might be imbibedq, it ſaves the cloth from being coroded; and it alſo prevents the ſufocating fumes of the oxygenated acid from being oſfenſive or injurious. Poſũbly the detergent quality of the leys may have a further effect effect in carrying off the colouring particles which are detached from the cloth by the action oſ the oxygen. When one or two paerts of pale concentrated nitrous acid are mixed with four of fuming muriatic acid, an efferveſcence ſoon takes place, and oxygenated muriatic acid is produced; at the ſame time that the mixture becomes of a red colour. The mixed acid is called aqua regia, which has the property of diſſolving gold. The sPARRY or fluor acid was diſcovered by Mr. Scheele, and takes ĩts name from the ſubſtance from which it is obtained, and which is commonly known in England under the name of Derbyſhire ſpar. This acid when pure aſſumes the form of gas. In this ſtate it is heavier than atmoſpheric air, extingriſres flame, and deſtroys animal life; it has a penctrating ſmell, like that of marine acid, but more powerful; and its cauſticity is ſuch that it almoſt inſtantly corrodes the ſkin. Heat dilates it, without producing any other change. The addition of atmoſpherical ai? has the eſfect of producing with it a white vapour, which is more or leſs abundant, in proportion as the atmoſphere contains more or leſs of humidity. If vitriolic acid is poured on the Derbyſhire ſpar, which is a combination of this peculiar acid with calcareous earth, and a gentle heat applied, the acid is diſengaged in an acerial form. It readily combines with water, and therefore the recipient ſhould be half filled with that fluid. The firſt experiments which were made of the diſtillation of this acid in glaſs veſſels, were attended with a ſtriking appearance, which required conſiderable acuteneſs for its explanation. It was obſerved that as ſoon as the acid gas reached the ſurface of the water, a quantity of earthy matter depoſited. This was at firſt naturally attributed to the acid carrying over with it part of the calcarenus ſtone from which it was diſtilledl Upon examination, however, it was found that the earth depoſited in the water was ſiliceons, and this gave riſe to an opinien that flint was only a compoſition of this acid with vater. This hypotheſis was ſoon overturned, by obſerving that the glaſs veſſel in which the diſtillation was perſormed was always corroded, or in part diſſolved. In this manner it was found that the fluoric acid has the ſingular property of diſſolving glaſs. As only a moderate heat is required for the diſtillation of this acid, it is now uſual to make uſe of leaden veſſels for that purpoſe; which are not corroded by the acid. The baſis of this acid is unknown, as we are not acquainted with any ſubſtance which can abſtract its oxygen. The ſluoric acid has been ſueceſęfully employed to make etchings on glaſs, in the ſame manner as nitrous acid is applied to copper. It combines readily with earth and alkalies, but ſcarcely, if it all, acts on gold, ſilver, lead, mercury, tin, antimony, biſmuth, or cobalt, but it diſſolves their calces. It acts directly on iron and Zinc, with the production of inflammatle ges; and ĩt likewiſe diſſolves copper in the metallic ſtate, though leſs eaſily than when calcined. If BoRAx is diſſolved to ſaturation in boiling water, and the vitriolic acid ædded in ſuch quantity as to be perceptibly in exceſs, a ſubſtance will riſe to the ſurface of the water in the form of white ſcales, which is proved to be a peculiar acidl. Many chemiſts have ſuppoſed that this acid is an artificial product, formed by a combination of the ſalts made uſe of in its manuſacture. This opinion, however, has been relinquiſhed, ſince this acid has been ſound to exiſt in a ſtate oſ great purity in mineral waters, and ſince real borax may be formed by adding this ſcaly ſalt to the mineral alkali. The acid of borax requires about fifty times its weight oſf water for its ſolution. In a mocerate heat it melts vith leſs intumeſcence than borax itſelf; and the glaſſy ſubſtance, thus ſormed, is again ſoluble in water, having only loſt its water of cryſtallization. The acid of borax is uſed to fuſe the ſlinty earths, vith which iĩt forms clear and almoſt colourleſs glaſſcs;3 by the aſſiſtunce of heat it diſiolves the earth precipitated from what ĩs called the liquor of ſlints, or flint difſolved in ſparry acid. It unites with ponderous earth, mogneſia, lime, and alkalis, and forms with theſe ſubſtances ſaline compounds. All theſe properties, and more eſpecially ĩts taſte, the red colour it communicates to the tinctures of violets and turnſcle, and ĩts neutral combinations with alkalies, ſuſiciently indicate its acid nature; but it ĩs the moſt feeble of all the acids, ænd is diſengaged from its combinations even by the carbonic acidl. The acid of borax is the ſubſtance called by Homberg ſedative ſalt, from its ſuppoſed eſiects on the human body. It eſferveſces with a boiling hot alkaline ſolution, but not with metals or abſorben: earths, though it may be united with them. It has a veak attraction for inflammable ſubſtances, particulerly ſpirits of wine, the flame oſ which it tinges green. From this circumſtance it has been ſuppoſed, but without ſuſficient proof, to ontain copper. PnosprORIC acid ĩs obtained by the combuſtion of the benes of adult animals, which are aſterwards rounded, and paſed through a fine ſilk ſieve; a quantity of weak vitriolic acid is then poured upon the powder, but leſs than is ſuſſicient for diſiolving the whole. This acid unites with the calcareous earth of the bones, and forms ſelenite, and the phoſphoric acid remains free in the liquor. The liquor is decanted off, and the reſiduum waſhed with boiling water; this water, which has been uſed to wah out the adhering acid, is mixed with what was beſore decanted off, and the whole is gradually evaporated. The diſſolved ſelenite now cryſtallizes in the form of ſilky threads, which are removed; and by continuing the evaporation ve procure the phoſphoric acid, under the appearance of a white pellucid gaſs. When this is powdered, and mixed with one third of its weight of charcoal, we procure very pure phoſphorus by ſublimation. The phoſphoric acid, however, as procured by the above proceſs, is never ſo pure as that obtained by oxygenating pure phoſphorus, either by combuſtion or by means of the nitrous acid. The phoſphoric acid may be rendered concrete with very little diſficulty, by merely exhaling the moiſture. It abounds in the animal kingdom, and is not unfrequent in the vegetable and mineral. In this laſt it is found united with lead and iron, as well as with calcareous earth. : The acid of aMBER is obtained from the ſubſtance of that name, by the ſimple application of heat. The operation muſt not be carried on too far, or by too ſtrong a fire, as the oil of the amber is apt to riſe with the acid. The acid ĩs found in a concrete form in the neck of the ſubliming veſſel; it is ſoluble in twenty-four times its weight of cold water, and in a much ſmaller quantity of hot water. It poſſeſſes the qualities of an acid in a very ſmall degree, and only c u a ». IV. E U T R AL S ALTS. \ Dhe Union of an Acid and Altali deſtroys ihe eorrove Quality ef each Neutral Salts do not communicate the ſaline Qualit; io other Bodies Cryſialline Formaow decompoſed. AT UR A L productions paſls by gradations into each other; and I might have given an account of the primitive earths immediately aſter that of the alkalies, as theſe ſubſtances have ſcveral properties in common, particularly that of uniting with acids, and forming neutral compounds. Metals alſo are capable of being united with acids, and of forming with them ſaline ſubſtances. A lucid order will hovever be better preſerved, by at preſent confining our attention to the conſideration of ſuch neutral bodies as are ſormed by the union of an acid and an alkali. To a perſon unacquainted with chemiſtry, it is a ſtriking circumſtance that two acrid and corroſive ſubſtances ſhould by their union form a compound very mild and inactive. Such however is the caſe, and what iĩs ſtill more remarkable, their previous acrimony, and tendency to combine, renders the neutral body proportionably more inoffenſive. Thus an alkali united with vitriolic aciq, may. be received into the Body vith much leſs caution than when combined with the ãerial or carbonic acid. The neutral ſalis in general have not ſo ſtrong a taſte as the ſimple, their endency to combination and their ſolubility being leſs conſider ble; t but the criterion, which more eſpecially not, like the ſimple ſalts, communicate the ſaline properties to other bodies. Their cryſtalline form is likeviſe a circumſtance which very generally diſtinguiſhes the neutral from the ſimple ſalts. The volatility of the neutral ſalts is not in general ſo great as that of the ſimple ſalts. Neutral ſalts may in many caſes be decompoſed by heat alone, but in general ĩt is neceſſary to have recourſe to elective attraction, or the addition of a third ſubſtance. When the decompoſition is effected by heat alone, the more volatile part is forced off: but it ſeldom ſucceeds in this way, the ingredients commonly adhering ſo ſtrongly that they riſe together. It then becomes neceſſary to have recourſe to elective attraction. Thus, if ſfrom a neutral ſalt we wiſh to obtain the acid pure, we apply another acid which has a greater attraction for the alkeli. If our object is to obtain the alkali ſeparate, we apply a ſubſtance which has a ſtronger attraction for the acid*. * I would recommend to the reader, before he proceeds further in this part of the work, to look over again that part of the fourth chapter of the firſt bouk which relates to the attraction of combiration C u A P. V, VITRIOLIC SALTSS. Glauters Salt ; heav decompeſed ; Solution of it leſt to ecol er ryntallies cn being ſoakenVitriolated TartarV itriolateà 4nmoniac. / HE ſirſt ſubſtances of this kind which chal llenge  our attèntion, are Glaubers ſalt and vitriolated tartar, or as they are denominated in the new chemical nomenclature, ſulphat of ſoda, and ſulphat of pot aſh. The former of theſe neutral ſalts is compoſed of the vitriolic acid, combined with the mineral alkali; and the latter of the ſame acid with the vegetable alkali. They both have a ſaline bitterneſs. By heat their ingredients may be raiſed into vapour, but no one ſimple ſalt will ſeparate them, as no acid has a ſtronger attraction for the alkali than the vitriolic, nor any alkali a ſtronger attraction for the vitriolic acid than the fixed. Dr. Stahl propoſed the effecting of this ſeparation as a problem. He knew how to ſolve it, and it vas aſterwards done by a double elective attraction, Another more curious method is this; talke Glaubers ſalt or vitriclated tartar, melt the ſalt in a hot crucible, and add to it firſt a quantity of charcoal, which has a ſtrunger attraction for the oxygen of the vitriolic acid than the latter has for the alkali. Theſe being expoſed to heat, the charcoal in part diſappears, and the mixture acquires a deep red colour. If the matter is poured out, we find it to be an hepor ſulphuris, or liver of ſulphur, the charcoal having carried off with it the oxygen in the form of carbonic acid gas. GLAUBER'S SALT is more fuſible than vitriolated tartar, melting in a moderate degree of red heat. The ſolution of Glauber's ſalt forms into columnary cryſtals, which have generally ſix ſides, four principal, and two which ſeem accidental. Its cryſtals, containing a large quantity of water, are liable to have iĩt abſt acted from them by the atmoſphere, when they fall to powder, or in chemical language effloreſcee How much water Glaubers ſalt is capable of containing, is known by its requiring twice its weight of water to cryſtallize. The vater ſhould be added in a builing ſtate, and. the mixture boiled a little aſterwards; it may be ſet by in a quiet place, and will be found cryſtallized the next day, or will ſuddenly aſſume that ſtate on being ſiaken. On cryſtallizing, a quantity of heat is perceived to be emitted by the ſubſtance paſſing ſrom a fluid to a ſolid ſtate, and conſequently loſing ſome of its Iatent heat. Of Glaubers ſalt, all that is uſed at preſent ĩ is produced by art. It is ſaid to be produced by nature in the waters of mineral ſprings, and of the ſea. But the ſalt found in them is uſually not Glaubers ſalt, but Epſom ſalt, conſiſting of the vitriolic acid and ragneſia. Glauber's ſalt is obtained by uniting the vitriolic acid with the mineral allcali of common ſalt, as happens in the proceſs for obtaining the muriatic acid. VITRIOLATED TARTAR is diſtinguiſhed from Glaubers ſalt, by a Ieſs degree of fuſibility. It requires for its fuſion the ſtrongeſt fire. Its cryſtals are harder, but leſs bright, and do not contain ſo much water as thoſe of Glaubers ſalt. Hence they are not liable either to ſpontaneous eſſloreſcence, nor to watry fuſion, but, like other ſalts, which contain little water, attract it ſtrongly. This ſalt decrepitates* in the u In decrepitation the eryſtals burſt, and fall into powder, from the expanſion of the water which they contain, by the heat. This occaſions that crackling noiſe vhich common ſalt makes when thrown into the fire. ſire. Vitriolated tartar does not appear to be a foſſil ſalt; it is found in the juices of vegetables, and remains in their aſes after they are burnt. What is uſed in dying and medicine, is obtained by art, moſt commonly by adding vitriolic acid to nitre, in order to diſlodge 1he nitrous acid. One hundred parts of vitriolated tartar contain, according to Bergman, about 52 parts of fixed vegetable alkali, 40 of vitriolic acid, and 8 oſ water of cryſtallization. The vitriolic acid combired with the volatile alkali is called AMMONTACAL VITRIOL, or ſulphat of ammonia. Ammoniacal ſalts, ĩt is proper to remark, are ſo called from ammon, an Arabic wvord for ſand; or, as Pliny conjectures, from the temple of Jupiter Ammon, near which ammonia uſed to be found in great quantities, on account of the camels dung and urine brought thither. With reſpect to the general properties of ammoniacal ſalts, as their alkali is very volatile, they are unable to bear any great degree of heat without being converted into vapour, though much more than might be expected from their ingredientss. They emit pungent fumes if a fixed alkali or lime is added to them, as theſe ſubſtances, having a ſtronger aſfinity with the acids, expel the volatile alkali. lllll When ammoniacal vitriol is very pure, it has the form of needles, which, on careſul examination, are found to be ſlattened priſms of ſix ſides, two of which are very broad, terminated by ſix-ſided priſms ĩrregelarly formed; but rhe whole figure of the cryſtallization is ſubject to conſiderable varieties. This ſult is ſornetimes in the form of quadrangular priſms, an is ſL; iꝶ.s  &btained i in very thin plates. It aſie bitter and urinous; it is light, and very ar. Etis ſcarcely changed by expoſure to air; it does not efloreſce like Glaubers ſalt, but on the contrary ſlightly atrracts the humidity of the air. It is very ſoluble in water, two parts of cold or one of het water being ſuſficient to hold it in ſolution; ĩt cryſtallizes by cooling; but the moſt perfect cryſtals are obtained by ſpontaneous evaperation. It likewiſe unites with ice, which ĩt melts, producing at the ſame time an exceſive degræe of cold. It does not act on the earths, nor on magneſia; though this laſt, according to Bergman, ſeems to decompoſe it after a length of rime. If mild ſixed vegetable alkali, that is alkali combined with the carbonic acid gas, is diſtilled with ammoriæcal vitriol, a double decompoſition and combination take place. The vitriolic acid unites with the ſixed vegetable alkali, and forms vitriolated tartar. The carbonic acid gas being at the ſame time volutilized, together with the volatile alkali, alſo in a ſtate of gas, both unite, and ſorm an ammoniacal ſalt, which cryſtallizes in the recipient. Arnmoniacal vitriol ſeems not to exiſt in a ſtat] C ”H A P. VI. ENITROUS S ALTS. . v- r . - . . : : Cmmeu Nitre; Phenomena aticuding its Deſtagration avith infinnmæ'li  I1,, , i . r . v. li : Subliances Natural Hiſtory of NitreCubic NitreUaion 17 . . . r a . . Ii ntrous Acid avith various Earths.—Nitrous imoniac. OMMON NITRE, Or nitrat of pot-aih #, conſiſts of the vegetable alkali and nitrous acid. Nitre vas unnown to the ancients; the ſubſtance which they diſtinguiſhed by that name was a foſſil alkali, for we are told by Pliny that it was detergent, and uſed in making glaſs. It is uncertsin when nitre was diſcovered, but we find it mentioned in the earlieſt chemical writers. Nitre melts in a very gentle heat, and in a greater degree of heat totally evaporates. Cold water diſſolves one-ſixth of its weight; and hot water about its own weight of this ſalt. Its cryſtals are more regular than thoſe of any other fſalt (being priſms of ſix ſides) having very little water in their compoſition, and thereſore not liable to ſpontaneous evaæporation. Its moſt extraordinary property is its deflagration with inflammable ſubſtances, which happens from the decompoſition of ĩts acid, by which a large quantity of oxygenous gas is ſet at liberty. To the production of this air is owing the rapid combuſtion of mixtures of nitre and inflammable ſubſtances, as evinced in 7 gunpowder. When nitre is melted by itſelf, no particular eſfect takes place; but iſ charcoal is added to it in its melted ſtate, deflagration li Commonly nown under the name of ſalt-petre. + The reader will do well to conſult what has been ſaid reſpecting gunpowder in Book IIL or detonation takes placec. We are thereſore not to conſider nitre itſelf as an inſiammable ſubſtance, but only as aſfording the pabulum of fire. If we continue to add charcoal, we find that the eſfect becomes leſi and leſs, till it entirely ceaſes. What rermains in the crucible is diſferent from ritre, it requires more heat to keep it ſluid, and upon examining it we ſind ĩt a pure vegetable fixed alkãli. The charcoal diſappears, becauſe ſt is converted into carbonic acid ges by being united vith oxygen; and the other component part of nitrous acid, the azote, by being deprived of its oxygen, is alſo volatilized and diſperſed. When the deſlagration is performed with ſulphyr inſtead of charcoal, the conſequences are conſideræbly diſferent. Like charcoal indeed, when ſulphur is added in a certain quantity, it will produce no further deſlagration; but when ſulphur is uſed, the ſlame is inſupportable to the eye, and the appearance of inflammation is greater though the noiſe is leſs, If the reſiduum is diſſolved in water, it will readily cryſtellize, and is found to be vitriolated tartar. The reaſon that leſs exploſion ĩs produced by ſulphur than charcoal is, that the former, when united with the oxygen of the nitre, becomes fixed; whereas charcoal united with the ſame principle is converted into gas, and eſcapes vith violence. The formation of vitriolated tartar is owing to the production of vitriolic acid from the ſulphur and the oxygen, which combines with the fixed vegetable alkali. The detonation of nitre ĩs a nice teſt of the inſlammability of bodies, as there are many which are found 10 have this property when added to nitre in a ſtate of ſuſion, which exhibit no ſigns oſ it on ordinary occaſicns. Nitre exiũs in large quantitics in nature, and is continually formed in inhabited places; it is found in great quantities upon walls which are ſheltered ſrom the rain; and the Biſhop of Llandaff collected a conſiderable portion ſrom the decayed mortar of an old barn. There appear to be three principal circumſtances that promote its formation; the firſt ĩs, the preſence of chalk, or any other calcareous earth, as appears by its being collected frem walls covered with plaſter, or from the ruins of ancient edifices. This ſalt iĩs likewiſe ſound perfectly pure in chalky earths. The late Duc de Ia Rochefoucault obtained ĩt, in the proportion of one ounce in the pound, from the chalk of Roche Guyon. The ſecond circumſtance neceſſary for the production of this ſalt, is the putrefaction, or ſpontaneous decompoſition of vegetable and animal matters. It is a well known fact, that places which are moiſtened vith animal liquids, or contain animal matters in a ſtate of putrefaction, ſuch as dunghills, ſtables, privies, &c. produce much. nitre. This conſtant obſervation has been applied to the formation of artificial nitrepeds. Dry ditches are dug and covered with ſheds open at the ſides; theſe are filled with animal ſubſtances, ſuch as dung, the excrements of quadrupeds, or birds, with the remains of vegetables. Theſe matters are from time to time watered, eſpecially with water charged with animal or vegetable matters capable of putreſaction, and they are tumed up to renew their ſurfaces from time to time. When the putreſaction is in an advanced ſtage, a ſmall portion of the matter is talsen up and lixiviated, to aſcertain whether it contains nitre; and when it is found ſuſficiently charged vith that ſalt, the whole is lixiviated. The third circumſtance which in the opinion of ſome, is ſuppoſed to favour the production of nitre, is the acceſs oſ air; this is the cauſe of the formation of the nitre found on walls; and for this reaſon it is that nitre-beds require to be frequently turned over, in order that the air may touch them in all points. The neceſiity of the acceſs of air is ſaid to be ſtill. moræ evidently ſnewn by the nitre contained in chalk, as ĩr is never found below a certain depth. When the threæ circumſtances here treated of are united, the production of ſalt-petre is very abundant. Nitre-beds ought always to be conſtructed on theſe principles. The theory of the formation of nitre has not been long known. Glauber, and many other che miſts ſince his time, ſuppoſed nitre to exiſt ready formed in vegetables, from which they imagined it to paſs into animal ſubſtances, and to become diſengaged by putreſaction; but it was ſoon perceived, that vegetables do not contain a ſufficient quantity of nitre to account for what is obtained from nitre beds. M. Thouvenel; whoſe diſſertation on the formation of nitre was honoured with the prize of the academy, has made many experiments to diſcover its origin: he found, that the nitrous acid is formed by the combination of an elaſtic fluid, diſengaged from animal matters in a ſtate of putrefaction, and pure aæair. He has likewiſe diſcovered, that the nitrous acid, once formed; combines with calcareous earth, when any animal matters are made uſe of; and that the remains of vegetables are uſeful to afford the fixed alkali, which is the baſis of common nitre. But M. Thouvenel did not determine the nature of the gas, which is diſengaged from putrefying animal matters. It is to Mr. Cavendiſh that we are indebted. for the prooſ that it is. the ſame gas, which conſtitutes one of the principles of the atmoſphere, under the name of azote, or phlogiſticated air, or atmoſpheric mephitis. His experiment, wherein the nitrous acid was formed by the combination of this gas with vital air, by means of the electric ſpark, has been already mentioned. CurIiC NITRE, Or nitrat of ſoda, conſiſts of the nitrous acid and the fixed mineral alkali. It reſembles common nitre in all its ſtriking qualities; almoſt iĩts only difference is the form of ĩts cryſtals, which is a paralellopiped. The cryſtals adhere ſo ſtrongly, that they are ſcarcely ever found diſtinct and regular. For the deſlagration of cubic nitre, charcoal is moſt proper; when perſormed with ſulphur, Glaubers ſalt is produced. Cubic nitre has not yet been ſound in nature, but is always produced by art. The ſhorteſt method is adding nitrous acid to ſoſſil alkali. Its taſte is cooling, and rather more bitter than that of common nitre. Fire decompoſes it; but it decrepitates, and does not ſo eaſily melt as common nitre; like that ſalt, however, it gives out vital air during its decompoſition. It iĩs ſlightly deliqueſcent when expoſed to air. It is more ſoluble in cold water than the common nitre, two parts of water, at the temperature of ſixty degrees, diſſolving one of the ſalt. It is ſcarcely more ſoluble in boiling water, and therefore cannot be had in regular cryſtals, except by ſlow evaporation. Siliceous earth combines with the baſis of this ſalt, and diſengages the nitrous acid; clay likewiſe ſeparates the acid, and affords a reſidue in the ſorm of fritæ, which is porous and opake when a ſtrong heat has been appliæ?d. Ponderous earth decompoſes this ſalt, and diſengages the mineral alkal. Magneſia and lime do not ſenſibly change it. The vegetable fixed  The mixed materials for making glaſ. alkali has a ſtronger attraction for its acid than the mineral. This fact is very eaſily ſnewn. If a heated ſolution of cubic nitre is divided into two parts, and the cauſtic vegetable fixed allali added to one of them, it will afford priſmatic cryſtals during its cooling; no cryſtals, however, will be obſerved in the other part becauſe cubic nitre does not cryſtallize by mere cooling vithout evaporation. The neutral ſalts hitherto examined produce no effect whatever on cubic nitre; if theſe ſalts are diſſolved together in the ſame ater, they cryſtallize ſeparately, and each in its ordinary manner; the nitre and Glauber's ſalt by cooling; the vitriolated tartar and cubic nitre by evaporation.. All theſe properties ſhew, that cubic nitre differs from common nitre. NITrRous AMMONIAC, or nitrat cf ammoniac, is compoſed of the nitrous acid and volatile alkali. It ĩs more ſoluble and more fuſible than the vitriolic ammoniac. When the heat is increaſed a little above what is neceſſary for its fluidity, it is converted into copious vapours. The degree of heat neceſſary for its fuſion is a little above that of boiling water; and if more heat is ſuddenly employed, it has the ſingular property of undergoing deflagration, though no inflammable ſubſtance ſhould be added to it, and even in a cloſe veſſel. This ſeems to depend on the decompoſition of the volatile alkali. M. Berthollet having expoſed a mmoniacal nitre to the action of heat in a pneumato- chemical and diſtilling aꝑparatus, and having obſerved the phenomena ofthis operation more careſully than had been done before, remarks, that it is not a true detonation which takes place, but a ſudden and inſtantaneous decompoſition, in which part of the volatile alkali is enrirely deſtroyed. The water obtained in the receiver contains a ſmall part of the nitrous acid diſengaged in proportion Io the quantity oſ volatile alkali decompoſed; and the latter gives out phlogiſticated air or azotic gas. The liquid product of this operation being weighed, a greater quantity of water is found than exiſted in the ammoniacaãl nitre; and M. Berthollet concludes that this ſuperabundant water is formed by the union of the inſtammable gas, vhich is one of the principles of the volatile alkali; with the vital air of the nitrous acid. The azotic gas, or other principle of the volatile alkali, which ĩs ſix times more in quantity than the inflammable gas, is diſengaged and collected under the veſſels of the pneumatic apparatus. This ſalt diſſolves readily in water, and in a very large quantity, but it has not ſo ſtrong an attraction for water as to be deliqueſcent. It may be decompoſed by the vitriolic acid, or either of the fixed alkalis. The nitrous ammoniac is contained in the juices of ſome M URI A TIC S ALTS. Sal DigeſtivusCommon Salt. Roct Salt. Natural Hiſtery ef Salt.Salineſi of the OceanUſes of commtn Salt in the 4i 5 Sal dmmoniacNatural Hiſiory of Sal æmmoniuc. H E combinations of the muriatic acid with the H alkalis are, 1ſt, SAL DIGESTIVUS, or muriat of pot-aſ, which has alſo been called the febriſuge ſalt of Sylvius, and is a compoſition of the muriatic acid with the fixed vegetable alkali. Its taſte is penetrating and bitter; its cryſtals cubical, but almoſt always confuſed and irregular. In the fire it decrepitates, that is, its cryſtals ſuddenly break and fly in pieces by the rarefaction of the water which enters into their compoſition. If the heat is then continued, and ſuſciently ſtrong, it melts, and is volatized without decompoſition. It is not much altered by expoſure to the air; it is however ſlightly deliqueſcent. About three parts of cold water are required to hold one part of this ſalt in ſolution, and hot water does not diſſolve a greater quantity. Clay appears to decompoſe this ſalt in part, for marine acid is obtained by diſtilling it with the clays found in the vicinity of Pariss This operation, however, in fact affords only a ſmall quantity of acid, and ſand ſeems to have a ſimilar eſfect. Ponderous earth ſcizes its acid, and ſeparates the alkali, according to Bergman. Magneſia and lime do not at all change it. The vitriolic and nitrous acids diſengage the muriatic acid with efferveſcence. This ſalt is found in a ſtate of nature, but never in conſiderable quantities; it is ſound in ſeavater, and in the water of ſalt ſprings, and it exiſts, though rarely, in places where nitre is found; it ĩs likewiſe met with in the aſhes of vegetables, and in animal fluids. It is not employed in the arts, and its bitter taſte prevents its being uſed for culinary purpoſes. In moſt of its properties, however, it is very ſimilar to common ſalt. 2d. CoMMON or MARINE SALT is compoſed of the muriatic acid and the mineral fixed alkali, and is therefore the muriat of ſoda of the new nomenclature. This ſalt requires a full red heat for ĩts fuſion; ſoon aſter this it begins to evaporate in white fumes. It has a ſtrong attraction for water, ſo as to deliqueſce in a moiſt air. During evaporation, the cryſtals of this ſalt form at the top of the ſolution, contrary to thoſe of other ſalts, which form at the bottom. When the evaporation is carried on quickly, it forms into thin irregular cruſts, and this is the ſtate in which we commonly have it. When the evaporation is ſlow, it aſſumes the cubic form, and the ſmalleſt eryſtals are the moſt regular; but if examined accurately, one of theſr ſides will be found a little hollow. The larger cryſtals have a pyramidal hollow apex, with a broad baſe. This is owing to their ſuperior ſurſaces being dry when ſoating in the water, while their inferior ſurfaces are moiſtened. Hence, as all dry bodies have a repulũon for water, and as their inferſor ſurſaces have a tendency to ſink, they are hollowed into Iittle pits on the ſuperior ſurfeces. This ſalt contains litte water of eryſtalliation, and deerepitates in the fire. If frequently diſolved, evaporated, and dried, its quantity Is more diminiſhed than that of any other ſelt. Ey decompoſition we obtain either its acid or ĩts alkali. The old cheniſts uſed to obtain its acid by heat alone, but this is troubleſome, and requires veſſels capable of enduring great heat. It is moſt readily decompoſed by the vitriolic acid, which has the ſtrongeſt attraction for the alkali. The nitrous acid will alſlo decompoſe it, but is more liable than the vitriolic acid to come over with the muriatic. Some water muſt be put into the retort with the vitriolic æcid, otherwiſe the muriatic acid will come over in fumes ſo copiouſly as to burſt the veſſelss. The quantity of the water ſhould be about half that of the vitriolic acid; one half of which ſhould be put into the receiver to condenſe the fumes of the muriatic acid, and the other half mixed with the vitriolic to prevent ĩts too ſudden action. Glauber's ſalt remains after this operation, and this is the uſual way of preparing it. The way to decompoſe marine ſalt, ſo as to obtain its alkali, is, firſt to expel the muriatic acid by means oſ the nitrous; we thus obtain cubic nitre, which muſt be deſlagrated to obtain the alkali. A better method, however, Is to mix a ſolution of marine ſalt with cauſtic vegetable alkali; by evaporation muriat oſ pot-aſh is obtained, and the remaining water contains the mineral alkali, pure and diſengaged. Common ſalt is the moſt uſeful of ſaline bodies; for though there are ſome which reſiſt putrefaction equally well, there is none which is ſo friendly and agreeable to the human ſtomach. Its agreeable qualities are not indeed confined to man; moſt other animals indicate a great fondneſs for it. The rock ſalt, or ſal gem, though only one form of common ſalt, does not melt ſo eaſily as the common cryſtals. The moſt remarkable mine of this ſalt is at Cracow, in Poland, where there is thought to be ſuſficient to ſupply the whole world many thouſand years. In this Iã ' 38 sSalineſ  the Ocean. ſBook VI. mine there are houſes, chapels, and ſtreets of rock ſalt, which, when illuminated, afford a beautiful proſpect. This ſalt,is alſo obtãined from ſome ſprings. Wten found in the earth it is ſeldom cryſtallized in any regular form; it has various degrees of whiteneſs, and is oſten found coloured; in this latter ſtate it is more particularly called ſal gem, becauſe it oſten has the appearance and tranſparency of gems.. The ocean differs in ſaltneſs in different climates. It is ſalter towards the equator than near the poles. This ſeems to ariſe from the different quantities of water which are evaporated, in proportion to thoſe which fall in rain. One pound of ſea water in the Baltic vields about a quarter of an ounce of ſalt; near Holland half an ounce; and in the Britiſh ſeas about two ounces. Boyle has alſo obſerved, that in places of great depth the water is ſalteſt at the bottom. n the voyage made towards the north pole in 1773, it was found, that the ſea-water at the Nore contained not quite one thirty- ſixth of ſalt; at the back of Yarmouth ſands, not quite one thirty- ſecond; off Flamborough Head, rather more than one twenty-ninth; oſf Scotland, rather leſs than one twenty-ninth; latitude 749, at ſea, one twenty- ninth; latitude 789, rather leſs than, one twenty-eighth; latitude 80°, near the ice, not quite one thirtieth; latitude 803, under the ice, not quite; one tventy-eighth; latitude 68°, 46, rather more than one twenty- eighth; latitude 65, at ſea, rather leſs than one twenty- eighth. Dr. Hales got only one twenty- ſeventh from water taken up in the Mediterranean, and one twenty-ninth from water taken up at the Nore. Dr. Rutty ſays, he procurred one twenty- fifth from water taken up in latitude 65; one twenty-eighth from water taken up near Dublin; and one thirtieth from ater taken up at Dungarvan; aud Dr. Lucas, that he obtained one twenty- fifth from water taken up near Harwich. From other obſervations alſo it has appeared, that water from near Teneriff contained about one thirty- ſecond of ſalt, and thæt ſome from Saint Jago contained fully one- fourth. Further experiments are needed to aſcertain the ſaltneſs of the ſea in different Iatitudes with preciſion. The ſalt commonly uſed for culina? purpoſes, and nown by the nume of bay-ſalt, is obtoined from the vater of the ſea by evaporation. This evaporation is in ſome places performed by the heat of the ſun, the water being let into ſhallow trenches, in order to expoſe as large a ſurface as poſſiblee. This method is practiſed in the ſouthern provinces of France, and on a very large ſcale near Aveiro in Portugal. In the northern provinces, where the heat of the ſun is not ſufficiently great, artificial fires are employed. In ſome ſalt-works theſe two methods are united; and in England, and countries where ſalt rock is plentiful, that ſubſtance is diſiolved in ſalt water, and then evaporated ?. In very cold countries another method is employed x A great quantity of rock ſalt ĩs uſed at Northwich, in order to ſtrengthen their brine ſprings, and a much greater quantity ĩs ſent coatwiſe to Liverpool, and other places, where it is uſed either for ſtrengthening brine ſprings or ſea- water; much of this rock ſalt was formerly exported to Hollanĩ, and it is ſtill ſent to Ireland for the ſame purpoſe. Rock ſalt, and the white ſalt which is at Northwich, chieſiy made from rock ſalt, is exported free from the ſalt duty; and I was informed, that the quantity, which is anually exported from Northwich, is ſo great, that if it paid the duty, it would bring in to government, a ſam not much ſtort of four hundred thouſands pounds a year. ⸗ According to the beſt accounts I have been able to procure, the greſs duty on ſalt made in South Britain, amounts annually to ſeven hundred thouſarò pounds (a)- The duty on ſalt made at Northwich is about ſeventy (a) Camp. Sur. of Erit. Vol. II. p. 26. employed to ſeperate the ſalt from ſea-water. The vater is expoſcd in trenches on the ſea-ſhore, where it forms ſeventy thouſand pounds a year, or a tenth part of the whole duty (b).  The Northwich rock ſalt ĩs never uſed at our tables in ĩts crude ſtate; and ĩts application to the pickling or curing of fleſh or ſi©-, or preſerving any proviſions, without ĩts being previouſly refined into white ſalt, that is, without its being diſſclved in nater, and boiled down into what iĩs called white ſalt, is prohibited under a a penalty of 405. for every pound of rock ſalt ſo applied. The pure tranſparent maſſes, however, of rock ſalt, might, probably, be uſed by us with our food, without any ſort of danger or inconvenience; at leaſt, we know that rock ſalt is ſo uſed, without being refined, both in Poland and in Spæin. In the lat of theſe countries, at Cordova in the province of Catalonia, there is a ſolid mountain of rock ſalt, between four and ſive liundred feet in height, and a league in circuit; ĩts depth below the ſurface of the earth is not known (c). This prodigious mountain of ſalt, which has no mixture of other matter with it, is eſteemed ſo ſingular an appearance, that it is thought to militate very much againſt the opinion of thoſe, who would derive the origin of all the beds of rock ſalt, which are found under the ſurface of the earth, from the evaporation of ſalt water, leſt in ſubterraneous caverns, either at the deluge, or upon ſome more local commotions of the globe.  The quantity of rock ſalt hich may be diſſolved in a definite quantity, ſuppoſe a pint or 16 avoirdupoiſæ ounces of water, ĩs cifrerertly eſtimated by different authors. Boerhaave is of opinion that 16 ounces of water will not diſſolve quite 5 ounces of rock ſalt (à); Spielmann thinks that they will diſſolve 6 ounces (); Newmann ) Since I received this inſormation, an additional duty of 104. a buſhel has been laid, in 1780, on ſalt. The whole duty rov amounts to 45. 2à. a buſhel, the buſhel weighing 56 Ib. The rakers of ſalt can afford, in moſt places, to ſell their ſalt, excluſive cf duty, from 84. to 104. a buſel. () Hiſt. Nat. de  Eſpag. p. 406.Sce an account of ſimilar mountains of rock ſalt, in Shaw's Travels, ꝑ. 229, and in Pliny: Hiſ. Nat. l. xxxi. c. 7. (à) Chem. vol. I. p. 496. forms ſo thin a ſtratum, that the cold of the atmoſphere acts powerſully in congealing it. As the frozen part conſiſts Newmann agrees with Spielmann ); Eller ſays, that 7 ounces of ſfoſile ſalt may be diſiolved in 16 ounces of water ); Iaſtly, Hoffmann aſſures us, that 16 ounces of water vill rot diſluive above 6 ounces of common ſalt (b). I have tried this muttær with diſtilled and with common water, and in various degrees of heat, and cannot but be of opinion, that Hofſmanns exDeriment approaches neareſt to the truth; I never could diſſolve quite 6 ounces of roch ali in 16 ounces of water. It is not wholly improbable, that diferent ſorts of rock ſalt may difſer ſome what with reſpect to their ſolubility in water. s If it be admitted, that 16 ounces of water can diſſolve õ ounces of ſalt and no more, then we may be certain, that no brine ſpring, in any part of the world, can yield 6 ources of ſalt from a pint of the brine. For brine ſprings are, ordinarily, nothing but wãter in which foſile ſalt has been diſſolved; but a pint cf the ſtrongeſt brire cannot contain ſo much ſalt as is contained in a pint of water, which has been ſaturated with õ ounces of ſalt; for a pint of water, in which 6 ounces of ſalt have been diſſolved, ĩs increaſed a little in bulk, it will do more than fill a pint meaſure, and the ſalt leſt in the ſurplus will ſiew, how much the ſalt, contained in a pint of the ſtrongeſt brine, falls ſort of 6 ounces. Or, we may conſider the matter in the following manner, which will, perhaps, be more intelligible; 16 ounces of water, impregnated with & ounces of ſalt, conſtitute a ſaturated brine, veighing 22 ounces; if therefore we would know how much ſalt is contained in 16 ounces of ſuch brine, by the rule of proportion we may argue, that if 22 ounces of brine contain 6 ounces of ſalt, 16 ounces of brine will contain 47% ources of ſalt. Hence we maey inſer, that the ſtrongeſt brine ſprings vill not yield much above one quarter of their weight of ſalt ).  Dr. ) Newmann's Chem. by Levis, D. 256. () Obſ. Ph 5. Chem. L. iĩi. Ob. xvi. (b) Ber. Mem. 1750. ) Several pits at Northwith, and at Barton in Lancaſhire, contain no leſs than ſix ounces oſ ſalt upon ſixteen of brine, which is as large a proportion of ſalt as water will diſſolve. Nem, Chem. p. 212, Lewis's noteThe author here is fallen, probably, onſiſts of mere water, the fluid which remains is conſequently more concentrated. The operation ĩs then completed by means of artificial heat. Pure Dr. Leigh, who firt ſnaved the manner of refining rock ſalt, informs us, that ſome of the ſtrongeſt ſprings at Northwich, gave ſeven or eight ounces of ſalt from a quart of brine; but a quart of brine veighs conſiderably more than 32 ounces, the weight of a quart of water: ſo that the Northwich ſprings, from this account, do not yield a quarter of their weight. At Middlewich there is ſaid to be one ſalt ſpring, which is ſtronger than the reſt, this ſpring vields a Full fourth part of ſalt æ), and hence it is, probably, fully ſaturated. We have an account in Kircher's works, of ſome famous brine ſprings in Burguniy, from which we learn, that one hundred pounds weight of the ſtrongeſt brine, gave twenty- five pounds, or juſt one four of its weight of white ſalt ).  There are a great many brine ſprings in Cheſhire, Worceſterſiire, Staord mire, Hampſhire, and in other parts of Great Britæin, ſome of which are ſuſiciently rich in ſalt to be wrought with proſit, others not. From what has been be fore advanced, the reader ill readily comprehend that ſixteen tons of the ſtrongeſt brine conſit oſ twelve tons of water, and of four tons of ſalt; and that, in order to obtalh theſe four tons of ſalt, the twelve tons of vater nuſt be, by ſome means or other, evaporated, ſo as to lcave the ſalt in a concrete ſorm. Suppoſe there ſiould be a brire, which in ſixtcen ons ſiould contain fiſtcen tons of vater, and only cne tor of ſaſt; yet it may chance, that ſoch a weak brine may be vwrought with more proũt than the ſtrongeũ; for the profit ariſing ſfrom the hoiling of brine into ſalt, depends as much upon the price of the fuel tſed in boiling it, as upon the quantity of ſalt which it yields. Thus the ſea-water, hich ſurrounds the coaſs of Great Britain, ĩs ſaid to hold ſeldom more than one thirtieth, or leſs than one fiſiieth part of common ſalt; but fuel is ſo cheap at Newcaſtle, that they can evaporate thirty or forty tons of water, / in  err—miupn into a little miſtake, by confounding a pound of water with a pound of brine; for if a pound or 16 ounces of water will only ciſſulve 6 ounces of ſalt, a pound of the brine, thus ſormed, i ũl crly hold 44 ource; of ſalt. (;) Philoſ. Tranſ. No 53. Pure clay has very little action on marine ſalt. Ponderous earth decompoſes it, but lime and magneſia produce no eſfect. Common ſalt is uſed to vitrify the ſurface of ſome kinds of pottery. This is done by throwing a certain quantity of it into the furnace, wher it is volatilized, and applies itſelf to the ſurface of the pottery. This is the kind of glazing uſed in the making of white Engliſh potterv. Common ſalt is alſo uſed in making glaſs, to render the glaſs whiter and clearer. It is alſo employed as a flux to facilitate the precipitation of metals from the ſcoriæ, and to prevent their calcination from the contact of the atmoſphere. 3d. Common Sa. AMMONTIAC is the muriat of ammoniac of the French chemiſts, and conſiſts oſ the muriatic acid united to the volatile alkali. This ſalt is converted into vapour before it melts, but may bo brought into fuſion by being combined with other ſubſtances, or even uncombined, if properly confined. When thrown into the fire, it increaſes the flame, and tinges it with a blue colour, eſpecially the flame of charcoa. When the air is very moiſt, this ſalt deliqueſces. It is very remarkable for producing a great degree of cold when mixed with water. in order to obtain one ton of ſalt, and yet gain as much clear proſit as thoſe do, who, in countĩes leſs favourably ſituated for fuel, boil down the ſlrongeſt brine.  The advantage reſulting f om ſtrengthening weak brine or ſea water, by means of rock ſalt, is very obvious. Suppoſe that the ſea water at Liverpool, where Inrge quantities of rock ſalt are refined, would yield one ton of ſalt ſfrom forty-eight tons of water, then muſt a quantity of fuel ſuſiicient to evaporare fortyſeven tons of water be uſed in order to obtain one ton of ũalt. But if as much rock ſalt be put into the forty-eignt tons of ſæa vater, as can be diſſolved in it, then will the ſea water reſemble a brine fully ſaturated, each ſixteen tons of which will give four tons of ſalt, and the whole quantity yvielded by the evaporation of fort 7 ſaven tors of water, will be twelve tons of ſalt. If we wiſh tò obtain the acid of ſal ammoniac, we may expel it by means of the vitriolic acid, but the fumes cannot be condenſed without great diſficulty. For obtaining its alkali, the chemiſts ę nerally employ the vegetable, as it is the cheapeſt. The quantity of vegetable alkali uſed is generally equal, but perhaps ought a little to exceed, that of the ſal ammoniac; the vater is in general equal in weight to the alkali, and a volatile alkali ſuſficiently ſtrong is obtained The product is diſferent, acording to the mildneſs or cauſticity of the fixed alkali. When a mild fixed alkali ĩs uſed, ſo much volatile alkali riſes, that Du Hamel and others thought purt of the fixed alkali was volatilized, nd roſe along with it. This however is found to be owing to the carbonic acid, which made part of the weight of the fixed alkali, being transſerred to the volatile alkali. The ſul ammoniac of commerce is in the form of cakes. It is prepared at Cairo from the ſoot of camels dung, which is burned there inſtead of wood. This ſoot is put into round bottles a foot and a half in diameter, terminated by a neck two inches high; each bottle contains about forty pounds of this ſoot, and aſfords nearly ſix pounds of the ſalt. Theſe veſſels are expoſed to the heat of a furnace which acts on their bottom, while the upper part, being cooler, ſuffers the ſalt to be condenſed there. When the operation, which occupies three days, is finiſhed, the bottles are broken and the ſalt talen out; it receives the form of the upper pert of the ſubliming veſſel, and the cakes are therefore convex and unequal, with a protuberance on one ſide from the neck oſ the ſubliming veſſel. Pomet has deſcribed a kind of ſal ammoniac in loaves, ſimilar to thoſe of ſugar with the point cut off, and which are imported into France by the way oſ Holland. This kind is made in the Eaſt Indies.  Sal ammoniac is, however, now made in large quentities in Britain. The volatile alkali is obtained in an impure liquid ſtate from ſoot, or bones, or any other ſubſtance which aſfords it; to this the vitriolie acid is added, and the vitriolic arnmoniac thus produced is decompoſed by common ſalt, by a double aſinity, or elective attraction; the vitriolic acid combining with the mineral alkali, and the marine acid vith the volatile alkali. The liquor therefore contains Glaubers ſalt and ſal ammoniac, which are ſeparated by cryſtallization; and the ſal ammoniac is ſublimed into cakes ſor ſalee. Lord Dundonald extracts volatile alkali from pit-coal; but whether it can be afforded cheaper for the general purpoſes of. commerce, than that of the above proceſs, is not, I believe, yet aſcertained.*- The taſte of ſal ammoniac is penetrating, acrid, and urinous. The form of ĩts cryſtals is a hexahedral pyramid. Cubical cryſtals are ſometimes, though rarely, formed in the middle of the concave and hollow parts of the Ioaves which are produced by ſublimation. This ſalt poſſeſſes a ſingular property, namely a kind of ductility, ſo that it rebounds under the hammer, and may be bended; a circumſtance which renders it diſficult to pulveriſe it. Sal ammoniac is not decompoſed by clay, and by magneſia very imperfectly. Lime, and likewiſe ponderous earth, ſeparate the volatile alkali, even without the aſũiſtance of heat. If ſal ammoniac is triturated with quick-lime, the ſtirong ſmell of alkaline gas is immediately perceived. C 1n a r. VIII. COMBINATIONS F THE OTHER MINERAL ACIDS. Sparry TartarSparry Soda. EBorax; its Preperties; its Use in the Arts. Combinations of neutral Salis wiih Metals. HE combinations of the other mineral acids vith the alkalies, have in general been very imperfectly examined, and I ſhall therefore be very brieſ in treating of them. The sPARRY TARTAR, or fluat of pot-aſh of the French chemiſts, is compoſed of the acid of ſpar united to the vegetable alkali. It is always in a gelatinous form, and has ſo ſtrong an attraction for water, that it annot be cryſtallizedl. According to Scheele, it is acrid, cauſtic, and deliqueſcent, when dried and melted; he compares it in this ſtate to the liquor of ſints. It appears, that the fire diſengages the ſparry acid, and that the ſiliceous earth taken up by the acid melts into a ſoluble earth by means of the fixed alkali. This ſalt has not been applied to any uſe. Of the ſparry ſoda ſtill Ieſs is known; and the ſame may be affirmed of the ſparry ammoniac. The combinations of the acid of borax have not attracted much more attention, except the ſubſtance from which this acid derives its name. Borax, the bora. of ſoda of M. Lavoiſier, is compoſed of a peculiar acid united to the mineral alkali. The form in which it ĩs expoſed to ſale is that of cryſtals, very tranſparent, and containing a large prop sortion of water. When a ſmall quantity of borax is heated ſo as to diſſiolve in its own water, it boils in a white foam; and when the water is diſſipated, the ſalt is found to have loſt much oſ its welght. By increaſe of heat, it undergoes a proper ſuſion, and aſſumes the appearance of glaſs; but is diſtinguiſhed from that ſubſtauce, by diſſolving and cryſtallizing again. Borax muy be decompoſed by means of the muriatic acid. It appears ſurprizing, but the fact is certain, that a quantity of acid of borax, though ſo weak an acid in its more obvious properties, will diſſlodge, when heat is applied, both the nitrous and muriatic acids, and unite itſelf to their alkali. The reaſon ſeems to be, that the attraction of different ſubſtances for the ſame body is different in different degrees of heatt. This again is to be attributed to a double elective attraction, in conſequence of the addition of the matter of heat. The coheſion of the nitrous and muriatic acids to their baſes is ſo much weakened by their affinity with heat, or in other words, their tendency to aſſume the gaſſecus ſorm, that the attraction of the boracic acid, which Is more fixed, becomes ſuperior, and diſplaces them. Borax, as imported from the Eaſt Indies, is very impure. When purified, it has a very regular form. Its cryſtals are ſix ſided priſms, two of the ſides being commonly larger than the others, terminated by trihedral Dyramids. Its cryſtallization is, however ſubject to conſiderable varieties. It is ſtyptic, and acts ſtrongly on the tongue, and like alkalies it converts the ſyrup of violets to a green Dos xpoſed to the air, loſes a ſmall part of its water of cryſtallization, and ſlightly effloreſces. It is onbt in twelve parts of cold and ſix of hot vater. Its eryſtals may thereſore be obtained by cooling; but the fineſt and moſt regular are formed by ſuffering the cold ſaturated ſolution to evaporate ſpontaneovſy in the ordinary temperature of the atmoſphere. Borax is exceedingly uſeful in many manufactures. It is employed as an excellent flux in the art of glaſmaking, as well as in aſſays. It is advantageouſly employed in ſoldering, which it aſſiſts by promoting the fuſion of the ſolder, by ſoftening the ſurfaces of the metals, and by defending them from the action of the air. Very little is known of the combinations of the acid of borax with the vegetable and volatile alkalies. The phoſphoric acid, and the acid of amber, are capable of combination with the alkalies; but the reſults of theſe combinations are ſo little known, that I ſhall paſs them over in ſilence, and haſten to the conſideration of the earthy and ſtony ſubſtances. Some ſaline, earthy, and metallic ſubſtances, have ſuch a relation to each other, that they are ſeparated vith great diſficulty, and adhere aſter repeated ſolutions and cryſtallizations. This circumſtance has given riſe to another diviſion of ſalts, which are denominated triple. as they do not, however, appear of ſufficient conſequence to be treated of under a ſeparate ſection, J ſhall merely enumerate them at the concluſion of the preſent. The moſt remarkable examples oſ this kind are, mineral alkali with calcareous earth; common ſalt with magneſia; vitriolated magne ſia with iron; alum vith iron; vitriolated copper with iron; vitriolated copper with iron and zinc; vitriolated iron with copper; vitriolated iron with Zinc; vitriolated iron with . C H A P. IX. EARTHS IN GENE RAL. Diferent Kinds of EorthVew Earths ãdiſcovered —Deſuition if Earths.F xceptionsOther general Properties of EarihsCalcarecus EaritbhXMaogneſiao BarytesClayFlint. T is now generally agreed among chemiſts and mineralogiſts, that all the earthy and ſtony ſubſtances which compoſe the ſolid parts of this globe, are chieſly reſolvable into five ſimple and origiral kinds of earth; namely, lime or calcareous earth, magneſia, barytes or ponderous earth, argill or clay, and ſilica or ſflint; to theſe late diſcoveries have added three other earths, the ſtronthian, the jargonic, and the adaemantine; but theſe are found in very ſmall quantities, and doubts are yet entertained whether they are any thing more than varieties or compounds of the five principal earths. Theſe ſubſtances agree in the following properties, which may be conſidered as the characteriſtics of all earthy ſubſtances. They are nearly inſoluble in water, are uninſlammable, have not the metalli ſplendour, and their ſpecific gravity, compared with that of water, is not more than five to one. This definition, however, like that of ſalts, is not ſo preciſe as to be beyond the reach of criticiſm; becauſe there are ſome earths perfectly ſoluble in water, though but in ſrmall proportions, and there are many in the internal parts of the earth which aford the ſtrongeſt evidence that they have been in æ ſtate of ſlution. But the definition, though not ſtrictly aceurate, ĩs proper in a general ſenſe. There is great difference oſ ſolubility between earths and ſalts, for a ſew grains of earth are ſuſſicient to ſaturate* a large quantity of water. There are two other circumſtances not included in the definition, which make part oſ the idea of an earthy ſubſtance; iſt, a great degree of fixedneſs; adly, a diſpoſition to form a glaſy concretion vhen melted with certain other ſubſtances. Lime, properly ſo called, is obtained by expelling the carbonic acid from calcareous ſubſtances by means of heat. Calcareous eorth is in æ tolerably pure ſtate in common quick-lime; but if ĩt is required perſectly free from foreign admixture, it may be obtained by the following proceſs: If pounded chalk is ſeverãl times boĩled in diſtilled water, the remaiuder vwill conſiſt almoſt entirely of calcareous earth, combined with the carbonic acid. If diſtilled vinegar is added to the powder thus obtained, it will form a ſaline combinaãtion with the lime only, to the excluſion of all extraneous matter. To a ſolution of this, decanted from the impurities, mild volatile alkali being added, the alkali will unite with the vinegar, while the calcareous earth ſeizes the carbonic acid of the alkali, and ſalls to the bottom in the ſtate of a perfectly pure chalk. The carbonic acid may be driven off by heat, and calcareous earth is thus obtained in ĩts moſt ſimple ſtate. The relative weight of quick-lime to that of ſlaked lime is as 1,c00 to I,287. Every pound can imbibe ſour ounces four drams and fiſty- three grains of ater. Calcareous earth is ſoluble in the nitrous and muriatic acids, and forms deliqueſcent ſalts. It is precipitated ſrom its ſolutions by means of vitriolic acid, with which it forms a nearly inſoluble compound, called ſelenite, (or plaiſter of Paris.) Pure calcareous * See note *, D. I. eerth, or lime, is ſoluble in a ſmall proportion in water, with which it contracts great heat. It is infuſible vithcut acdition. It attracts the carbonic acid from the fixed alkaælies, and by ĩtſelſ beconiing mild renders them cauſtic. Its ſpecific gravity is 2,723. Maogneſia does not burn into a cauſtic ſubſtance like quick- lime, though iĩt is deprived of its carbonic acid by the application of heat. It ĩs ſoluble in ſeveral acids, and forms with the vitriolic the ſal catharticus amarus, or Epſom ſalt. When mixed with water, it ſhews a very ſmall degree of heat, but without any efferveſcence. Tt requires 7,692 times ĩts weight of water for its ſolution. It is not precipitated irom other acids by the vitriolic, as calcarecus earth is. It⸗ ſpecific gravity is 2,155. Barytes is by far the moſt ponderous of the earths, ſrom which circumſtance it derives its name. Vith vitriolic acid it forms the ponderous ſpar, which is inſoluble in water; and its combinations with the nitrous and muriatic acids are alſo not very ſoluble, but with the acetous acid (or vinegar) it becomes deliqueſcent. Combined with carbonic acid, it is ſoluble in 1550 times ĩts weight of water, when pure in 900 times. The ſpecimens of barytes naturally combined with carbonic acid are rare; it is more commonly found united with the vitriolic acid. From this the earth may be ſeparated by the following proceſs: Pound the ponderous ſpar, and mix it with twice its weight of fixed alkali; expoſe this mixture to a ſtrong red heat for about two hours. The acid quits the earth to unite with the alkali, forming a neutral ſalt, which may be wahed away. The earth rem7ins combined vith carbonic acid, which may be diſpelie by heat. The ſpecific gravity of this earth, when pure, is 3,773Vou. Argill, or clay, is ſoluble in the vitriolic, nitrous, and muriatic acids, and forms alum vith the firſt of theſe. If concrete volatile alkali*, or any other of the alkalis, is added to a ſolution of pure alum, the alkali and acid unite, while the clay falls to the bottom, united with only a ſmall quantity of fixed air. The ſluid muſt be abſtracted by decantation, and the precipitate waſhed with diſtilled water, and dried. Pure clay does not become cauſtic by burning, but is contracted in ſize, and becomes very hard. The ſpecific gravity of this earth is only I,665. The principal natural ſpecimens of argillaceous earth are boles, clays, marles, ſlates, and mica. In none of theſe, however, except the flag-ſtone, does the argill amount to half the weight of the whole ſubſtance. Silica abounds very much in common clays. Baked clays conſtitute all the varieties of bricks, pottery, and porcelain. If baked in a ſtrong heat, they give fire with ſteel. Silica, or Aint, is ſoluble in only one of the acids, the fluoric, yet during its precipitation, it is capable of combining with moſt of the mineral acids. In its indurated ſtate, it is always ſuſficiently hard to ſcratch and ſtrike fire with ſteel. After being burnt, it does not fall to powder as the calcareous earth does. It produces no eſferveſcence with acids. It may be diſſolved by the fixed alkalies, both in the dry and wet way. When alkali and flint are expoſed to the heat of a glaſs-houſe furnace, if the alkali is only half the weight of the ſilica, it produces a diaphanous and hard glaſs, but when the alkali is in double or triple the proportion, the glaſs deliqueſces of itſelf, by attracting the humidity of the atmoſphere, and forms vhat is s The volatile ſalts in a ſolid ſate. called liquor of Rints. This earth is perfectly diſſolved in that wonderful boiling water-ſpout, above ſixty feet high, at Gæyſer in Icelard, wherè by cooling it forms a hard ſiliceous maſs. Pure ſiliceous earth is obtained by fuſing* clear quartz with four times its weight of fixed alkali, diſſolving the whole in diſtilled water, and precipitating the earth by æn acid. Its ſpecific gravity is 2,650. M. Bergman has formed perfect ſiliceous cryſtals by diſſolving ſiliceous earth in the ſparry acid, and ſuffering it to cryſtallize ſlowly. It is probable that nature forms them in a long courſe of time from a ſclution or diffuſion of this earth in water. Of the newly diſcovered earths I ſhall treat in a ſeparate chapter, though it may be premiſed, that they are rather of importance in order to complete the nomenclature of the mineral kingdom, than ſrom their quantity or their properties. Though the ſimple earths are all infuſible alone, yet they may readily be fuſed by mixture with each other. The calcareous earth is found to act as a menſtruum in diſſolving the other earths by heat; and when it has once acted on any earth, a compound menſtruum is formed, which acts ſtill more efficaciouſly in diſſolving other earths:. Hence it is, that any three of the ſimple earths may be fuſed into glaſs, provided calcareous earth is one- of the number. Thus far it appeared neceſſary to premiſe concerning the general properties of the ſimple earths in their ſeparate ſtate; but as their combinations are various, and their uſes in this laſt ſtate very important, it will be proper to treat of each on a more ample ſcale than the limits of a ſingle chapter would admit. * Melting by heat. C  A P. X. CALCAREOUS EARTIHS. Chalt, Limeſtone.  Marble.  Marle.  Calcareous SparlIcelanà CryſtalsnPetrifuctionsParts of Animals found in Marle, &c. GytſonisGreat Varicties. AlabaſierFibrous StoneMineral GlaſiSeleniteG;pſeous SparpPlaiſter of Paris; hoav præpared.Fuſible or Derlybire Spar Spars, how formed.ZBeautivful Aptearances in diſerent Caverus.Metallic Combinaciions with calcareons Earih. ALCAREOUS earth is ſometimes found in the form of powder, but more frequently in that of a concrete ſubſtance called chalk, which differs with reſpect to the fineneſs of its particles and firmneſs of texture. I. Chalk conſiſts of calcareous earth or lime, united with. carbonic acid, and an union of the ſame principles allo conſtitutes limeſtone and marble. Theſe ſubſtances only differ from common chalk in their degree of purity, or in the manner of their aggregation, 2dmitting of more or leſs polilh. The diſferent coJoured veins in marble are produced by the admixture of other ſubſtances, (moſt commonly iron) unequally ibued through the maſs. 2. Strata oſ marle alſo contain calcarequs earth, more or leſs blended with a conſiderable proportion of clay and ſend. 5 Calcareous earth is oſten found projecting into the intg:ſtices and crevices of rocks in a cryſtallized ſtate, and is then. called calcareous ſpar. It is more cr leſs tranſparent, and ſiivers into flat ſragments of a tals. They engaged the attention oſ Sir Iſaac Newton, by their remarkable quality of refracting the rays of light without ſeparating them into colours, ſo a5 to make a line drawvn on pæper appear double, when viewed through them. The Englih lead-mines are full of ſpars; their ſhæpe is in general a firm column, terminated at each end with a pyramid. Of theſe calcareous ſpars there are many varieties. 4. Calcareous earth appears in the form of animal and vegetable ſubſtances, petrified into ſtone by being expoſed to petriſying vaters. Theſe fill up the pores of the ſubſtance with calcareous earth, and incruſt them. Hence we may conclude, that this earth is ſoluble in water, and is depoſited in certain circumſtances. The quantity of earth, however, contained in the water is very ſmall, and therefore the petrifacſaections are formed ſlowly. Thoſe organic bodies, which reſiſt putrefaction moſt, are frequently found petrified, ſuch as bones, ſhells, and the harder kinds of wood; on the contrary, the ſoft parts of animals, which are very ſubject to putriſy, are ſcarcely ever found petrifiedl Mr. Kirwan remarks, that petrifuctions are moſt commonly found in ſtrata of murle, chalk, lime-ſtore, or clay; ſeldom in ſand-ſtone, ſtill more rarely in gvpſum, but never in gneiſs, granite, baſaltes or oeri; they ſometimes occur among pyrites ænd ores of iron, copper, and ſilver, and almoſt always conſiſt of the ſpecies of earth, ſtone, or other mineral, which immeciately ſurrounds them. Thoſe of ſhells are generally found neareſt the ſurſace oſ the earth, thoſe of ſiſh deeper, and thoſe of wood deepeſt. A very remarEable circumſtance iĩs, that petrifactions are found in ciimates where their originals could not have exifted. From the gradual and inſnſible concretion of this kind of matter from dropping waters, are formed the large pendulous columns hanging like jcicles from the rooſs and ſides of caves. The moſt remarkable are in the Peak of Derbyſhire. Sometimes they are found in the arches of old bridges, and ariſe from the water oozing through and carrying perticles of lime with it. This earth ſo concreted is called ſtalactites, ſtone- icicles, or drop-ſtone. 5. The ſhells of all cruſtaceous animals, from the coarſeſt to the pearl which Ilines the ſhell of the oyſter, are all made up of this calcareous earth with a ſmall quantity of animal gluten. Egg-ſhells are of the ſame nature, and thoſe marine bodies which, from their hardneſs and vegetable appearance, are called ſtony plants, ſuch as are all the ſpecies of coral, &c. Marles, which have been already mentioned as containing calcareous earth, are generally divided into three kinds. Firſt, ſhell marle; ſecond, clay-marle; third, ſtone-marle. The firſt is found in beds of conſiderable extent, and conſiſts of the remains of ſea and land ſhells; that which contains the ſea ſhells is commonly found in the greateſt quantity. Of this kind is that of Paris, mentioned by M. Reaumur, which is about ten feet deep, and of great extent, conſiſting of oyſter and other ſea ſhells; nd ſorme very large Deds maey be found in the neighbourhood of Woolwich. The relics of land ſhells are thoſe of ſnails; they have probably been carried by the current of ſome water, and depoſited ..t one place, and the water being drained off; the ſhells remained behind. Beds of freſh-water ſhells are alſo found. Clay-marle is à calcareous matter, which when expoſed to the air crumbleęs to duſt; it is to be diſtinguiſhed from common clay, by eſferveſcing with acids, from the calcaręous earth ir contains. Stone- marle differs from clay- marle only in being much harder; but it differs ſrom ordinary ſtone by breaking to pieces when expoſed to the air. It has been ſuppoſed by ſome reſpectable writers, that all theſe ſpecies of calcareous earth derive their origin from ſhellss. Some marbles are evidently formed of ſhells, and thoſe of Derbyſhire exhibit this appearance in a remarkable manner. Coral is univerſally allowed to be the work of ſmall animals of the polypus kind. The ſtrata of limeſtone being alſo found ſo frequently united with ſhells and other marine ſubſtances, has induced the philoſophers to whom I allude to believe, that the ſtone itſelf is altogether compoſed of ſhells, which at firſt mouldered into paſte, and were aſterwards preſſed and concreted together. In one of the quarries of Italy, the bones of ſmall fiſhes are found; and ſome rocks in the midland counties of England are almoſt wholly compoſed oſ the kind of ſhells called entrochi. The animals which produce the coral are here ſeldom to be found; but in other parts, as in Jamaica, the bottom oſ the ſea is entirely covered over with coral, and harbours are ſometines ſtopped up with it. Sir Hans Sleane mentions a Spaniſh plate- ſnip, which was wreckeq, and remained at the bottom of the ſea twenty-five years, being then fiſned for, the treaſure, as well as the timber, &c. were covered with coraline concrerions. Hence, this conſtant growth at the bottom of the ſea may in time producæe beds and ſtrata of this ind of earth, whicl, according to circumſtances, may be converted nio marle, limeſtone, marble, &c. Calcareous earths, united with carbonic acid, may be known under all forms, by eſferveſcence with the mineral acids. 6. If vitriolic acid is poured on chalk, the carbonic acid is expelled, while the æitriolic urites with the calcareous earth, and conſtitutes a ſubſtance which has very little ſolubility. This is vPSUM, ſelenite, or plaiſter of Paris, which exiſts in conſiderable quantities in nature. Gypſums are found in ſolid maſes, very ſoſt, and eaſily ſcraped with a knife. They are diſtinguiſhed from the combinations of calcareous earth with carbonic acid, by not eſferveſcing with acids; and from other earthy bodies, by being by heat changed into a white powcer, which when mixed with a Ingæ proportion of water, ſuddenly concretes into a ſtony maſs. They are moſt commonly found in the ſtrata of clay, ſometimes in thoſe of ſand, under the appearanc? of a whitiſh coloured maſs, but the ſmall pieces are tranſparent, and ſometimes have a red tinge. They are often compoſed of ſmall ſhining particles, like the grains of ſugar, and when under this appearance they are particularly called gypſum. When hard, ſo as to admit of being cut into toys and figures they arc called alabaſter. The ſecond ſorò under which they are found, is that of a fibrous ſtructure of oblique eryſtuls, which are parallel to e emſelves, but which croſi the maſs from the upper to the under ſurface. In this ſtate they are called ſibrariœ or fibrous ſtone by Dr. Hill. Theſe diſer much in ſize and regulerity of concretion. The third ſpecies is compoſed of clear tranſparent plates, Iile glaſs, in cloſe contact with each other, but which may be ſeparãted. They ſpht with a kniſe into fine plates, very flexible, though they cannot be bent without producing ſiaws. They are called glacies marina, and ſometimes Muſcovy glaſę, but impropertv, as at is a diſſerent ſubſtance. The fourth ſpecies is in the form oſ ſeparate oblong eryſtas, vhich are called ſelenites; ſome are long and ſeous ſpar is of a platey texture. Gypſeous ſpar varies in compactneſ and tanſouency, is ſometimes white, ſomerimes reddiſh, and is mixed with a greater or leſs quantity of other matter: ſometimes we meet with it in cryſtals. The ores oſ metals are often found in this ſpar. Sixthly, gypſum is oftien met with in waters of ſprings in a diſſolved ſtate; for we find by experiment, that i it is ſoluble in water, though but in ſmall quantity. When the waeter is evaporated, i it is depoſited in cryſtals very ſmall, and which appear like a white powder; but by the microſcope are fourd to be oblong regular concretions. Margraſſ ſirſt ſiewed that all theſe ſpecies were compoſed of calcareous earth and vitriolic acid. He took a quantity of gypſeous earth in a ſubtile powder, and boiled it for ſome time in a ſolution of fixed vegetable alkali; and upon examination, he found the calcareous earth at the bottom in an uncombined ſtate, and in the ſolution a vitriolated tartar. He alſo compoſed an artificial gypſum of calcareous earth and the vitriolic acid, w hich had all the properties of a natural gypſum. From knowing the compoſition of theſe ſubſtances, ve may ſuſiciently underſtand their properties, particularly that of being converted by a moderate heat into plaiſter of Paris. If the purer kinds are reduced to fine powder, and put into an iron veſſ], by the time the veſl is heated the powder grows / and is thrown into motion like a boiling fluid. here are alſo a vai lety of other carthy powders, which hen moiſt give the ſame appearance; for the vapour riſing uD, m nakes its way through the powder, keeps it aoo at, and agitates ĩt Iike a lic qud in : a bolling ſtate. This appearance continucs till moũ of the water is evaporated. Aſer this the powder becomes heavy, and lies at the bottom of the veſſel as before heating. It is then prepared for plaiſter of Paris, for if a quantity of it is put into ſo much water as gives it the conſiſtence of cream, it will ſoon become ſolid, and ring like a veſſel of earthen-ware, or metal. It loſes iĩts tranſparency by heat, and becomes white. The ſofter kinds are beſt for the plaiſter of Paris. The explanation of all theſe phenomena is not difficult, when we conſider the nature of gypſum, which being a ſaline compound, has all the qualities of a ſalt. In its natural ſtate it is cryſtallized in conſequence of ĩts containing a quantity of water. Heat expels the water; which being again added, is attracted by the gypſum, and occaſions a cryſtallization. A more violent heat produces very little change, as the vitriolic acid adheres very cloſely to the earth. If theſe ſubſtances, however, are mixed in powder with a quantity of charcoal- duſt, the whole of the acid may be diſſipated, and the calcareous earth only leſt behind, and thus a particular phoſphorus is formed. In this experiment the charcoal attracts the oxygen of the acid, which is by that loſ rendered volaetile, and ĩs diſperſed in fumes. 7. Calcareous earth is alſo found ſuturated with muriatic acid in ſea- water and in ſalt-pits. 8. Calcareous earth, united with the fluoric acid, forms the fuſible ſpar or fluor, which is commonly known by the name of DERBYSHIRE SPAR. The texture of this compound is either ſparry, or irregularly ſhattered or cracked. It is either tranſparent or opa ke; and the ſpecimens are of a cubic, rhomboidal, polygonal, or irregular figuree The coloured ſpars have the property of emitting light when laid on a hot iron, or otherwiſe heated; but they loſe this property by being made red hot. The green ſpars are the moſt phoſphoreſcent, but none of them exhibit this quality except when well warmed. They are ſcarcely harder than common calcareous ſpars, and therefore do not ſtrike fire with ſteel. They do not melt by themſelves; but very much promote the fuſion of other ſtones, particularly the calcareous. They do not efferveſce with acids, either before or after being ſubmitted to the action of fire. Mr. Whitehurſt explains in the following manner the formation of ſparry and ſtalactitical productions. When water impregnated with the ſparry acid proceeds ſlowly through different ſtrata of earths and minerals, it becomes charged with a variety of theſe ſubſtances in ſolution; and as ĩt exudes gradually on the ſurface of caverns and fiſſures, the aqueous particles evaporate, and the ſparry matter cryſtallizes in various forms, including in its own ſubſtance the heterogeneous matters with which ĩt is charged. If the quantity of water thus impregnated, which exudes through the pores of the earth or ſtone, ĩs not more than will eaſily evaporate in the ordinary heat of the atmoſphere, a ſparry cruſt is formed. If the quantity of water exuded exceeds the quantity evæporated, ſtalactites are produced in one inſtance, and tubes in another. If a drop of water hangs from the roof, almoſt dropping, the aqueous particles evaporate from the ſurface ſooner than from its interior parts. A cryſtallization therefore takes place on the ſurface, while the center remains fluid: the water thus detained is continvally increaſing, and the tube gradually extends downwards. By this proceſ3 tubes are ſrequently formed of two feet in length, and one tenth of an inch in diameter. The appearance of caverns ormmented with theſe ſplendid produẽtions exceeds that of the moſt laboured works of art: tranſparent columns, adorned with the moſt beautiful and vivid colours, diſpoſed ſometimes in the form of a honeycomb, ſometimes in a more irregular arrangement: mirrors, reflecting the images of objects, tinged vith æ light ſade of the moſt delicate colours, raviſ the eye of the beholder. The pillars appear of various ſorms and ſizes; ſometimes arranged like a reguler colonnade, and ſometimes diſpoſed vith all the delightſul irregularity of nature. The ſtalactites hang like icicles from the lofty rooſs of theſe ſtupendous caverns, and are reflected back by the poliſi]d. and glittering floors. Some of the moſt ſtriking caverns of this èind are the grotto of Antiparos , Pooles 5 Hole, and Peak Hole,i in Derbyſire. 9 Caleareou æ The ſollowing is an account of this famons grotto, communicated by Magni, an Italian traveller, to the celebrated Xircher. —t Having been informed (ſays he) by the natives of Paros, that in the little ifland of Antiparos, which lies about two miles from the former, æ gigantic ſtatue was to be ſeen at the mouth of a cavern in that place, it was reſolved that we (the French conſul and himſelf) ſonld pay it a viſit In purſuance of this reſolution, after we had landed on the iſland, and walked about: ſour miles through the midſt of beautiful plains, and ſloping woodlands, we at length came to a little hill, on the ſide of which yavned a moſt horrid cavern, that w ith its gloom a2t firſt ſtruck us with terror, 2nd a2lmoſt repreſſed curioũty. Recovering the fir;t ſorpriſe, hovever, we entered boldly; and had not proceeded above twenty paces, when the ſuppoſed ſtatue of the giant preſented itſelf to our viev. We quickly perceived, that what the ignorant natives had been terrified at as a giant, was nothing more than a ſparry concretion, formed by the water dropping from the roof of the cave, and by degrees hardening into a figure that their fears had formed into a monſter. Incited by this extraosdinary appearance, we were induced to proceed ſtill farther, in queſt of new adventures in this ſubterranean abode. As we proceęded, new wonders oſęred themſelves: the ſpars, formed Into trees and ſirubs, pre: 9, Calcareous earth is found faturateũd with what was thought a particular acid, which has been called the tungſtenic BEi z ented a kind of petriſied grove; ſome white, ſome green; and all receding in due perſpective. They ſtruck us with the more amazement, as we krew them to be mere productions of nature, who, hitherto in ſolitude, had, in her playful moments, dreſſed ih ſcene, as if for her owa amuſerment.  But we had as yet ſeen but a few of the onders of the place ; and we vere introduced only into the portico of this amazing temple. Inm one corner of this half illuminated receſs, there appeared an opening of about three feet wide, which ſeemed to lead to æ place totally dark, and that one of the ratives aſſured us con-tained nothing more than a reſervoir of water. Upon this wę tried, by throwing down ſome ſtores, which rumbling along the ſides of the deſcent for ſome time, the ſound ſeemed at laſt quaed in a bed of water. In order, however, to be more certain, we ſent in a Levantine mariner, who by the promiſe of a good reWard, with a ſlambeaux in his hand, ventured into this rarr-ow aperture. After continuing within ĩt for about a quarter of an houy, he returned, bringing ſome beautiful pieces of white ſpar in his hand,  hich art could neither imitate nor equal. Upon being informed by him that the place was full of theſe beautiful incruſtations, I ventured in once more with him, for about fifty paces, anxiouſly and cautionſly deſcending by a ſteep and dangerous vay. Finding however, that we eame to a precipice vhich led into a ſpacious amphitheatre, if I may ſo call ĩt, ſtill deeper than any other part, we returned, and being provided with a ladder, flambeaux, and other things to expedite our deſcent, our Whole company, man by man, ventured into the ſame opening, and deſcending one after another, weat laſt ſaw ourſelves all together in the moſ magnificent part of the cavern. æ Ounr candles being now all lighted up, and the whole place completely illuminated; never could the eye be preſented with amore glittering, or a more magniſicent ſcene.. The roof all hung with ſolid icicles, tranſparent as glaſs, yet ſolid as marblee. The eye cõuld ſcarce reach the lofty and noble ceiling; the fides were ręgularly formed with ſpars; and the whole preſented the idea of a magnificent theatre, illuminated with an immenſe profuſion of lights. The floor conſiſted of ſolid marble; and in Teveral places, magnificent columns, thrones, altars, and other objects appeared, - ii as tungſtenie acid, though it is certainly no other than the metallic ſalt of that name. This combination forms the TuNGSTEIN of the Swedes. This ſtone is remarkably heavy, and reſembles fluor ſpar in the form of its fragments. It becomes yellow in acids, and is found united vith petroleum (or mineral pitch) in the proportion of ninety-five of the former to four of the latter. In this ſtate it forms the ſwine- ſtone, vwhich is of a dark colour, and becomes fetid by friction. 10. Caleareous earth is alſo found united with three of the metals, iron, copper, and lead; of each of which there are ſeveral varieties. When united with copper, it is called mountain blue; when united with as if nature had deſigned to mock the curioſities of art. Our voices, upon ſpeaking or ſinging, were redoubled to an aſtoniſhing loudneſs3 and upon the firing of a gun, the noiſe and reverberations were almoſt deafening. In the midt of this grand amphitheatre roſe a concretion of about fifteen feet high, that, in ſome meaſure, reſombled an altar; from which, taking the hint, we cauſed maſs to be celebrated there. The beautiful columns that ſot up round the altar, appeared Iike candleſtickss and many other natural objects repreſented the cuſtomary ornaments of this ſacrament.  Below this ſpacious grotto, there ſeemed another cavern; down vhich I ventured with my former mariner, and deſcended about fifty paces by means of a rope. I at laſt arrived at a ſmall ſpot of level ground, where the bottom appeared difſerent from that of the amphitheatre, being compoſed of ſoft clay, yielding to the preſſure, and in which Ithruſt æ ſtick to about ſix feet deep. In this, however, as above, numbers of the moſ hbeautiful cryſtals were formed; one of which, particularly, reſembled a tablee. Upon our egreſs from this amazing cavern, we perceived a Greek inſcription upon a rock at the mouth, but ſo obliterated by time, that we could rot read it. It ſeemed to import that one Antipater, in the timè of Alexander, had come thither; but whether he penetrated into the depths of the caverns, he does not think fit to inform us,. Kircher de Mnd. Sb. 112. calx of copper, it is denominated Armenian ſtone. Gypſeous earth combined with calx of copper, is called turquoiſe and malachites. The pureſt malachite, according to Kirwan, conteins ſeventy- five parts oſ copper and twenty five of aerial or carbonic acid; calcareous earth is therefore not an eſſential ingredient. It is of a green colour, and is ſometimes cut ZCuar XI. mæ GNES IAN EARTHS. Hegn eha, hoo ottaintd E. tſm Sal r—suat Roct. F rench Clalt Serpextine Stone—Mica.IalbMuſcovy Glaſi. Aſteſios. Diucral Cloth.Mountain Leather. Meountain Flax.Mountain Wocdl. O obtain MAGNE:I4, the mother water of nitre, or of common ſalt, is placed in a large veſſel, and diluted with a conſiderable quantity of common water. Fixed alkali diſſolved in water is then added, and the mixture juſt made to boil. By this proceſs the magneſia falls to the bottom of the veſſel ĩ in the form of a powder, which ĩs purified by repeated affuſions of water. Magneſia, in iĩts mild ſtate, conſiſts of forty parts magneſian earth, forty- eight carbonic acid, and twelve vater. The. cryſtallized acrated magneſia contains half its weight of carbonic acid, one fourth magneſian eaerth, and one fourth water. Magneſia combined with vitriolic acid conſtitutes EPrsoM saLT, which in many reſpects reſembles Glauber's ſalt; it may be diſtinguiſhed, however, by an eaſy experiment; for if a fixed alkali is added to a ſolution of Epſom ſalt, æ precipitation is produced, which is not a conſequence of adding an alkali to a ſolution of Glaubers ſalt. Even the volatile alkali, if mild, is capable of ſeparating magneſia from its acid, by means of a double attraction; the alkali unites with the vitriolic acid, and part of the earth falls to the bottom, combined with carbonic acid. Maggneſia enters into the compoſition of ſome earthy ſubſtances; the ſtones uſually treated of under this head conſiſt of magneſia united with flint; but the latter uſually predominates. Moſt of them are ſoapy to the touch, and ſo ſoft that they may be cut into various utenſils. Of theſe the following are the moſt remarkable: I. Steatites, lapis ollaris, or soaæ ROCE, is of various colours, but chieſly of different ſhades of green. It does not becomæ ductile in water, and is fuſed with diſficulty. One variety of it is in the form of ſix- ſided priſims, another ĩs lamellated. 2. Smectis, or FRENCH CHALE, is found pretty plentifully in Cornvall. Its colour is either white, yellow, or red and white; ſome ſpecimens have the appearance oſ Caſtile ſoap. 3. SERPENTINE STONE I Of different ſhades of green. The ſtructure of this ſtone is fibrous, and it might therefore be confounded with another earthy matter, called aſbeſtos, if its fibres did not adhere ſo cloſely together, as to eſcape obſervation, when the ſtone is cut and poliſied. Of the ſerpentine ſtone there are many verieties, and iĩt is found ſpotted or ſtrealed with a great diverſity of colours. What is commonly called ſerpentine ſtone, is a true lapis ollaris; but being variegated like the ſkins of ſome ſerpents, is diſtinguihed by another name. Great quantities of this ſtone are found in Italy and Switzerland, where it is oſten worked into the hape of diſhes and other veſſels. It is harder than ſteatites, but not ſo hard as to give fire with ſteel; and leſs ſmooth to the touch, but is ſuſceptible of a good poliſ, it looks like marble, and is oſten in thin pieces ſemitranſparent. The greener ſorts of this ſtone have been called nephritic; their colour ariſes from manganeſe. But the term lapis nephriticus is commonly applied to jade. 4: Micaceous carths, or TaL&s, may be deſined earthy or ſtony bodies, the texture and compoſition of which conſiſts of thin flexible particles, diviſible into plates or leaves, having a ſhining ſurface. Theſe plates, by being expoſed to heat, ſeparate i into ſmaller ones, but their flexibility is much diminihed. By a ſtrong heat they curl or crumple, but it ĩs very diſiicult to reduce them to perfect ſuſion without addition. The plates of mica, when of the pureſt kind, are tranſparent, and there is one variety, the plates of which, from their near reſernblance to glaſs, are called Muſcovy g glaſs. Micas, however, are often tinged with a variety of colours, or are more or leſs opae. Sometimes they have a luſtre reſembling that of metallic fubſan ce Sometimes they are in the form of ſhining powder, like that which is uſed in bronzing figures. This appearance has often impoſed upon miners, who have thought they met with gold and ſilver, whereas there is never any metal in theſe ſubſtances but iron. They are found alſo mixed with other ſtones, as the granite, which frequently contains a great quantity of talk. Freeſtone alſo contains more or leſs; its horizontal Ilayers have between them a thin ſtratum of talk where the ſtone more eaſily ſeparates. It is alſo found in ſome kinds of ſlate, which, when expoſed to the air, moulder into talky povder. The tranſparent Muſcovy glaſs is uſed for windows, and for thoſe lanthorns which are employed in powder magazines, as this ſubſtance is not ſo liable to break as glaſs, and is unaſſailable by firee The twiſted, or crumpled mica, which is ſound at Iardul in Jempland, is there manufactured into kettles and other veſſels, as alſo for hearths of chimnies; and the powder which ſalls in the working may be mixed with common ſalt for the diſtillation of the muriatic aci?l. The ſhining appearance of the micaceous earths has obtained them the names of daze, glimmer, or gliſt. Talk differs from other micas in its laminæ? or filaments being much tenderer and more brittle; but both have the metallic luſtre. 5. The aszESTOS, Or àamianthus, is a foſſil agreeing with tallk in having a regular ſtruecture;, in being flexible, but diſfering in being compoſed of fibres inſtead of plates. When long expoſed to air, it diſfolves into a ſort of downy matter, which has ſome degree of toughneſs, but the fibres cannot be unravelled. Cloth and paper have been mace of this ſubſtance, vhich reſiſt the firee. Aſbeſtos, however, though unaſſailable by common fires, has ſubmitted to the power oſ ſtrong burning mirrors, and has undergone vitrification. The ancients are ſaid to have manufactured cloths of this foſſil, in which they wrapped their dead when they burred them, that the aſhes might be preſerved. Several moderns have ſucceeded in making this cloth; the chief contrivances which are neceſſary are to mix the mineral fibres with a large proportion of flax, and to uſe oil ſreely; theſe matters are aſterwards conſumed by expoſing the cloth to a red heat. Although the cloth of aſbeſtos when ſoiled is reſtored to its whiteneſs by burning, yvet it does loſe ſome part of its weight, as has been aſcertained by accurate experiments. The varieties oſ this curious genus of foſils are mountain leather or cork; mountain flax, to which the name of amianthus is particularly applied; common or unripe aſbeſtos, and mountain wood. Theſe ſubſtances all conſiſt nearly of the ſame component parts, and differ chieſly in colour, ſolidity, or in the form and direction of their fibres. Some ſpecimens of the amianthus are ſo light as to float in water. When the fibres are parallel, ĩt is called mountain leather; when twiſted, mountain cork. The mountain cork or leather contains in the hundred from 56 to 62 parts of ſiliceous earth, from 22 to 26 of mild magneſia, from 7 to 14 of mild calcareous earth, I.7 of clay, and 10.6 of iron. Theſe afford a white ſlag by fuſion. The ſpecimens which are of a yellowiſh brown colour are impure, and melt pretty ealily into a black ſlag. There is alſo a ſpecies of a light green colour, ſomewhat more brittle, and contaminated with iron. This laſt is ſoluble by C nu a r. XII. PONDEROUS EARTHS. Barytes a sſcarce Mineral ; found in to StatesCriſtatumaPonderous SparCavk.Liver Stone. ARYTES is found in two ſtates, combined either with the carbonic or vitriolic acids. 1ſt. When united with the former acid, it reſembles alum, but is hard and ſtriated, as if compoſed of radiating fibres coming from a center. This mineral has only been found native in a lead mine at Anglezark in Lancaſhire. It is ſometimes of a greenih colour; ſometimes jagged, when it is called criſtatum, from its reſemblance to a cocks comb. Theſe prominences are found accreted to balls of the ſame ſubſtance. Later inveſtigations have however claſſed this as a ſulphat of Barytes. 2. Ponderous earth is more frequently united with vitriolic acid, and in this ſtate it is found in all the Derbyſhire and Cumberland lead mines, and in ſeveral coal pits throughout England. Theſe ſtones are found of various appearances, pale yellow, blackiſh, with coarſe ſcales, or with fine ſparkling ſcales. They are either tranſparent or opake. The tranſparent PONDEROUS SPAR is uſually in the form of a ſix-ſided very flat priſm, ending in a four-ſided pyramid; but, like all other cryſtals, liable to be varied by the circumſtances attending their formation. The opake ſpecimens, called cAwx by the miners, are of a white, grey, or fawn-colour; frequently of no regular figure, but often in the peculiar figure of a number of ſmall nited together. Theſe eavy, in general exceedi ter, and by this circumſ may commonly bę diſcc of vitriolic acid and b ſmelling like liver of this property they are c C u Aa r. XIII. ARGILLACEOUS EARTHS. General Aecount of Clays or ArgilsAlum; iis CompoſitionNatural Hiflory of Alum.Action of this Subſtance on cther Bodies Uses of Alum in the ArtsLar Lunæ.Porcelain Clay Manner of mating difjerent Kinds of PotteryStone WareVi ellow, or Queen's WareChina, Lithomarga7erra LemniaBole ZeoliteLapis Laæuli3ripoli—DBrict Clayslate. H E argil, or earth of clay, is one of thoſe ſubſtances which abound moſt in nature. There are immenſe ſtrata of clays, and they make a part of every rich ſoll. The idea commonly entertained of clay, is that of a natural ſubſtance, the pureſt kinds of which are firm, and have a ſort of fatneſs or unctuoſity, and which by being rubbed by the finger receive a polil. When dry, they imbibe moiſture, ſo that when applied to the tongue it adheres to them. From their attraction for water, they are always found moiſt in a natural ſtate. If more water is added, they form a ductile paſte, which, when thoroughly burnt and dried, becomes hard, ſtony, and impenetrable to water. On the regular contraction which clay undergoes from the application of different degrees of heat, depends the conſtruction of a thermometer for meaſuring intenſe degrees of heat, and invented by Mr. Wedgwood *, As clays when wrought together become impenetrable to water, they are made uſe oſ to retain water in ponds, &c. This is the reaſon that when cattle are allowed to tread a clayey ſoll in wet weather, the æ See vol. i. p. 113. plants die that grew there; for the clay being previouſly mixed with the water, and being then compreſſed by the feet of the cattle, the ground is rendered too tough for the vegetables to ſpring up through it, eſpecialiy when the clay thus trodden together ĩs afterwards dried by the heat of the ſun. Clays diſfer much in conſiſtency Some melt in the moutl, others are gritty, and get between the teeth. They are white, blue, grey, red, yellow, or black. Some are much leſs viſcid than others. Some reſiſt a very violent heat without undergoing any change; but moſt of them, in very intenſe heat, melt into a vitrifed maſs. Some of them eſfferveſce with acids, others not. All theſe varieties have but one ſpecies of earth for their baſis, and ære nothing more than mixtures of pure clay with heterogeneous ſubſtances. Thus we oſten find ſtrata, which contain a large mixture of ſandy and gritty particles. All clays which are ſandy, are ſo from ſand, or calcareous earth: when mixed with the latter, they efferveſce. The variety of theis colour depends on an admixture of iron; though ſometimes of inflammable matter. The clay becoming white in the fire, is the ſureſt ſign of its purity. We can actually extract iron from moſt of theſe clays, eſpecially thoſe which burn to a red colour, which colour is always aſſumed by the calces or ruſt of iron. When they eſferveſce with acids, they claſs with marles. Clay, united with vitriolic acid, forms that common and vell known ſubſtance called aLuꝶ. The Zrvæ7ręæ of the Greeks, and the alumen of the Romans, vas a native ſubſtance, and differed much from the ſalt of which I am now treating. The varieties mentioned by Dioſcorides refer to ſtalactites, which contained very little if any alum, and that completely enveloped by a vitreous matter. The deſcriptions of Pliny are ſtill more diſficult to be underſtood, as he had not ſeen the ſubſtance which he deſcribes, but mærely tranſcribed from others. The factitious ſalt which is now called alum, was firſt diſcovered in the eaſtern countries, but when, where, or by what means, is unknown. On account of its ſimilar aſtringency, and its uſe in the arts of tanning and dying, the new ſalt has retained the old name. Among the moſt early works for the preparation of alum, was that of Roccho, a city of Lycia, now called Edeſſa, hence the appellation Roch alum (now commonly miſtaken for rock alum). In the neighbourhood of Conſtantinople, and other parts near Smyrna, were many alum-worls. The Italians hired and made uſe of theſe, but about the fifteenth century introduced the art into their own country. Bartholomew Perdix, or Pernix, a merchant of Genoa, who had often been at Roccho, diſcovered the matrix of alum in the iſland of Iſchia, about the year 1459, and eſtabliſhed a manufactory there; at the ſame time John de Caſtro made the ſame diſcovery at Tolſa, by means of the ilex aquifolium, which he had alſo obſerved to grow in the adjacent mountains of Turkey; and his opinion was conſirmed by the taſte oſ the ſtones. The attempts of the Genoeſe at Viterbium and Volaterre ſucceeded extremely well; inſomuch that an edict of Pope Pius II. prohibited the uſe of oriental alum, Manufactories were eſtabliſed in Spain, Germary, England, Sweden, &c. in the courſe of the ſixteenth century. The proportion of the principles may be aſcertained in the following manner: the water is expelled by a gentle heat; the rernaining maſs grows opake, ſwells, ſoams, and at length grows quiet, Tpong y, and friable; the quantity of earthy baſis is eaſily determined by precipitation with fixed or volatile alkali. Mr. Pott firſt obſerved that when clay is mixed with vitriolic acid, and boiled a conſiderable time, the ſolution affords alum, though he obtained but little in this vay. Margraſf found that the vitriolic acid diſſolves one half or more of the pureſt clay; from the ſolution he obtained much alum, but always found it neceſſry to add a certain portion of alkaline ſalt beſore the alum would appear; and he could never obtain it without adding a greater quantity of vitriolic acid than was neceſſary to compoſe the alum. The uther half, which did not diſſolve, he concludes to be a very fine ſand, or an earth of the flinty kind. The ſhorteſt way is to add a ſmall quantity oſ fixedd or volatile alkali to the ſolution, which immediately becomes muddy, the alkali attracting ſome of the ſuperſluous acid, a powder precipitates, conſiſting of the cryſtals of alum. The alum, however, which ĩs employed in the arts, is not prepared in this vay. Nature produces but æ very ſmall quantity of actual alum, and this is mixed vith heterogeneous matters, or effloreſcences, in various forms, upon ores during calcination, but rarely occurs eryſtallized. In this latter ſtate, it is reported to be found in Egyyt, Sardinia, Spain, Bohemia, and other places; it is ſometimes generated in the aluminous ſchiſt of Lapland and Weſt Gothland, by a ſpontaneous decompoſition of the ore; beſides it is found (but rarely) in mineral ſprings. Alum is moſtly mrepared from certain foſſils, or ores of alum, as they are called. Theſe ores are generally found in ſtrata, which appear like indurated clays, oſ a dark black colour, and have a ſulphureous ſmel. When expoſed to the air for ſome time, they grow hot, ſwell, and crumble down into a powder, emit ſulphureous ſumes, and ſometimes take ſire. Some do not undergo this change merely from expoſure to the air, but muſt be firſt burnt and waſhed, and then expoſed to the air a good vhile beſore alum can be obtained. Aſter they have been crumbled down in this manner, they are ſteeped in water; an alkali is then added, and the alum cryſtallizes and ſubſides. Villi Theſe ores are evidently natural mixtures of clay and ſulphur. B expoſore to air, according to the old ſyſtem of chemiſtry, i it was ſuppoſed that the clay acted on the ſulphur in ſuch a manner as to make it part with its phlogiſton, whence they explained the production of hdat. This fact, however, is now much better explained, according to the new ſyſtem, by ſuppoſing that the oxygenous gas of the atmoſphere is decompoſed; and while the oxygen is abſorbed by the ſolphur (with which it forms tiol c acid) the heat is ſet at liberty, and becomes ſenſiblee. Afſter a proper quantity of alkali has been added to the ſolution, it is cryſtallized i in the common manner, that is by evaporation. The cryſtals are at firſt tolerably diſtinct, but of no conſiderable ſize. A great quantity of them being heaped together until they undergo a watery fuſion, they unite into a maſ, vhich is called roch alum, and i in this form ] it is expoſed to ſale. That accurate and attentive obſerver, Biſ=op w atſon, in his Chemical Eſſays, relates, that being one day engaged, in evaporating ſomething or other from a ſaucer made of Staſfordſhire yello ware, he was ſurpriſed to ſeę a white ſubſtance bubbling through a crack in the ſaucer; ; upon taſting it, he found i it to be a ſalt, and, upon further examination, diſcovered that it was a perſect alum. The fire, he obſerves, vas a yeiy very hot one, and it was made of coal cinders; the ſaucer was placed on the bar of the grate, and the alum, he conceives, was formed from the ſulphureous acid of the cinders uniting itſelf with the clay, which enters into the compoſition of the yellow ware. He was informed that the vapour which, in ſome places, eſcapes from the coal-pits which are on fire in Staffordſnire, forms an alum whenever it meets with an argillaceous earth. This, he remarks, is conſormable to the manner of making alum on the Solfatara, near Naples, where they place little heaps of argillaceous earths or ſtones over the crevices from which the ſulphureous vapour iſſues, in order that they may collect a greater quantity of alum. This ſalt contains much water, hence it undergoes vhat chemiſts call the watry fuſion; after this there remains a ſubſtance called burnt alum, which contains the earth and vitriolic acid, with little or no water; this, iſ the heat ĩs increaſed, does not melt, nor by heat alone can we ſeparate the whole of the acid, though ſome of it riſes; but the addition of any inſlammable ratter diſ;oſes it to riẽ in fumes, vhich are very ſulphureous. One hundred parts of cryſtallized alum contain thirty-eight of vitriolic acid, eighteen of clay, and forty-four of water. The ſenſible qualities of alum ſhe it to be the oppoſite to borax, which is compoſed of the fixed alkali and a very weak acid; on the contrary, alum is the ſtrongeſt acid, combined with an earth which attracts it very weakly; ſo that the qualities of the acid are very little altered, for if we apply a ſolution of alum to the infuſion of litmus, it changes it to a red. The ſolution has alſo a manifeſt acidity, combined with another taſte which æpproaches to ſweetneſs. If an allali is added, the earth ĩs immediately precipitatec, and this effect is not only produced by the fixed and volatile alkalies, but by magneſia and calcareous earth. Alum is often obtained ſrom the liquor of the compound of iron and vitriolic acid. The earth of alum will combine in exceſi to the ſalt when already formed. M. Beaumẽ boiled a ſolution of alum vith the earth precipitated from another portion of alum, by means of fixed alkali; the earth was diſſolved with efferveſcence, the filtrated ſolution had no longer the taſte of alum, but that of a hard water, did not redden the tincture of turnſole, but converted ſyrup of violets to a green. BY ſpontaneous evaporation it afforded cryſtals, ſcaly and ſoſt to the touch like mica; M. Beaumẽ compares them to ſelenite. It is not eaſy to compoſe alum by adding vitriolic acid to this ſaturated ſalt, the mixture becoming acid, but not ſtypticc. However, aſter ſpontaneous evaporation for three months, the ſolution afforded eryſtals of alum mixed with ſome micaceous ſcales, ſimilar to thoſe afforded by alum ſaturated with itę earth. Alum, heated with combuſtible matters, forms a ſubſtance which takes fire on expoſure to air, and is called the pyrophorus of Homberg. This chemiſt, who publiſhed an account of the pyrophorus, in the year 1711, made experiments on human excrement, for the purpoſe of obtaining a colourleſs oll poſſeſſing the property of fixing mercury into fine ſilver: the inquiry produced many diſcoveries; the reſidue of this animal ſubſtance, diſtilled with alum, took fire on expoſure to the air. Homberg repeated this experiment a number of times, and always with ſucceſs. Lemery the younger, in the years 1714 and 1715, publiſned two memoirs, in which he æffirms, that pyrophorus may be made with a great number of vegetable and animal ſubſtances heated with alum. But he did not ſucceed in his attempts to form it with ſome other vitriolic ſalt. Theſe two chemiſts, who ſuppoſed alum to be a combination of the vitriolic acid and calcareous earth, imagined that the latter being converted into lime attracted the humidity of the air, and produced a degree of heat ſuſficient to ſet fire to the ſulphur formed by the vitriolic acid and inſnlammable ſubſtances. Alum is one of the moſt uſeſul ſalts in the arts. It is added to tallow to make candles hardl. Wood ſuſſiciently ſoaked in alum does not eaſily take fire: the ſame is true of paper impregnated with it, which for that reaſon is very proper to keep gun-powder, as it alſo excludes the moiſture of the air. This paper is alſo uſeſul in whitening ſilver, and in ſilvering braſs without heat. Alum is uſeful added to mills which does not eaſily ſeparate its butter. It is particularly uſeful in dying, in preparing the matters to be dyed; for by cleanſing and opening the pores upon the ſurface by a gentle corroſion, it both renders the ſubſtance fit ſor receiving the colouring particles (by which the alum is generally decompoſed) and at the ſame time makes the colour fixed. It conſtitutes the baſis of crayons, which generally conſiſt of the earth of alum, finely powdered and tinged for that purpoſe, with diſferent colouring matters. The argillaceous foſls are referred to the following heads: I. ARGILLA aERATA, to Which the fanciful name of Iac lunæ has been applied. This was ſuppoſed to be a particular ſpecies of calcareous earth, till M. Screber found that it was a combination of argil vith the carbonic acid, It efferveſces with acids, and contains a very ſiml vrcrt]n ſ æ.ræous earth, and ſomet e of gy7pſum i b gueeiy found in ſinall cakes oſ the hardneſs of chalk, Iike whic ich it marks white. Its colour is ſnow white, and when examined by the microſcope it is ſõund to conſiſt of ſmall tranſparent cryſtals. It efferveices with acids. II. PORCELAIN CLAY, argilla apyra, the ææclin of the Chireſe. This is very refractory, and is with great diſſiculty brought into perfect fuſion. After it has been ſubmitted to the action of heaæt, it is oſ a ſolid texture, and is ſo Eard as to ſtrike fire with ſteel. It is found of an excellent quality in Japan, and likewiſe in different parts of Europe. In Sweden it is met with in coal-pits, between the ſtrata of coa. Common pipe-clay belongs to this diviſion, and differs from porcelain clay only in being leſs pure, which prevents its burning to a good colour. The eſential ingredient in all kinds of pottery is clay or argillaceous earth, becauſe theſe earths are capable of being kneaded, and eaſily receiving any form, and of acquiring much ſolidity and hardneſs by expoſure to fire. Pottery is, in general, covered with a glazing, or is made to undergo a vitrification at the ſurface, without which it would be pervious to fluids. Ordinary pottery is glazed with glaſs of lead mixed with metallic calces, or with fuſible metallic earthss A fine kind of pottery is made of white clays, or ſuch as whiten in the fire; the ſurface of which is vitrified by throwing into the furnace, when the ware is ſuſficiently baked, ſome common ſalt and ſaltpetree. The Engliſn ſtone ware is compoſed of tobacco-pipe-clay and ground flints. The uſe of the flints is to give ſtrength to the ware, fo that it may preſerve its ſorm during the baking. In making this ſtone-ware great pains are taken to employ orly the finer particles of the clay ænd fiint. With this view the clay is much beaten in water, by which the finer parts being mixed with the ſiuid are ſuſpended, while the coarſer ſink to the bottom of the veſſtl. The thick liquid, conſiſting of water and the finer particles of the clay, is farther purified by paſſing it through hair and lawn ſieves of different degrees of fineneſs. After this the liquid is mixed, in various proportions for different wares, with another liquor, of about the ſame denſity, and conſiſting of ſints calcined, ground, and ſuſpended in water. The mixture is then dried in a kiln, and aſterwards, being beaten to a proper temper; it becomes fit for being formed at the wheel into diſhes, plates, bovls, &c. When the ware has been expoſed to heat ſor about forty eight hours, iĩt is glazed by means of common ſalt. This is thrown into the furnace through holes in the upper part of it, and being converted into a thick vapour by the heat, is applied to the ſurface of the heated ware, and cauſes it to vitrify. This curious merhod of glazing earthen ware was introduced into England by two Dutchmen, near a century ago. It appeaers to be produced by a combination of the alkali oſ the ſalt with the ſiliceous earth of the pottery. The yellow or queens ware is made of the ſame materials as the flint ware, but in different proportions. The glazing is alſo different; it is made by mixing together in water, till it becomes as thick as cream; one hundred and twelve pounds of ground white lead; tventy-four pounds of ground flint, and ſix pounds of ground flint g.ſs. The ware, before it ĩs glazed, is baled in the fire, by which it acquires the property of ſtrongly imbibing moiſture; it is then dipped in Chãp. 13.] CLineſe Porceluin. 81 ards expoſed a ſecond time to the fire, by whicl means the glaze it has imbibed is melted, and a thin glaſſy coat is formed upon its ſurface, which is more or leſs yellow, according as a greater or leſs proportion of lead has been uſed. Porcelain, or chinæ, is a ſemivitrified earthen vare of an intermediate nature between common wares and glaſs. The firſt ſpecimens of this beautiful manufacture came from China and Japan. Chineſe porcelain is ſaid to be compoſed of two ingredients, ore of which is a hard ſtone or rock called petuntſe, which they careſully grind to a very fine powder; and the other, called by them haolin, is a white earthy ſubſtance, which they mix intimately with the ground petuntſe. Reaumur examined both theſe matters; and having expoſed them ſeparately to a violent fire, he diſc covered that the petuntſe had fuſed without addition, but that the kaæolin had given no ſign of fuſibility; from which it appeared that the former was of a flinty nature, and the latter argillaceous. He afterwerds mixed theſe matters, and formed cakes of them, which, by being baled, were converted into porcelæin ſimilar to that oſ China. Macquer thinks that the ſiisſt European porcelains were made in Saxony and in France; and aſterwards in England, Germany, and Italy. Manufactories have ſince been cſtabliſred in almoſt all the countries of Europe, in many of which porcelain is made very little if at all inferior to the Chineſe. III. Lithomargã, or sToNE-MARROW, when dry, feels as ſlippery as ſonp, but is not wholly diftuſible in water. When mixed with water, it ſalis in pieces, ſo as to aſume the appearance of curds. In the fire it melts into a frothy ſlag. In the maſ it breaks into irregular ſcaly plecess. This is the ſuller's earth uſed in the dreſſing of cloths. To this ſpecies alſo belongs the terra lemnia; this is of a browniſh colour and ſnining texture, and falls to picces in water with a crack ſing noiſe. The terra lemnia is ſo called from the iſland of Lemnos, now Statimane, in the 'gean ſea, whence it is procured. It is likewiſe called the Turkiſh earth, on account of ĩts being impreĩed with the ſeal of the grand ſignior. IV. BotE is a fine and denſe clay of various colours, conteining a large quantity of iron. It is not eaſily ſoſtened in water when indurated, as the porcelain and common clays, but either falls to pieces in the form of fine grains, or repels the water, and cannot be made ductile. In the ſire it grows black, and is then attracted by the loadſtone. The ſoſt boles are of various colours, as red, yellow, green, grey, and blueiſh grey. The red kind is that uſed in medicine, under the name of Armenian bole; an indurated kind of which affords the material for red pencils. An indurated bole ĩs frequently found in conl-pits, betwæen the ſeams of coal, and is called coal ſlate. It is met vwith frequently in pieces like nuts of various ſizes; vhich when broken exhibit impreſſions of plants, as the nodules of copper- ſlate from Ilmenaus contain repreſentations of filh. A ſpecies of bole ĩs found with ſcaly perticles, the hornblende of the Swedes. It is diſtinguiſhed from mica, by the ſcales being leſs ſining, thicker, and rectangular. It ĩs frequently. mixed with pynites; it is of two kinds, black ænd greeniſh. The former, when rubbed ſine, aſſnds a green , and ĩs either oſ a lamellateſ or granular tex ture. The greeniſh kind is oſ a granulor texture, or ſtriated. V ZEOLITE is in general of a cryſtalline ſorm, compoſed of imperfect pyramids turned towards a common center. Their form is ſometimes globular; but ſeldom priſmaticc. The lapis lazuli belongs to the zeolites. Theſe foſſils are harder than ſluors, but may be ſcratched by ſteel. The ſiliceous earth predominates much in them. The lapis lazuli contains ſilver and iron, which gives the blue colour. Zeolite melts per ſe with ebullition into a white frothy ſlag, which in the moment of fuſion affords a phoſphoric light. The lapis lazuli firſt becomes brown when melted, and then produces a clear glaſ's with blue clouds. By ſcoriſication with lead, one hundred weight of it has aforded two ounces of ſilver. VI. TrIPOLI ſeems to he of a volcanic origin. It is an earth conſiſting of very fine particles, ahd is Inown by its quality of rubbing or wearing hard bodies, which gives them a poliſ. Other fine clays, however, have the ſare property when a little burnt. The tripoli grows ſormewhat harder in the fire, and is fuſed with great diſficulty. When crude it imbibes water, but is not ſoluble in it. It taſtes like chalk, and is rongh or ſandy between the teeth, though no ſand can be ſeparated from it. That which has been juſt deſcribed is of a yellow colour, and is ſold by druggiſts. This kind oſ tripoli has been lately diſcovered in Scotland. Another variety, called the rotten-ſtone, is found in Derbyſhire. It is in common uſe in England for all ſorts of finer grinding and poliſning, and is alſo ſometimes uſed by lapidaries for cutting of ſtones. VII. Common or BRICE CLAY is found of various tolours, as req, , pale red, grey, and blue. It acquires a red colour, more or leſs deep, in the fire, and melts pretty eaſily into a greeniſh glaſs. It conſiſts of a mixture of pure clay, ſiliceous and martial (or iron) earths, containing alſo a ſmall quantity of vitriolic aciò. The clay is alſo found mixed with ca2lcareous earth, when it conſtitutes marle. It is alſo found in an indurated ſtate, either pure or mixed with inflammable ſubſtances, and vitriolic acid, in which caſe it forms the ores of alum. VIII. Argillaceous foſſile ſtones, to which the denomination of scHISTI properly belongs. The moſ remarkable ſtones comprehended under this diviſion are the blueiſh purple ſchiſtus, or common roof ſate; the dark blue ſchiſtus, or writing ſlate; the pyritaceous ſchiſtus; the bituminous ſchiſtus; the argillaceous grit, vhich is alſo called ſand-ſtone, and free-ſtone; the killas; the lag-ſtone, and the toad-ſtone. The method of ſplitting the ſlate, uſed for the roofing of houſes, ĩs the following: they expoſe it in blocks to be well wetted and ſoaked by the rain; when the froſt comes upon it afterwards, it rarifies the water, and cracks and opens all the joints of the ſtone, ſo that when the froſt has completed its work it lies in looſe flakes or ſivers. Thus the elements perform C H A P. XIV. SILICEOUS EARTHS. General Arrangement of Flinty Subſtances. Gems.Diamond. Rub;.  sapphire,erax Emnerala Hyacinth—aAmeth;ſt Garuet. 7ourmalin Opal. Compoſition and Properties of precious Stones. Quariæ.Roch C rſtalsPebblesF lintsLapis Nephriticus. Cats E ve.Hydrophanes. Explanation of the Phenomena of the Hyãrophanous Stane Moon-Stone Chalcedony Ouyx. —Carneſion. Sardonyx. Agate Common Flint. Chert Sand and Gravel Vaſper Feldt Spar Labrador StoneSchirl and hetſtone Art of making Glaſs Prince Ruper?s Drop ond Philoſophic| PhialCurious Phenomenou. HE ſiliceous earths are chieſly diſtinguiſhed by their hardneſs, by which they ſtrike fire with ſteel, and their property of forming good glaſs with alkali. They may be divided into, I, Gems, or precious ſtones; 2, Quartæz; 3, Flints; 4, Jaſpers; 5, Feldt ſpars. I. GEMS.The diamond is the hardeſt of all bodies, and the moſt valuable of all the gems; it is however not an earthy but an inflammable ſubſtance, and therefore will be ſully treated of under that head*. It is mentioned on the preſent occaſion only, that the catalogue of gems may not appear incomplete. 2. The ruby has been confounded with the diamond, on account of its hardneſs and Iuſtre, but ſome Iate experiments ſhew that it is eſſentially diſferent. According to Cronſtadt, there are four principal kinds of rubies: 1. The ruby of a deep colour inclining to æ See Chap. 44. purple. 2. The ſpinell ruby, of a ponceau red, that is, of a bright corn-poppy-ſlower colour. 3. The balaſiruby, pale red inclining to violet. 4. The rubicell, of a reddiſh-colour. 3. The ſapphire is tranſparent, and of a blue colour, and is ſaid to be next to the diamond in hardneſs. They are ſometimes of a milky appearance. 4. The topaz is chieſly of diſferent ſhades of yellow, but is ſometimes greeni. When of a ſea-green colour it is called aqua- marine; when more green, the beryl; when yellowi©h green, the chryſolite. 5. Emerald, the chief colour oſ which is green, iĩs the ſoftæſt oſ the precious ſtones, and when heated is phoſphoreſcent like the fluors. 6. The jacinth or hyacinth, is of a fine reddiſh yellIow colour, and ſometimes brown; theſe gems are formed in priſms, pointed at both ends. 7. The amethyſt is a gem of a violet colour, or great brilliancy, and as hard as the beſt inds of rubies and ſapphires, from which it only differs in its colour. This is called the oriental amethyſt, and is very rare; vhen it approaches to the purple, or roſe colour, ĩt is more eſteemed than when it inclines to the blue. The amethyſts called occidental, are oſ the ſame nature as rock cryſtals, and have the ſame gradations of colour. Cryſtuls within the geodes, or hollow agateballs, are very cften found of an amethyſt colour, and ſome are very fine. S. The garnet, when tranſparent and of a fine colour, is reckoned among the gems; but it varies more than any, both with reſpect to its form and colour, ſome being ofa deep and durk red, ſome yellow and purple, and ſom brown, blackiſh, and quite opake. The regular ſape of the garnet is the dodecagon, with embol al faces, and its chief variation is, the double CEap. 147 Tue æ Courmalin and Opal. 87 eight-ſided pyramid, terminating by four faces on each end. In general their luſtre is ſeſ then that of other gems, ãs well as their hardneſs, which yields to the file, though they ſometimes ſtrike fire with ſteel. Their colour proceœds from the iron which they contain; Aand, according to M. de Sauſſure, even the fineſt oriental garnets attract the magnetic needle at a ſmall diſtance. The Syrian garnet is the fineſt, and moſt eſteemed: ĩt is of a fine red, inclining to a purple colour, very diaphanous, but leſs brilliant than the orental ametſhyſt. 9. The tourmalin has lately been brought much into notice by its remarkable property of becoming electrical, in conſequence of the ſimple application of heat. Iſit is immerſed in hot water, in.which proceſs no friction can be ſuppoſed to happen, aſter ĩt ĩs removed it gives ſigns of contrary electricity a at the two oproſite ends of its priſmatic form. The oriental tourmalins are found in the iland of Ceylon: they are tranſparent, of a dark brown yellov. From Braſil they are for the moſt part green; but there are alſo ſome red, blue, and yello. From Tyrol they are obtained of ſo dark a green, as to appear opake. They are alſo found in the mountains of Old Caſtile in Spain. 10. The opal isa moſt beautiſul ſtone, from the changeable appeaerance of its colours by refraction and reſiection. There are two kinds; one of which, the opal of Nonnius, appears olive- coloured by reſlection, and then appears to be opake; but when held againſt the light, it is found to be tranſparent, and then appears of a fine red colour. The white opal, of a glaſs- like complexion, throws out green, yellow, purple, and blueiſh rays; but it ĩs of a reddiſh, or rather flamecolour, vhen held againſt the light. The precious ſtones are chi lefly compoſed of the argillaceous and ſilicecus earths; of which the ſormer predomirates. Some diamonds alſo are thought to contain a portion of carth, but theſe cannot properly be accounted diamondis. On diſſolving the very ſubtile powder of the gems in a double weight of vitriolic acid highly concentrated, the reſiduum, after evaporation, being aſhed vith warm water, yields a metallic colouring ſubſtance, and a ſimall portion of Iime. The meitaliic part, precipitated what was in the old chemical nomenclature called a phlogiſticated aſkaline lixivium, yvields a beautiful I Proman blue; hencæ we conclude that the red colour of the ruby, as well as the blue of the ſapphire, the yvellow of the topaez, the tawny of the hyacinth, and the green of the emerald, are to be attributed to iron*. Bergman obtained by analyſis, from one hundred parts of the following precious ſtones: Clav. Flint. Lime. Iron. Emerald,  6o  222—65x Sapphirb,  53  35 5 2 Topaz, 46  39.  8 65f6 Hyacinthh, 40  25 20 1I3 Ruby, 4 39/ 9,Io From the above it may be collected, thaet the gems agree in this reſpect, that they all conſiſt of the ſame principles; and that of theſe the argillaceous earth forms the greateſt port, then the ſiliceous, next the calcareous, and leaſt of all the iron ?7. The gems, except the emerald and hyacinth, reſiſt the moſt in-  Bergman's Diſſiertations, ꝑ- I5. t Chemical Eſſays, Diſſ. 15. tenſe fire; yet we know that the ruby has been ſoſtened in the focus of a burning mirror*.. TTheſe ſtones all aſſume different forms of eryſtallization, and as this aſfects the arrangement of their minute parts, it doubtleſs ĩs not without eſect on their external appearance. Their value depends on their hardneſs and tranſparency. The degrees of hardneſs are1, diamond; 2, ruby; 3, ſapphire; 4, topæz; 5, hyacinth; 6, emeraeld. lll: The garnet diſfers from all the above, in the ſiliceous earth being more prevalent than the argillaceous. II. QaurTZ has leſs tranſparency and hardneſi than the precious ſtones. The fracture of quartzoſe ſtones is vitrecus, or like glaſs, and they ſtrike fire with ſteel. TIeat cauſes them to loſe their hardneſę and tranſparency, and reduces them to a white opake earth. They are generally cracked throughout, and breal irregulaery, and into ſharp fragments. Melted with alkali they give a more ſolid and fixed glaſs than any others oſ the ſiliceous orcer. When there is no interruption to their natural accretion, their ſubſtance always cryſtallizes into hexagonal priſms, pointed at one or both ends. Theſe occur in cleſts, fiſſures, and ſmall veins in rocks. Quartzoſe ſtones very often contain metals. No very remarkable ſtones belong to this genus. The varieties are Fat quartæ, which is very gloſſy; it is eĩther colourleſs, or is tinged with white, blue, or violet. Dry quartz, tranſparent, white, or pale green. Spatry quartz, pale yellow, or pale blue. Cryſtallized quartz is either opake or tranſparent: the tranſpaæ Chemical Eſays, DIſſ. 15. Quertæ, Rock Cryſiul, &c. ſBook VI. rent and dar-brovn kind is called ſ;moy- topaz; the yellow, blue, grceen, and red, falſle gems; and the colourleſs, rock eryſtals; when milky, milk cryſtals, and pebbles. Quartz is alſo found combined ith iron and copper; with the former it conſtitutes a black calx, with the latter a red calx. III. FLinTs are more uniformly ſolid, and not ſo much cracked in the maſs, as quartZz; and are more pellucid than jaſper. They are better for making glaſs than the jaſper, but not ſo good as quaærtz, and ſecm in moſt reſpects to be of an intermediate nature betveen theſe ſtones. Flint oſten ſhews evident maerhs of having been in a ſoft and tough ſtate, ilke giue or jelly. The ſeveral vorieties of ſlſnts Eave obtained more diſtinẽt names, from the veriety oſ diæſr colours, than ſrom any real diſſerence in their ſubſtance; but thæſe are ſtill proper to be retained, as the only names by which jewellers and others are uſed to diſtinguiſh them. 1. Jade, Iapis ne phriti cus. This ſtone feels uncrucus to the touch, but is ſo hard as to ſtrike fire with ſteel, and is alſo ſemipellucid. Theſe lutter circumſlances ſuſficiently denote ĩts ſlinty nature; though its inctuoſity has induced ſome mineralogiſts to think thet it ought rather to be referred to the argillaceous 1 ncũan orders. It is not hardened - the heat oſ the urnace, but it melts by the ſolar heat, in the focus oſ a burning mirror, into a green glaſs. That callæd by the name of circumciſion-ſtone, which comes from the Amezon river, melts more eaſily by the concentrated rays of the ſun into a brown opake glaſ. The colour of theſe ſtones is eſther milky, or different ſhodes of green. Thoſe oſ à grey, olive, or vellowiſh llill colour, or magi colour, are the vulgaer lapis nephriticus; which name they have obtained, from a ſuppoſed property of curing nephritic pains, when applied externally to the lons. Their ſemipellucid appearance, hardneſs, and ſpecific gravity, are characters by which the lapis nephHitius may be diſtinguiſhed from other ſtones. 2. The cats eye is a very ſcarce ſtone. It is op and reflects green and yellow rays, in a manner ſomewhaet ſimilar to the eye of the animæl from which its name is derived. It ĩs found in Siberia. 3. The hydrophanes, or oculus mundi. The character which diſtinguiſhes this from all other ſtones is its property of becoming tranſparent in conſequence of being immerſed in water. This happens from its imbibing that ſluid, as it becomss: again opake by being dried. This circumſtance may be illuſtrated by a compariſon with ſome other natural phenomena. The appearance of clouds ſerves to ſhew that particles of water, copiouſly mixed with thoſe of air, prevent the tranſmiſſion of light, and render the maſs more or leſs opake, although the particles of each, ſeparately taken, are pellucid. The cauſe of this is to be ſought for in the difference of the refracting power; ſor, by means of that, the rays are turned from their original courſe at every particle, a circumſtance which is very injurious to tranſparency. A common experiment will ſtill more clearly elucidate this point. The moſt tranſparent glaſs, when reduced to powder, becomes opale, becauſe the air which now occupies the interſtices reflects the light much more copiouſly than the particles of glaſs. But upon pouring on water, which diſplaces the air, and which diſfers leſs from the glaſs in its reſracting power, a certain degree of tranſparency i / 92 Ia opbaneous Stone, &. IBook vI. ture of the Lydrophesous ſtone, which is opake when t but gradually acquire; tranſparency by lying in ræter. This ſtone agrees nearly in ſpecific gravity ih vater, at leaſt ĩ is. not more diſtant from it than glaſs. Its particles are tranſparent, but it is uniformly. perſorated by inviſible forarnina, ſo that the air and vater are admitted, but not readily When dry, thereſore, on account of the great difference of the medjums between the particles of the ſtone and thoſe of the air, it is opake; but when the water is gradually imhibed, it grows by degrees pellucid, beginning at the ſurface, and proceeding towards the center. That the hydropbanes abſorbs moiſture and emits air, vhich is a ſluid of much leſ denſity, appears from the weight ĩt acquires, and the ſmall bubbles vhich cover its ſurface during the time it is acquiring itã tranſparency. 4. Moon- ſtone, or rælnbow-fton eſcãs light of pearl and cãrnation còlours. Its fracture is foliated, and its colour pale blue ànd milky. 5. Chalcedony, or white agate.This ſtone ĩs uſuãlly cut with a convex ſurface, and receives a good poli. Its degree of hardneſ”s is intermediate, between that of the onyx and the true agate. It is ſe-mitranſperent, and its colour ĩs uſually very ſimilar to that of milk dilured with water. 6, The onyx is the hardeſt of flints. Its uſtal colour : is that of the. human nailss. It is either marked with white lines only, or vith black and white together. Heat deprives it of color, and, ir ſuddenly applied, cracks it.:. I 7. The carnelion derives its name e from its reſemBlance to the colour of fieh. It ĩs eiĩther quite red or of different ſhades of red, with brown and yellow. 8 T he ſardon 5x Is à mixture of the chalcedony and carnelion, ſometimes diſpoſed i in ſtrata, and ſometimes confuſedly blended and mixed together. Its colours are therefore a mixture of white and red, ſoetimes i in ſtripes, ſometimes ir rregulasly notched. lil : 9. Agate. This name is given to Rints that are variegated Vim different colours promiſcuouſ ly blended together, and they are eſteemed in proportion to the mixture and perfection of their colours. 10. Common ſlint or pebble, is in reality of the ſame nature with agate, but anting the beautiful and various colours of the ſubſtances that bear that name. Chalk and white lime-ſtone are uſually the matrices of flints, in which they are imbedded in the form of nodules, conſiſting of nuclei involved in a cruſt. u1tI. Chertis leſs hard and tranſparent than the è common ſlint. It is not in general found in lcoſe and ſingle irregular nodules, but forms veins in rocks. Cherts are ound of a ſleſhcolour, white, pale yellow, and greeniſh, and ſeem to be of an intermediate nature between the fints and jaſpers. Sand and gravel may be conſidered as ſlinty matters, torn away from the rocks in which they originall exiſted, and aſterwards worn and ſmoothed by the attrition occaſioned by the motion of water. Sand and gravel, however, conſiſt of all the- variety of ſtony matters which exiſted in the maſes from which they proceeded, and are therefore found of many- -different coIours and properties. : ll Chap- 14] ] Z Commn : Plint or Pal ble, &c. . The name of JasPERS is given to all the opake ſiliceous ſtones, which in their texture: reſemble dried clay The. principal circumſtance, beſides their appearance, which diſtinguiſhes them from the other ſiliceous orders, is their more eaſily melting. in the fire, They i in general contain much iron. They. are very hard, and admit a good poliſh; and they are variegated with diſferent colours They are ſeldom ranged in ſtrata, but form conſiderable maſſes æand veins in rocks. They are alſo ſound in ſmall round maſſes. The principal ſpecies of jaſpers are the followingthe white, grey, yellow, red, brown, green, veined, ſpotted, flowered, and green with red points, or blood-ſtone. Toys, and more eſpecially cups and ſaucers, are made of jaſper. Many antique ſculptures are on ſtones of this nature. V. The moſt common kind of FELDT-SPAR is formed of rhombic laminæ, and has therefore obtained the name of rhombic quartz. It gives fire with ſteel, whence it has been called ſpathum ſcinſillans. It is harder than the ſchiſti, and is fuſible. It is found in locſe maſſes, two inches long, or mixed with ſand, clay, &c. or bedded in granite. It is uſed in making china at Dreſden. Its colours are white, red, brown, pale, yello, or greeniſh. The Tabrador- ſtone is generally claſſ ed vith the ſeldt-ſpars. It admits of a very fine poliſh, and when in that ſtate reſiects a variety of beautiful colours. The ſtone itſelf is of different ſhades of grey. VI. SHIRL or cocꝶLE, of different ſhades of green; and the various ſpecies of whetſtones, are allo commonly referred to the ſilicecus order, though th? Iatter are generally in ſome meaſure compound. The uſes of the flinty ſubſtances are various, and hæve been partly intimated; but there is one art, in which their uſe is too conſpicuous to be paſſed over in ſilence. The art of making glaſę depends on the fuſion of earthy ſubſtances, of which the flinty earth is the beſt, and for that reaſon is called vitrifiable. But as eærths cannot eaſily be fuſed without mixture, it is neceſſary to add certain ſubſtances which may promote the vitrifcation. In the making of ordinary glaſs, to parts of ſand, or other ſiliceous matter, are mixed with about one of fixed alkali:. If the glaſs is not required to be tranſparent, impure alkali, not freed from the aſhes, is employed; but in making the finer and moſt tranſparent kinds of glaſ, care is taken to puriſy both the earth and the alkali. One of the chief points to be obſerved in the making of glaſ is to heat the mixture gradually, ſo that the elaſtic fluids may eſcape before the materials cohere, as the ingredients are othẽrwiſe apt to be ſo ſwelled by the diſengagement of air as to be loſt by flowing over the ſides r the veſſel in which they are heated. In order to prevent this, due proportions of ſand and alkali are mixzed together, and expoſed, during a conſiderable time, to a red. heat, not intenſe enough to melt them. BY this calcination the inlammable matters, which would have impaired the colour of the glaſs, are conſumed, and the air expelled. This firſt mixture of the materials of glaſs, aſter being treated in this manner, is called the fitt. The due degree of heat is an eſſential point in making of glaſs: it ought not only to be very ſtrong, but. alſo maintained during a long time. In great manuſactories the glaſs ĩs. ept fuſed during ten or twelve hours ptæ it is taken out of the pots. The ingredients are thus more completely melted, and more thoroughly mixed, and the- appearance oſ threads or veins is in ſome meaſure prevented, which proceed from the different denſity of diſferent portions of the glaſs, and which thereſore act diſferently on the rays of light. The imperfections of glaſſts are moſt ſenſibly felt in the conſtruction of optical inſtruments. Good glaſ, although kept in fuſion for a long time in a great heat, is never perfectly liquid. It is always forehat thick, and when taken out may be drawn into fine threads. The great ductility and ſlexibility of red hot glaſs ſits it for being reduced into any form. In general the glaſs ĩs taken out of the pots in which it is fuſcd by means of an iron tube. When a ſuſficient quantity of the glaſs is collected at the extremity of the tube, the workman begins to blow through it, and thus inſſates the glaſs. HFe occaſionally rolls it, in order to form it into a cylinder, a cone, &c. and if it becomes too cold, he heats it by holding it before the mouth of the furnace. Glaſs, in ĩts tough ſtate, may be cut with ſhears, bencied with pincers, preſſed into meulds, and wrought, in a veriety of methods dependent on theſe propertie- 5, into the vaſt variety of forms which ĩt is made to aſſume. Glaſs veſſcls as ſoon as made, are carried to an oven, in which they are gradually cooled; for without this proceſs, which is called æmealling, they would eĩther breal in the cooling, or be liable aſterwards to be broken by the ſlighteſt ſorce. : The principal defects oſ glaſs are colours, veins; and bubbles. The colours which generally injure the common alkaline glaſs are ſades of green, blue, and olive. Theſe are moſt effectually removed by the addition of a ſmall quantity of manganeſe. The cauſe of the veins has been aælready explained, and that of the bubbles depends on the imperfect expuiſion of air. The addition of calx oſ lead to glaſs renders it much more denſe, and leſs liable to be broken. Artificial gems are only the beſt inds of glaſ, coloured with different metals; but the modes of applying the ſeveral metals to this uſe ill be mentioned when treating oſ them. ilill l lil There are two toys made of unannealed glaſt, which, though commonly uſed for the amuſement of children, exhibit phenomena which juſtly intereſt the curioſity of the philoſopher. When àa drop of melted glaſs is ſuffered to fall into water, it aſſumes an oval form, vith a tail or neck reſembling the retort of a chemiſt. This is called Prince Ruperts drop, and poſſeſſes the ſingular property, that if the ſmalleſt portion is broken off, the whole drop flies into powder with a kind of exploſion, and a corſiderable ſhock is communicated to the hand that graſps it*. The other is called the philoſophical phial, which is a ſmall cylindrical veſſel of glaſs, open at the upper end, and rounded at the bottom. It is generally made of glaſs ſo thick that it will bear a ſmart blow againſt a hard body without breaking, but if a ſmall pebble or piece of ſlint is le fall into it, it immediately cracks and ſlies in pieces. This veſſel is formed upon ſimilar principles with Prince Rupert's drop, it conſiſts oſ glaſs ſuddenly cooled, and, I ſuſpect, by immerſion in water. Various explanations have been offered oſ theſe facts. The moſt generally received is founded on the aſſumption that the dimenſions of bodies which are ſuddenly cooled remain larger than i the cooling had been more gradua. The dimenſions, therefore, of the ſmooth external ſurface of theſe glaſes, which are ſuddenly cooled, are ſuppoſed to be larger than is adapted to the accurate envelopement of the internal  Honour ĩs like that glaſſy bubble, That givẽs philoſophers ſuch trouble; The one part crackd, the whole will ſiy, And wits are crackd to find out why. HvDIBRAS? part, which is neceſſarily cooled in a more gradual manner; if, therefore, by a crack or raſure, a ſolution of the continuity takes place in the external ſurface, the ſudden action of the parts which remained in a ſtate of tenſion, to recover that of perfect coheſion, is ſuppoſed to eſfect the deſtruction of the maſi. This explanation I confeſs has not appeared to me ſatisfactory, and I have been inclined to ſuſpect that the phenomenon ariſes either from a quantity of air being included in the ſubſtance of the glaſs, which ruſhes ſuddenly out, on the ſurface which includes it being broken; or that by the ſudden cooling the pores of the glaſs are ſealed up by the fine ſmooth ſurface, and contain little or no air, ſo that on the continuity oſ that ſurface being interrupted, the air ſuddenly ruſhing into all the pores of the glaſs may effect its diſſolution. That the whole effect depends on deſtroying the continuity of the ſurface, I have ſufficiently proved; for unleſs the flint or pebble which is let fall into the philoſophical phial is large and angular enough to ſcratch the ſurface of the glaſs, ĩt will not break. To aſcertain whether the fracture of theſe toys depends or not upon the air, a few experiments might be made on Prince Rupert's drops in a vacuum; when, if it proceeds from air included in the drop, the exploſion will be more violent, or the drop would perhaps ſpontaneouſly burſt; and if from the contrary C u a Pp. XV. OF THE STRONTHIAN, JARGONIC, AND ADAMANTINE EARTHS. The Scottiſb or Strenthian Earth diſcovered b Dr. Crauwſord.Ofthi Fargonic Earth.Adamantine Earth—All of theſe ſcarce Minerals. HE ScorTisu or STRONTHIAN earth was long unnoticed, and vas conſounded with the calcareous genus, to which it bears a near reſemblance. It was firſt brought under the conſideration of the learned by the late Dr. Crawſord. It has hitherto been only found in a mild ſtate, united with fixed air, which (like limeſtone) it loſes by a ſtrong heat, when it forms æ kind of lime. This lime, however, is more ſoluble in water than that produced from common calcareous earth, and is ſpecifically heavier. It decompoſes vitriolated tartar, but is itſelſ decompoſed by barytic lime. It alſo decompoſes ſolutions of common gypſum, and of nitrated or muriated calx. Vitriolic acid dropped into this lime water produces an immediate precipitation, which it does not in common lime water. The earth itſelf is found in large light or whitiſh green maſſes. Its ſpecific gravity is from 34. to ] . 644Of the JARCONIC earth, the only ſpecies yet known is the ſtone called the Jargon of Ceylon, which is generally ofa grey or greeniſh olive colour. The cryſtallization preſents either right-angled quadrangular priſms ſurmounted by pyramids, or octohedrals. The external luſtre is caſual, but the internal is ſtrong, inclining to the metallic. Its ſpeciſic gravity ĩs 4. 416. In ĩts qualities it more reſembles argil, than any other kind of earth. It is incapable of uniting with fixed air. The AbaAMANTINE earth is alſo a late diſcovery, and was found in a ſtone called adamantine or diamond ſpar, in which it conſtituted about one fourth of the weight. It is inſoluble in acids, and infuſible by alkalis; in this laſt property therefore it differs from ſilex, and in the former from all the other earths. Its ſpecific gravity ĩs ſaid to exceed 3,000. Theſe earths are all of them ſcarce, and form a ſubject rather intereſting to the curious, than important to the general reader. The Stronthian ĩs ſaid to be the moſũ abundant, and yet even this ſeems ſcarcely to have been ſubjected to a ſuſficient analyſis to aſcertain its nature and properties; nor will it be a matter oſ ſurprize, if on further examination theſe new earths ſhould be found to be only compounds derived from ſome of the five principal earths, ſince the more the works of nature are explored, the more of ſimplicity is diſcovered, and the genuine effect of ſcience is rather C H A P. XVI. COMPOUND EARTHS. Defnition of this Genus.Various compound Stones. N a ſtrict ſenſe all earths and ſtones, as they exiſt in nature, may be denominated compound, ãs there are none which are wholly ſimple. By compound carths, however, is here meant ſuch as are formed of two or more kinds of ſtony matter, and vhich in general conſtitute a maſs of an heterogeneous appearance. In treating of theſe ſubſtances, the arrangement of M. Daubenton appears the moſt perfect and commodious. Mixed Stones, OF TWO GENERA. Quartz and ſcintillating ſpar -CO3Granitin. Quartz and ſchir- - -C3Granitello. Quartz and ſteatites -2-Quartzoſe ſteatites. Quartz and mica - - -NMicaceous quartz, Tranſparent quartẽ and mica -NMiicaceous cryſtal. 1 Garnet on grit Quartz in grit and gem ſtone dJ. Galone. Lit ſtone. Quartæ in grit and mica -Micaceous grit. Quartz in grit and calcareous ſ1 Cryſallized grit. matter - - - ll 2 Grit in ſtalactites. ſandy and ſiliceous Qarti in ſand and opake ſtone ' an U cias. l . : ſcintillating ſchiſtus Quar tz in ſand and ſchiſtus s hornſtone. trap. Quoartz in ſand and zeolite ſcintillating zeolite. Scintillating ſpar and paſte, or l i ophites cement, of ſchirl Semi- tranſparent ſtone, with opake s jaſpered agate, or ſtone - - - - agatized jaſper. . . micaceous ſpathoſe Schirl and mica - - s hir. Schiſtus and mica - - micaceous ſchiſtus. Schiſtus and marble Florence marble. I Green Egyptian marble. 2 ſea-green marble. Serpentine and marble - 3 green antique marble. 4 green marble of Suza. -5 green marble of Varalia. Ponderous ſpar and calcal alkaline ponderous ſpar. r eous matter - OF THREE GENERA. Quartz in ſand, ſchiſtus, and mica - Rough whet- ſione. Quartz, gem, and mica - -ugarnet rock. Quartzoſe paſte, ſcintillating ſpar nſ porism large fragments, and ſchorl Quartzoſe paſte, ſcintillating ſpar in Jerpein harã ſerlarge fragments, and ſchir- pentine. Quartz, ſchirl, and ſteatittc- tubereulous rock: Qe⸗ ſcintillatng ſ ſpar, and lemie OF FOUR GENERA. mica : E Quartz, ſcintillating ſcar, ſchirl and 1 lll OF SEVERAL GENERA, MORE OR LESS IN NUMBER, UNITED IN univerſal breccias. BRECCIAS. - - DOUBLE BRECCIAS. 1 Fragments of porphyry, with a paſte of Varieties. porphyry. 2 Fragments of granite, with a paſte of ſchrl. C u a rPr. XVII. VOLCANIC PRODUCTS S. LavaDiferent KindsProgreſi of a River of LavaCompound Parts of Lava Pumice StoneZBaſaltesTrapp.Terra Puxzolana. I. AVA is of very various appearance, according to ſts compoſition, and its more or leſs perfect vitrification. The materials of which lavas conſiſt, are the common ſubſtances to be found every where in the earth, namely, ſtones, metallic ores, clay, ſand, &c.; and as there is room for great variety in the combinations of theſe ſubſtances, the melted maſſes formed by them muſt in different circumſtances be very various. Some lavas are very compact, and receive a beautiſul poliſh, exhibiting great variety of colours and forms. Others are extremely porous, and mixed with ſcoriæ or droſs. On the diſferent conſiſtence of lavas depends their capacity for being converted into mould, capable of ſupporting vegetables. Some lavas have a tendency to crumble into duſt immediately on iſſuing from the crater; others are a perfect glaſs, and are calculated to reſiſt for a long time every approach towards diſſolution. Lava, when firſt thrown out from the crater of a volcano, is an imperfect liquid maſs, and flows down the ſide of the mountain with conſiderable rapidity. From loſs of heat, however, its ſurface is ſoon converted into a tough and black cruſt, which, as it becomes thicker, gradually impedes the progreſs of the fluid Iava which is contained within it. This cruſt is frequently broken, when the ſtream of lava reſembles a river with maſſes of ice ſloating on ĩts ſurſace. Fluid lava ſometimes flows for a conſiderable diſtæance, under the tenacious ſcum, and agæin appears beyond ĩt in all its ſplendor. In the night time the courſe ol the lava appears like flame, in conſequence of the bitumen, which is mixed with the lava, and vhich Is ſuppoſed to be the principal cauſe of its fluidity. In the day-time its courſe is marked by a thick white ſmoke. Mr. Kirwan divides lavas into three kinds, the cellular, the compact, and the vitreous. All Iavas are more or leſs magnetic, give fire with ſteel, are of a granular texture, and melt without the addition of other ſubſtances. The cellular lavas are ſuch as have undergone only the firſt and Ioweſt degree of fuſior, being juſt ſoſtened and heated ſuſficiently to expel the fixed air contained in the matter from which they are formed, which ſeems to be argillaceous ſlate; hence they abound in ſmall cavities occaſioned by the expanſion of that air. The ſpecific gravity of ſome lavas from theſe cavities is ſo ſmall, that they float for ſome time on water. From this circumſtance they have ſometimes been miſtaen for pumice- ſtone; but they differ ſrom it, becauſe their texture is never filamentous. The perfectly vitrified lavas muſt have been expoſed to an immenſe heat, as they are very difficultly fuled without addition. M. Sauſſure has ingeniouſly imitated all the different kinds of lavas, by diſferent degrees oſ fuſion of the earthy ſubſtances from which they are formed. M. Bergman analyzed a ſpecimen of the perfect kind, and found an hundred parts to conſiſt of forty-nine of ſiliceous earth, thirty-five of argillaceous, ſour of calcareous earth, and twelve of 1ron. The beds of lava are deepeſt and narroweſt near the crater, and broader and ſhellower as they advance, unleſs ſome valley intervenes. Pumice- ſtones lie at a ſtill greater diſtance; and ſrom theſe obſervations, ſays Mr. Kirwan, extinguiſhed volcanoes may be tracedl. The quantities of matter thrown out of volcanoes at one eruption, are oſten ſo great as to cover æ ſpace of country of maæny miles, and to be many years in cooling. II. PuMICE-STONE is a volcanic ejection, but is ſrequently found at a diſtance from its origin. Its colours are grey, white, and reddiſa brown. It is hard, rough, porous, conſiſts of ſlender fibres parallel to each other, is very light, and with diſficulty gives fire with ſteel. It ſeems to have been originally an aſbeſtos decompoſed by the action of firee One hundred parts contain from ſix to fifteen of magneſia, with a ſmall portion of calcareous earth; the remainder is chieſly ſilex. Pumice- ſtone ſwims on water. It is uſed to ſmooth rough ſurfaces, and, in a ſtate of powder, in various branches of manufacture, chieſly for poliſhing. III. BasaLTEs is a ſtone of a dark grey colour, covered with a ferrugineous cruſt, and generally cryſtallized in opake triangular or polyangular columns. When it is amorphous*, and breaks into large, thick, ſquare pieces, it is called rę?€70. When heated red hot, and quenched in water, It becomes by degrees of æ reddiſh brown. It melt without mixture into a perſect ſlag. One hundred perts contain fiſty-two ſiliceous, fiſfteen argillaccous, three calcareous, two of magneſion earth, and twenty-ſive of iron. Eaeſaltes æ Xot of a regælar form. ſometimes is found in large columns with convex and concave articulations, ſo as to reſcmble an artificial ſtructure: of this kind are the baſaltic pillars in Ireland, called the Giants Cauſeway. Baſaltes has always, till very lately, been conſidered as a volcanic product; and in corroboration oſ this opinion it is aſſerted that glaſs, in cooling, has been nown to aſſumèe the regular baſaltic form. Sir William Hamilton remarked, both in Sicily and Naples, that ſuch lavas as have run into the ſea are either formed into regular baſaltes, or have a great tendency to that form. Mr. Kirwan, hovwever, in the laſt edition of his Elements of Mineralogy, takes conſiderable pains to controvert the common opinion. His principal arguments to prove that baſaltes are formed by water, and not by fire, are the cloſenels of their textures, ſince they are quite free from the cavities which are numerous in all other volcanic products, and their containing mild calcareous earth, which could not have been the caſe if they had been ſubjected to ſuch a degree of heat as to have reduced them to a ſtate of fuſion. Baſaltes alſo contain Zeolites in ſome inſtances, which muſt have loſt the water combined with them, if they had been ſubjected to much heat. In baſaltes there is no appeãfance of vitrification, which they muſt have had if they had cryſtallized from a ſtate of fuſion. Baſaltes are alſo frequently found, not only at a diſtance from volcanoes, but mixed and ſurrounded with ſtrata, hich have evidently derived their origin from water. For inſtance, their ſubſtance ſometimes paſſes gradually into argillites and ſandſtones. Mr. Kirwan ſeerms at a loſs to account for the peculiar ſhape of baſaltes; but this is equally difficult on the principles of either theory. He mentions an inſtance, however, of a ſtone cracking into pieces of a ſimilar figure. On the whole, Mr. Kirwan thinks it much more probable that baſaltes furniſh the materials of volcanic products, than that they themſelves are of volcanic origin. IV. TERRA PUZZOLANA Or Terras, is a volcanic production, of a grey, brown, yellowiſh or blackiſh colour, looſe, granular, or duſty and rough, porous and ſpongy, reſembling a clay hardened in the fire, and then reduced to a groſs powder. Its moſt diſtinguiſhing property is, that when mixed with about onethird of its weight of lime and water, ĩt hardens very ſuddenly, and forms a cement which ĩs more durable in water than any other. Its indurating power ſeems to ariſe from the dry ſtate of the halſ- baked argillaceous particles, which cauſes them to imbibe water very rapidly, and thus the deſiccation of the calcareous carth is accelerated. It is found not only in Italy, but alſo in France, in the provinces of Auvergne and Limoges, and alſo in England and elſewhere. According to Bergman's analyſis, one hundred parts contain from fiſty five to ſixty of ſiliceous earth, nineteen or twenty of argillaceous, five or ſix of calcareous, and C H A P. XVIII. ME TALS. Us of MetalsTheir Properties Weight, Otacity, Mallealilir⸗, Duttility, Fuſibility Mix avith each other.  heir Inſlammability. CcCalcination. Entire and Semi-metalsPeifec? and imperfeã. ANatural Hiſtory of MetalsVWorking of Mines —Aſaying. Smelting. Union avith AcidsAction of other Subſtances ou Meials. T7 ETALLIC ſubſtances are valuable for their durability, their capacity of aſſuming and retaining all ſorts of forms and impreſſions; the cloſeneſ of their texture, which renders them capable of poliſh; the firm coheſion of their particles, which renders them highly proper for utenſils, where great ſtrength ĩs required to be combined with moderate bulk. Several of the metals are alſo highly uſeful as medicines. The firſt and moſt obvious property of metals is their remarkable weight, in which they exceed all other bodies. By this circumſtance they are diſtinguiſhed from earths; the lighteſt of metals, which is tin, being ſeven times the weight of water, whereas the heavieſt earth is only between four and five times the weight of that ſluid. Metallic ſubſtances are by far the moſt opake of all bodies. The moſt opake ſtone divided into thin plates, has more or leſs of tranſparency, whereas gold is the only metal which admits of being reduced to ſuch a degree of thinneſs as to afford the ſmalleſt perceptible tranſmiſſion of light. Gold in leaf, which is about %59 part of an inch in thickneſs, tranſmits light of a lively green colour; but ſilver and braſũ leaf arę perſectly opake. The opacity of metallic bodies renders them exceedingly proper for reflecting the rays of light, as no bodies poſſeſs this property in ſo eminent a degree. Thus we obſerve that glaſs reſiects objects very imperfectly, unleſs coated with metal, as in looking-glaſſes. The capacity of reſiecting light depends on the degree of poliſh and the whiteneſs oſ ſurface, conſequently white metallic ſubſtances reſlect a greater quantity of light, and are more brilliant, than thoſe which are coloured. A property which ſeems to belong excluſively to metals, and yet not to all of them, is malleability. This confiſts in a capacity of having their ſubſtance extended, and their ſurface increaſed, either in breadth or length, without being liable to fracturee The capacity, however, of being extended in length and Dreadth is not exactly the ſame, for metals which ædmit of extenſion under the hammer cannot always be drawn into wire, which property is diſtinguiſhed from the other by the term ductility. Beating always reduces metals to a ſtate of rigidity and brittleneſ. To remedy this, the metals are generally heated red Lot, and cooled again ſlowly; in this caſe their malIeability will be increaſed, and this is called annealing them. Crammer ſays, that if gold is annealed in this manner the leaf will be opake, nd that the tranſmiſſion of light through ordinary gold leaf depends on ſmall cracks and flaws in the metal. If this aſſertion is true, it will in a great meaſure eſtabliſh the perfect opacity of metallic ſubſtances. Metals, when hammered, give out a degree of heat, and at the ſame time become brittle; and the only method of reſtoring their malleability is to expoſe them to the action of heat, and to ſuſfer as much of this as poſſible to fix ſelſ in their ſubſtance, by cooling them gradually. From theſe facts it is probable that the malleability of metals, as well as fluidity and elaſticity in general, depends on the particles of bodies being kept at a diſance by the preſence of latent heat. Metals are of all bodies the beſt conductors of electricity. Metals are fuſible by heat, and one of them ſmercury) is well known to exiſt in a ſtate oſ fuſion in the ordinary temperature of the atmoſphere. The particles of metals have a remarkably ſtrong attraction for each other, which is evinced by ſmall portions of metal, vhen in a ſtate of fuſion, having a tendency to aſſume a globular form. Mon metaels will uniformly mix in all proportions vith each other; the ſpeciãc gravities, however, of theſe compounds is ſcarcely ever ſuch, as would be mathematically deduced from the ſpecific gravities oſ the metals employed, on the ſuppoſition of their junction by ſimple contact. Mixtures of metals are ore ſuſible than might be expected from the degree o ſnbiits of their component parts, and are therefore conveniently uſed as ſolders. It is found that metals which, aſter having been fuſcò, are ſuffered to conl gradually, evince a tendency to aſſume a regular figure, and to eryſtallize in general in an octahedral form. Metals, in their ſplendid or reguline* ſtate, have æ conſiderable attraction for oxygen, and are in this re= This is the ſtate in which metals uſually appear when vrought. The ſtate of a calx or ore is eſſentially different, they then appear like coloured earthy ſubſtances. The name r/gulus was given by the fanciful alchemiſls to the metallic button, found in the bottom of the crucible aſter an 2ſũuy, from the idea that this button contained gold, which they called the Aing of metals. ſpect neærly allied to the inflammable ſubſtances. Tron burns with a bright flame when heated to a certain cegree, and immerſed in vital air; and a mixture of tin and nitre produces a violent deflagration. Zinc, vhen heated and acted on only by common atmoſpheric air, burns with a bright and vivid flame like phoſphorus. It is remarkable that mixtures of metals calcine more eæſily than the metals in a ſeparate ſtate. Thus a mixture of lead and tin, neither of which, vwhen ſeparate, aſford heat and light, in their mixture produce both, and the calcination is remarkably rapid. From the addition of oxygen the weight of the calx is greater than that of the quantity of the metal from vhich it was produced. In ſome metals, however, the attraction for oxygen is ſo weal (as is the caſe with the finer metals) that it is only by particular proceſſes that they can be combined with it. Metals united with oxygen loſe their ſplendor, malleability, and texture, and are denominated calces. According to the old chemical theory, the calx of a metal was deemed a ſimple ſubſtance; and was called the earth or baſis of a metal; and it was ſuppoſed that this earth, united with phlogiſton, conſtituted the metal in its perfect ſtate. It is now, however, very ſatisſactorily proved, that the metallic ſtate is the more ſimple, and that the calx is a combination oſ the metal with oxygen. Metals are reduced from the calciform to the reguline or metallic ſtate, by heating them in contact with ſubſtances which have a ſtronger attraction ſor oxygen than themſelves, as charcoal, tallov, &c. Metals which are malleable are called entire metals; and thoſe vhich are brittle, ſemi- metals. Metals are alſo diſtinguiſhed into perſect and imperfect. The perfect are ſuch as are not calcined by being heated in contact with air; and are three in number, ſilver, gold, and platina: the other metals are calcined in thoſe circumſtances, and are called imperfect. It will eaſily be underſtood that theſe differences merely indicate diſferent degrees of attraction for oxygen; and as in this reſpect, as well as in regard to malleability, there are numerous gradations among the metals, it will be neceſſary to treat ſeparately of each metal as a diſtinct ſubſtance. I ſtiall begin with ſuch metals as have moſt reſemblance to the earths, and are therefore called ſemi- metals, and conclude with thoſe which have the metallic properties in the higheſt perfection. Thoſe metallic bodies with which we are at preſent acquainted, and which we can reduce to the metãllic or reguline ſtate, are the. following ſeventeen: : J. Arſenicc. 10. Iron. ] à 2. Molybdena. i1. Tin. g 3.Tungſtein.  12. Leadl. b 4. Manganeſe. B 13. Copper. li 5. Nickel. ?E1I4. Mercury. E 6. Cobalt. EI3. Siiven..]. 7. Bifmut.35. Golo. g 8: Antimony.. ;. Platine. ꝗ 9. Zinc. lll m DOf theſe the nine firſt are calle d ſemi-metals; from defect of malleability; the five following imperfect metals, ſrom their being calcineable by heat and air; and the three laſt, peiEæ; ſrom their capacity of reſiiling the action of heat and air without change. It is neceſ: ſary, however, to remark, that to the above liſt of nine, Iate diſcoveries have added four nev ſemirmetals, viZz. vuraænite, ſylvanite, titanite, and menachanite, of Which I ſhall nfterar treat in a diſtinct chapter. : Metals exiſt in a  ſtate of n nature in four different ſorms. llE I. They are found in a native ſtate of purity, with all the metallic properties. Gold is always found in this ſtate; ſilver, copper, mercury, biſmuth, and arſenic oſten; iron ſeldom; and Iead, æinc, and regulus oſ antimony ſtill more rarely. 2. Metals are found in the ſtate of earth or calx, without the metallic aſpect, and often reſembling ochres. 3. The common ſtate, however, in which metals are found is that of ores. In this ſtate they are either combined vith ſulphur or with ſome metal, the moſt common of which is arſcnic*,. 4. The Iaſt ſtate in which metals are found, is that oſ a combination uith ſeline ſubſtnces, and almoſt always acids. The vitriolic acid is moſt frequently found combined with metals, viz. zinc, lead, copper, and iron. The carbonic acid is ælſo a ccrmmon mineralizer, and the arſenical and phoſphoric acids have likewiſe been diſcovered in combination with metals. Metallic ſubſtances are more commonly found in mountains than in plains, and almoſt always in ſuch mountains as ſorm continued chains. It is in the ſtratiGed mountains that metals moſt abound, where he inclination of the ſtrata, in conſequence of the convulſions of nature, brings a variety of ſubſtances into view, which muſt otherwiſe have been for ever concealed beneath the reach of human inveſtigation. There are entire mountains which conſiſt of iron ore, but in gencral the metallic part of a mountain is very inconſiderable in proportion to the wholee. The ores ſom:times run parãllel to the ſtony ſtrata; the layer on which the ore is placed is called the bed or floor  In this and the ſolloing ſlate they are ſaid, in technical Iangu/ge, 10 be miræliueã; tha. is combined with ſome other mineral ſubſiaree. of the mine; the other which covers it, is called the rooſ. Sometimes, however, the metallic ſtrata, which are always more irregular than the other ſtrata of which the mountain is compoſed, interſect the bodies which ſurround them in a variety of directionss The metallic ores are accompanied with ſtony matters, which ſeem to have been formed at the ſame time. Theſe ſtone are uſually quartæ and ſpar; ; they are called the rider or matrix * of the metal, and muſt neither be confounded with the mineraliZing ſubſtance which is intimately combined with the metal, nor with the general maſs of ſtone; of which the mountain containing the metal is compoſed. It is obſerved that the vegetables which grow on metalliferous mountains are ;:n the trees ſmall ſinuous, and deformed, and the ſands often exhibit metallic colours. Mineral metallic ſprings are uſually found in the vicinity; by the examination of which, and of the ſands over which they flow, æ tolerably æccurate judgment may be ſormed of the metallic contents of the neighbouring ſtrata When metallic vęins appear at the ſurface of the corth, the ground may be broken into with great probability of advantage, and the boring inſtrument, by bringing up the ſubſtances which compoſe the internal parts of the mountain, together with the metallic minerals, ſerves to ſhew their quality, as well as the reſiſtance which may be expected in digging. : Before a metallic vein is wrought vith a view to proft, it is neceſſary to acertain the proportion of metal contained in it, and this is called aſſaying. In theſe ſmall trials the fuſibility of- the maũ is increaſed by the addition of three times the quantity of the black flux, which is made by burning tògether two parts of r 80 called from; its frequently incloſing the ore. The ſparry matters are alſo ſom etimes called by min eralogits gangues. tartar with one of nitree. The alkali of this compound increaſes the fuſibility of the ſtony matter mixed à the ore, and conſequently aſfords the metal an oppcrtunity of ſt ſeporating from it; while the charcoal contained in it, and which proceeds from the impurity of the tartar, abſtracts the oxygen of the ore, and reduce the metal to a reguline form. When the operation has been properly perſormed, the metal, or regulus, is ſound in the form of a button at the bortom of the maſ, and being veighed ſhews the proportion of metal contained in the ore. This method is uſcd in reducing ſmall quantities, as in aſaying ofores, but would be tco expenſive in large operations. In this latter caſe it ĩs cuſtornary to mix the ores or calces with the fuel, but to let as little air as poſſible paſs through ĩt, as this would tend to re-ealcine the metal. To prevent this eſfect, a particular ſort of furnace is employed, in which charcoal is chieſly uſed. It ſrequently happens that the ſame minerals contain the perſect metals mixed with the imperſect; theſe are ſeparated both in the ſmall and Iarge way by heating the mixed maſs in contact with air. By this operation the imperfect metal is reduced to a calx, and leaves the perfect metal in a ſtate of purity. If the remaining metællic matter is ſtilla compound, and contains two of the perſect metals, theſe are ſeparated by expoſing them, with as large a ſurface as poſſible, to the action of a menſtruum, which has the property of diſſolving one oſ them without the other. There is alſo a method of aſſaying in the humid way, by ſubmitting the ores to the action of difſerent acids; but ihis is not ſo practicable as the other. In the extraction of metals in the large way, the ore is poundeq, waſhed, roaſted, ſmelted, and reſined. By pounding, the ſtony matters are ſeparated from the metallic, and the whole being then waſhed on inclined planes or tables, the ſtony matter being lighter is waſned away, while the metallic remains behind. The ro⸗ ſting or burning ĩs intended to exnel the volatile metters. Ores which contain much ſulphur muſt be ronſted in the open air, but ſuch as contain but little may be roaſted in the furnaces which aſterwards ſerve to fuſe them. Some ores are fuſible alone, cthers recuire to be mixed with different ſlues. The methods of refining metals are extremely various, and depend cn particular chemical aſfinities, which will be mentioned under the head of each metal. The ſalts, and of them the acids in particular, have great eſfect on metalss. Melals unite with acids into compounds, many oſf which cryſtallize. The corroſiveneſs of the acid is abated by its union with the metal, but not in ſo great a degree as by its union with the allalies or earths. Neither is the poirt of ſaturation ſo well marked in the union of an acid vith a metal as with an alkali. The ſame acid may, in many caſes, be united to the ſeme metal in diſferent Froportions; when the acid is in exceſs the maſe i⸗ celiqueſcent, when ĩt is deſicient it ſeerms to produce litle other eſfect on the metal than to deſtroy its texture, and reduce ĩt to a friable and earthlike ſtate. Every metal, however, is not diſpoſed to unite with every acid, though ſome unite with all; others vith only one acid. The order alſo in which the acids attract the metals is diſſerent from that in which they attract the algęalis. Metals attract the muriatic acid moſt ſtrongly, next the vitriolic, and laſt the nitrous. Tetals which diſſolve in the ſame acid diſfer very much in the force with which they adhere to it, ſo that they may be employed to precipitate one another. Thus, if we add to the ſolution of ſilver in aqua- ſortis, quickſilver, it precipitates the ſilver; copper, the quickſilver, iron or lead, the copper; and zinc, which precipitates thee, may tſelf be precipitated by an alkali. j The ſolution of metals in the acids is attended vith the eſcape of an elaſtic Vapour, and an eſferveſcence ?. This appearance is proved to ariſe from a decompoſtion either of the acid or the water, and the elaſtic fluid differs in different caſes, according to the ſource from which it derives its origin; when it ariſes from the decompoſition of water, it is hydrogen or inſlammable gas; when from that of the nitrous acid, nitrous g⸗ 13, &. Before the metal can be diſſolved, it is neceſſary thatit ſould be oxygenated; and thereſore when its attraction is ſufficiently ſtrong, it decompoſes the acid or the water, by abſtracting their oxygen. It has been already remarked, that the muriatic acid has the ſtrongeſt attraction for metals, and the nitrous Ieſs than either that or the vitriolic. From merely obſerving the action of theſe acids on metals, however, a diferent concluſion might be drawn, for the nitrous acid acts with violence and rapidity i in compariſon with. the other two; and the muriatic, when in its pureſt ſtate, has the leaſt action of the three: This ſeeming inconſiſtency depends on the different degrees of attraction which the baſes of the different aciũs have for oxygen. The reaſon, therefore, why ſome metals cannot be diſſolved in particular acids, is, that they have not a ſuſiciently ſtrong attraction for oxygen to decompoſe the acid. If we ſepatate a metal from an acid by æny ſubſtance which is not t capable of depriving it of oxysę en, ve alvays xæ This was ſormerly adduced mong the prooſ for the exiſtencè of hlogiſton, w hich, united with a ſmall quantity of the water or acid, vas ſuppoſcd to conilitute this. elaſtic fiuid, at the ſTame time that the metal, by its loſs, was depiived of its ſplendour, &e. obtain it in a calcined ſtate. Thus gold, if precipitated from its ſolution in aqua regia by an alkali, is a calx; but if precipitated by any of the inflammable ſubſtances, as aromatic oils or ſpirits oſ wine, or by ancther metal, it appears in the metallic form. If metals are calcined previous to being united with acids, they produce no eſcape of gas, becauſe being already furniſhed with oxygen, they have no tendency to decompoſe the acid. Light appears to alter the colour and brilliancy of ſome metallic matters, independently of the action of uir; for when expoſed to light in tranſparent veſſels well cloſed, they become tarniſhed, and Ioſe their metallic brilliancy. Heat applied to metals produces no other eſſects than expanſion and fuſion, if the air is completely excluded, unleſs carried to ſuch a degree as to volatilize them; but even in that caſe, hen the heat ceaſes to act, they return to their original ſtatet Metals, on being converted into vapour, boĩl like other ſluids, and even gold and ſilver are capable of this ſtate when acted on by a large concave mirror. Moſt of the combuſtible bodies act on metals. Inflammable gas gives them a deeper colour, and is capable of reducing ſome of them to the metallic ſtate. Sulphur, and its combinations with alkalies, called hepars, act powerfully on metals. From what is hitherto known of metals, there iĩs C u A P. XIX. ARS E NIC. Natural Hiſory of ArſenieDMode of reducing it to the metallic Fornm, VWhite Enamel. —Orpiment.Realgar.Its Uſe in Medicine A dreadful Poiſon; how to detec? it in the Body.æl Remedy ſor ile Poiſin of Arſenic. RSENIC is often found native, in black heavy maſſes, but not very brilliant. It has ſometimes the metallic Iuſtre, and reflects the colours of the rainbow; in its fracture it is more briiliant than at its ſurface, and ſeems compoſed of a great number of ſmall ſcales. Native arſenic is very eaſily known, when it has the metallic brilliancy and ſcaly texture. It is, however, more frequently found in the form of a powder, or, in chemical language, of fiowers*, or mixed with certain earths. Cobalt ores contain much arſenic, and that which is commonly ſold is brought chiefly from the cobalt-works in Saxony. The ore is thrown into a furnace, reſembling a bakers oven, with n ſlue or horizontal chimney, nearly two hundred vards Iong, into which the fumes paſs, and are condenſed in the form of a grey or blackiſh powder. This is refined by a ſecond ſublimation in cloſe veſſels, with a little pot ah to detain the impuriĩties. As the heat is conſiderabie, it melts the lowers into thoſe white cryſtalline maeſies which are met with in commerce. The regulus is obtained ſrom this ſubſtance, which : Flovers, in the old chemical language, means thoſe matters which by heat are raiſed into the nreck of a retort in the form of very ſine powder, as ſlowers of ſulphur, &c.Ii was, probably, riginally Aour, 5 a calx of arſenic, by heating it with one-tenth of its weight oſ charcoal, or of any unctuous matter. The mixture is put into a tall veſſel, and a gradual and gentle heat applied to the lower part of it, while the upper is kept cool by the air. The arſenic, when early ret hot, parts with ĩts oxygen, and riſes to the upper part of the veſſel, where it is condenſed in the metallic form. To give it, however, its perſect metallic ſplendour and opacity, the ſublimation muſt be repeated. The regulus of arſenic s ofa bright yellowiſh white colour, very ponderous and friable, and ſubject to tarniſh and become black on expoſure to air. If heat is applied to the regulus in contact with air, it is volatilized beſore it melts, and is at the ſame time imperfectly calcined. The fumes are dangerous, and have a ſtrong and offenſive ſmell, reſembling that of garlic, The white calæ of arſenic is ſo for in a ſaline ſtate a5 to be ſoluble in eighty times its weight of cold, or fiſteen times that of boiling water. When diſtilled with the nitrous acid, it decompoſes that fluid by depriving it of part of its oxygen. The arſenic, by this addition of oxygen, is reduced to the ſtate of an acid Ieſs volatile than either the regulus or calx, but retaining the form of a white concrete ſubſtance. The oxygenated murĩatic gas likewiſe reduces arſenic to the ſtate of an acid. Arſenic readily melts with other ſubſtances ſo as to form glaſs, and even promotes their fuſion. At firſt ĩt always renders the glaſs miliy, but by a continuation of Eeat the arſenic evaporates, and the glaſ becomes quite trunſparent. It is an ingredient in the vhite enamel dial-plates; and it forms thoſe white ſpirals which are common in the ſtalks of wineglaſes. r 123. Poiſonous Nature of Arſenic. ſBook VI. Sulphur unites readily ith arſenic into a compound more fuſible than the arſenic. itſelf. Orpiment is a combination of arſenic and ſulphur, of a yellow colour, It is found- naturally in the earth, gererally of an irregular form, and compoſed of ſhining flexible Iaminæ. Its ſpecific gravity, according to Kirwan, is 3315, who alſo aſſerts that it contains one-tenth part of its weight of ſulphur. The ſame author mentions, that realgar, or the red combination of arſenic and ſulphur, contains ſixteen paerts of ſulphur in the hundred, and is of the ſpecific gravity of 3,225. Chaptal, however, obſerves that the difference between realga and orpiment does not conſiſt in the proportions of ſulphur, norhing more being neceſſary in or rder to convert orpiment into realgar. than expoſure tõ a ſtrong heat. The violent action of arſenic on the animal machine is much abated by combination with ſulphur. Common white arſenic has ſometimes been ſucceſsſully uſed in doſes of one- twelſth or one- ſixteenth of a grain. Received, however, in any conſiderable quantity into the body, it produces dryneſs of the mouth, heat in the throat, excruciating pains in the boels, attended ſometimes with vomiting of blood, cold ſweats, &. On diſſection, the bowels are found inſſlated and corroded. Many black and livid ſpots appear on the ſtomach and ſmall inteſtinẽs, ſometimes gangrenous. But theſe ſigns are not altogether to be depended on. Sume of the arſenĩc is frequently found, and may be eaſily diſitinguiſhed,. The powder is heavy, and eaſily ſeparates from the lighter contents oſ the bowels, by waſhing with- vater; ihe arſenic always falling to the bottom. a very little of this is ſuſficient to give the ſmell oſ garlic, and tinge ropper vhite, if heat is applied to it. It was formerly uſual to give mucilaginous drinks, or milk or mild oĩls, to perſons poiſoned by arſenic. But Navier, a phyſician of Chalons, vho has madæ experiments to aſcertain the beſt remedies againſt the poiſon of arſenic, has diſcovered a ſubſtance which combines with ĩt in the humid way, and deſtroys, in a great meaſure, its cauſticity. This ſubſtance is the calcareous or alkaline liver of ſulphur, which is ſtill better adapted to the intention, when it holds a ſmall quantity of iron in ſolutionn. When this martial hepar is poured into a ſolution of arſenic, it is decompoſed without emitting any ſmell, becauſe the arſenic combines with the ſulphur, and forms orpiment, and at the ſame time unites with the iron. Navier preſcribes a dram of the liver of ſulphur in a pint of water, of vhich he directs a glaſs to be taken at a time; or five or ſix grains of dry liver of ſulphur may be given in pills, a glaſs of warm water being given after each pil. When the firſt ſymptoms are diſſipated, he recommends the ſulphureous mineral ſprings. Navier likewiſe approves the uſe of milk, becauſe it diſſolves the arſenic as vell as water, but he condemns the uſe of oils, which have not that property. Arſenic ſhews a ſtrong diſpoſition to unite with all the metals except platina. By a mixture of it in ĩts ordinary ſtate with copper, a metal is produced re ſembling ſilver. It generally gives metals a white colour, C u A P. XXX. MOLYBDE NA. Short Account of this Semi metalMay be reduced to an AcidA searce Mineraãl. HIS is a mineral ſubſtance, which has till Iately been confounded with plumbago, but is now found to be a combination of a particular metallic ſubſtance with ſulphur. It ĩs of a blackiſh colour, and conſiſts of ſhining laminæ, which have a degree of ſlexibility, ſo as to be very difficultly reduced to powder. Molybdena reduced to its metallic form reſembles Iead in colour and ſpecific gravity, but is very brittle, eaſily calcined and volatilized, and will not mix with lead when in fuſion. It differs from all other ſemi-metallic ſubſtances by being nearly inſuſible in our furnaces; it is probably the impoſſibility of reducing it to the form of a round button, which induced Klaproth to ſuppoſe that he had never brought it to its metallic ſtate:. By Mr. Pelletier's account, however, it was evidently reduced, and Mr. Hielm produced a ſtill purer and more perfect regulus. In a red heat it calciness. When in its reguline ſtate it gives no colour to borax. Molybdena, in this ſtate, is called by Mr. Kirwan molybdenite. Molybdena is capible of being oxygenated ſo far as to become an acid, in which ſfate ] it is a concrete body, white and pulverulent, reſembling chal. This acid, heated with ſulphur in a particular manner, ĩs capable of being converted into a ſubſtance in every reſpect the ſame as native molybdena. This mineral is ſcarce. It ĩs diſtinguiſhed from black lead by a more ſhining, ſcaly appearance; and it marks paper with a more brilliant ſtroke. Cu a? xxXI TUNGS TE IN. Ee Ore of Tung ſtein confounded ith that of VinWtere found. Mode of reducing it to the reguline or metallic State. : UNGSTEIN or wolfram is a particuler metal, the ore of hich has frequently been confounded with that of tin. The ſpecific gravity of this ore is to water as ſix to one; in its form of cryſtallization it reſembles the garret, and varies in colour, from a pearl white to yellow and reddiſh; it is found in ſeveral parts of Saxony and Bohemia. The mineral called wolfram, which is frequent in the mines of Cornwall, is likewiſe an ore of this metal; in all theſe ores the metal is oxydated; and in ſome of them it appears to be oxygenated to the ſtate of an acid, being combined with lime into a true tungſtat of lime æ, : The calx of this metal cannot be obtained free from the bodies with which it ĩs united, ithout ⸗ particuler proceſs, which conſiſts in the alternate application of volatile alkali and marine acid, and the ſubſequent addition of the nitrous acid, as long as red fumes are produced. This ca alx or imperſec acid has the coIour oſ brimſtore, andĩs ſcarc cely ſoluble in water. By being ſubmitted in a crucible with charcoal, to a ſtrong heat, a regulus of tungſtein, called tungſtenite by late mineralogiſts, may be obtained, which is a brown maſs, conſiſting ofa congeries oſ metallic globules internally of a ſteel grey, and which again becomes yellow by cælcinai Lavoiier s Chemiſtry. i tion. The regulus is not acted on by the vitriolic and marine acids; the nitrous acid, however, and aquaregia, act on it, and by oxygenating it reduce it to its calciform ſtate. M. Lavoiſier recommends the following proceſs for obtaining the calx of tungſtein:  ix one part of ore of tungſtein with four parts of mid vegetable alkali, and melt the mixture in a crucible, which ought to be of platina; then powder, and pour on twelve parts of boiling water; add pale nitrous acid, and the tungſtenic acid precipitates in a concrete ſorm. Afterwards, to inſure the complete oxygenation of the metal, add more pale nitrous acid, and evaporate to dryneſs, repeating this operation as long as red fumes are produced from the acid. In the ſtate of yellow calx it has the following properties: ĩt is perſectly inſipid and inſoluble in water; if triturated in water ĩt ſimply diffuſes through it like an emulſion, and takes ſome months to depoſit from it. If volatile alkali is poured on it, it whitens, which inſtantly diſtinguiſhes it from the yellow calx of uranite, HEl 128 j Eilt [Book VIi C n A P. XXII. MANGANESE. Vatural Hi 3 of Mangan ſ Iis Eg-ects on cun DRegulus or Meztal.Black Wad. AMangantſe contained in VegetoblesUſes in the Aris. . l HIS metal is almoſt always ſound in the ntate of calces, which vary much in colour and appearance; they are white, blue, yellow, red, dark green, and black, according as they are united with more or leſs oxygen, or contaminated with foreign ſubſtances. The darker coloured the ores; the more oxygen they may be ſuppoſed to contain, as any proceſs which deprives them of this principle always renders them paler. Manganeſe is alſo found cryſtallized in a variety of forms. Many natureliſts, judging by their colour, and the ochry * cruſt with which they are often ſurrounded, have ranked the calces of manganeſe among the iron ores. The black calx of manganeſe gives a violet, purpliſ, and ſometimes a reddiſ tinge to tranſparent glaſs; but when added in a ſmall quantity to that which has a blueiſh or greeniſh caſt; it produces only a ſlight duſkineſs, vithout a predominancy of any colour. The regulus of manganeſe is very diſficultly obtained. It colour is a duſky white, but its maſſes are irregular and uneven from imperfect fuſion. Its fracture is bright and ſhining, but it ſoon tarniſhes and becomes blacki on expoſure to air. When pulveriſed it is always magnetic, though it has, not this v operty in the maſ. I expoſed i to air, particula rly N * Ochre being an iron ore. in moiſt weather, it ſoon crumbles into a blackiſh brown powder, which is ſomewhat heavier than the regulus from which it was produced. The calces of manganeſc retain their oxygen ſo weakly, that part of it may be expelled by the application oſ a ſtrong heat. They alſo part with their oxygen to unctuous oils. If half a pound of that ore of manganeſe called black wad is well dried before the fire, aſterwards ſuſfered to cool for about æn hour, and then mixed with two ounces of linſeed-oil, ſmall clots will be formed, and in little more than half an hour the whole will gradually grow hot, and at Iaſt burſt into flame. Manganeſe ſeems to be contained in the aſhes of moſt vegetables, ænd to it the blue or greeniſh colour of calcined vegetable alkali is owing. If three parts oſ alkali of tartar, one of ſifted aſhes, and one- third of nitre, are melted together, they form a dark green maſs, which being diſſolved in water, affords a beautiſul green ſolution; this being filtered on the addition of a few drops of vitriolic acid becomes red, and after a few days a brown powder is ſeparated, which has all the properties of mangancſe. The vitriolic, nitrous, and marine acids diſſolve the regulus of manganeſe in the uſual ways. The black calx is nearly inſoluble in the æcids, unleſs ĩt is deprived of part of its oxygen by the addition of ſome inflammable or metallic ſubſtancee. The marine acid, however, digeſted with the black calx of manganeſe, diſſolves it without addition, in proportion as it loſes ſome part of its oxygen. The oxygen uniting with part of the muriatic acid, renders it volatile, and converts it into oxygenated muriatic acidc. The permanent ſolubility of the black calx oſ manganeſe in the acids, depends on the acid, or ſome ſubſtance mixed with the acid, abſtracting part of its oxygen. The manganeſe ſeparated from its ſolution in acids by alkalies, is in the form of the white or imperſect calx, which, however, becomes black by being heæted in contact with air. In the dry way the calx of manganeſe combines vith ſuch earths and ſaline ſubſtances as are capable of undergoing fuſion in a ſtrong heat. The violet colour which it communicates to glaſs is liable to be deſtroyed by combuſtible ſubſtances. From this circumſtance we may conclude, that the property of colouring glaſs depends on the calciform ſtate of this metal, and that it is loſt when any body abſtracts its oxygen and reduces it to a regulus. Manganeſe in its metallic jr.- will rot unite with ſulphur, but melts readily with moſt of the metals. Gold and iron are rendered more fuſible by a due addition of manganeſe, and the latter metal is rendered more ductile. Manganeſe has hitherto been uſed chieſly by glaſmakers and potters; but the important diſcoveries of the effect of oxygenated muriatic acid, prepared by means of manganeſe, in bleaching, vill no doubt extend C H A. XXIII. NICK E L. Netural Ziſtor; of Mir LelMetal hw chtain d.—Detchates vith Nitre.las a ſiroag Repulſion for Silver, and ditra⸗ Don for Suiphur.A uſeloj; Mineral. PVHIS metal derives its name from the mineral in d vhich it is contained. It is found united with ſulphur and arſenic. Its ores have a coppery red colour, are almoſt always covered with a greeniſnh grey eſoreſcence, and have been miſtaen for ores of copper. The cres of nickel often contain cobalt and iron. Moſt oſ the ſulphur and arſenic may be driven oſf by Iong continued roaſting, and the occaſional addition of charcoal, which prevents the arſenic from being rendered more fixed by calcination; and the green calx which remains may be fuſed by the ſtrongeſt heat of a ſmith's forge, together with two or three times its weight of black ux. By theſe means a regulus may De obtained, which, however, is very far from Dbeing pure, as it contains much arſenic, cobalt, and iron. In this ſtate it is of a white colour with a tinge of red, and has a granulated texturee. When this metal is rendered more pure by treatment with ſulphur, charcoal, volatile alkali, and nitre, it becomes extremely inſuſible, loſes ſomewhat of its reddiſh tinge, and acquires a conſiderable degree of malleability. Nickel may be freed from ſulphur and arſenic, but it cannot be accurately purified from cobalt and iron, for it is conſiderably attracted by the magnet, and gives ſigns of containing cobalt, aſter the utmoſt pains have been taken to obtain it in a pure ſtate. It afords a blue ſolution with volatile alkali, and in nitrous acid its ſolution is of a full green. From its magnetic property, nickel has been conſidered as a modification of iron; and by its producing a blue colour with volatile alkali, it has been ſuppoſed to be an alloy of copper with various metallic fubſtances. Chemiſts, however, are now very generally agreed in conſidering nickel as a diſtinct metallic ſubſtance. M. Sage aſfirms, that when four parts of oil of vitriol are diſtilled with one part of the regulus of nickel in powder, the ſulphureous acid paſſes over; the reſidue is greyiſh, and, being diſſolved in diſtilled water, produces the moſt beautiful green colour. The cryſtals obtained from this ſolution are foliated, and of the colour of an emerald. According to M. Arvidſon, the vitriolic acid forms a green ſalt, in decahedral eryſtals, vith the calx of nickel. This calx is eaſily ſoluble in the nitrous acid, and cryſtallizes in rhombic cubes. According to M. Sage, all the other ſolutions of nickel, or its calx, eĩther in the muriatic acid or in vegetable acids, are more or leſ green. It has been ſaid, that the nickel contained in cobalt occaſions the ſubſtance known under that name to produce a green colour with acids. Nickel differs from cobalt in not being ſeparated from acids by the addition of any other metal. Nickel detonates* with nitre; this detonation afſorded M. Arvidſon a method of diſcovering the preſence of cobalt, which no other proof has rendered ſenſiblee. Nitre has likewiſe the property of augmenting the intenſity of the hyacinthine colour, communicated to glaſs by the calx of nicke. The calx of . Inſlames, and explodes ſuddenly. nickel, fuſed with borax, likewiſe produces a hyacinthine colour. The calces of nickel are of a green colour. The moſt remarkable properties of the regulus of nickel are, a repulſion for ſilver, and a ſtrong attraction for ſulphur. It has ſo ſtrong an affinity for ſulphur, as to attract it from moſt other metals. Nickel combines by fuſion with ſulphur into a hard mineral of a yellow colour, with ſmall brilliant plates, which, when ſtrongly heated in contact with air, deflagrates and emits very luminous ſparks, ſimilar to thoſæ aſforded by iron when forged. Cronſtedt informs us that this metal is ſoluble in liver of ſulphur, and forms a compound reſembling the ores of copper. The ſulphur can only be ſeparated from nickel by repeated fuſions and calcinations. Cronſtedt affirms that nickel forms, with biſmuth, a brittle and ſcaly regulus. Nickel has not yet been applicd 20 any uſe, C u A Pr. XXIV. C O B ALT. Nacral H tory of CobaliAdnalogy betaveen this Metal and the blue colouring Matter of VegetablesMode ef aſaying itMines of CobaltSmalt, cr Porder Blue. Uses of Cibalt in the Aris. Curious ſympattetic Ink. Changeable Landſtape.  Union avith cthir Metals. 7O B ALT has never been found native, that is, in a metallic ſtate, but is almoſt always calcined or united with arſenic, the arſenical aciq, ſulphur, iron, vitriolic æcid, &c. Minerals containing cobalt are frequently of a pink colour, which ariſes from the preſence of arſenical acid, and this colour is deſtroyed by fire, in proportion as the acid is diſfſipated. When united with vitriolic acid, it alſo is ſometimes redciſh: the effect of acids on cobalt points out an analogy between it and the blue colouring matter of vegetables. To aſſay cobalt ores, the operations of pourding, vaſhing, and roaſting, muſt be all employed. The cobalt remains in a ſtate of black calx, more or leſ™ deep with reſpect to colour; this is mixed with black flux and a ſmall quantity of decrepitated ſea-ſalt; the fuſion is performed in a forge heat in a covered crucible, which muſt be ſightly agitated, to precipitate the metal as ſoon as the fuſion is complete. The metallic button is ſometimes found to conſiſt of two diſtinct ſubſtances, cobalt being uppermoſt, and biſmuth bencath; a ſtroke oſ the hammer readily ſeparates them. The regulus of cobalt is of a whitiſh grey or ſteel colour, hard, brittle, of a dull cloſe-grained fracture, and moderate ſpeciſic gravity. It has about the ſame degree of fuſibility as copper; does not eaſily become calcined; and ĩts calx is of ſo deep a blue colour as to appear black. Cobalt expoſed to heat does not melt till it is well ignited. It appears to be very fixed in the fire, and it is not known whether it can be volatilized in cloſe veſſels. If it is ſuffered to cool ſlowly, it cryſtallizes in needle-formed priſms, placed one on another, and united ir bundles, Cobalt, melted and expoſed to the air, becomes covered with a dull pellicle, which is a calcination analogous to the ruſting of iron. The richeſt mines of cobalt are in Saxony. The ore which is worked there in the large way contains a conſiderable quantity of arſenic, which is driven off by heat, but I. collected in long channels of wood, and preſerved for ſale, as was intimated before. After the ore has been kept ſome time in the furnace, there remains a dark ſriable ſubſtance, which is the cobalt in the form of a calx, and called æqare. This is mixed vith the ordinary ingredients of glaſs, and melted with a violent heat, ſo as to produce the common blue poder called ſmalt, which is a pounded glaſs. Some of this is mixed with ſlints and alkaline ſalts, and then ſold under the name of ſapphire to the manufacturers of porcelain and common Delſt ware, for tinging their glazing blue. Powder blue, or azure, is obtained by grinding ſmalt in mills, and afterwards waſhing it in water. This laſt operation is performed in a caſ& filled with water, and pierced with three openings at difſerent heights. The water of the uppermoſt cock carries out the fineſt blue. The larger particles fall more ſpeedily, and the azure brought out by the water of the three cocks forms the diſferent degrees of fineneſs, known by the names of azure of the firſt, ſecond, and third fires. Powder and ſtone blue, uſed by laundreſſes, is æ preparation made by the Dutch from the coarſe ſmalt. A ſmall quantity of the calx of cobalt tinges glaſs of diſferent ſhades, according to the quantity uſed. Ore grain of cobalt to ſeven thouſand of the glaſs, renders it very blue: hence the paſtes in imitation of ſapphire are produced. Stained ſlint glaſs is made by ſixteen parts of ſand, eight or ten of pearl aſh, and metals in different proportions. Cobalt diſſolves readily in aqua-fortis, both in its metallic ſtate and in that of a calx. Iſ we take a ſolution of ĩts calx in that fluid, and add a quantity of water 1o it, and then let it ſtand a while, ĩt turns red, and on evaporation forms cryſtals of the ſame colour, and by this it ma ay be diſtinguiſhed from all other metals. This ſolution forms a red ſympathetic ink, which appears on the paper by heat, and again diſappears by cold. Aquã regia diſiolves cobalt more eaſily than the muriatic, but not ſo eaſily as the nitrous, acid. This ſolution is a celebrated ſympathetic ink. If ĩt &s diluted with a ſufficient quantity of water to prevent its action on paper, and then uſed to write with, the Ietters are inviſible as ſoon æs the clear ſolution becomes dry; but if the paper is held to the fire for a ſhort time, they appear of a ſine green colour; which again diſappears by removing it, and ſuffering it to cool. If held to the fire too long, the green colour becomes permanent. From theſe two inks a very curious changeable Iandſcape may be made. The trunks of trees, houſes, &c. may be painted with common colours, ſo as to repreſent winter. The verdure, the fruits, and the flowers, may be depicted in different ſhades oſ the te hs. On æpproaching the fire the landſcape will gradually be chi.ized from a vinter to a ſummer ſcene. The trees will begin to ſnoot out their ſoliage, and the flowers and the ſruits vill, by degrees, aſſume the appearance oſ maturity. The vivid parts will again fade, on being removed from the heat, and the landſcape reſume the wintry aſpect. It was formerly thought that the green colour produced by heat in the ſympathetic ink of cobalt, aroſe from the metallic ſalt being cryſtallized, and afterwards attracting a ſuſficient quartity of water ſfrom the cold air to diſiolve it, and cauſe it to diſappear; but ĩt is proved, that the marine ſalt of cobalt, diſolved in vater, aſſumes the ſame colour when expoſed to à certain degree of heat.. The vitriolic acid in a concentrated ſtate does not diſſolve cobalt without the aſiſtance of heat, when the acid is decompoſed, and comes over in ſulphureous fumes. The cobalt is in part calcined, and in part converted into a cryſtalline ſalt ſoluble in water, and which may be precipitated by lime and by alkalies, in the form of a roſe-coloured powder or calx. Diluted vitriolic acid acts upon the calx of cobalt, and forms the ſame ſalt. Cobalt unites with all the metals except ſilver, lead, quickſilver, and biſmuth, but does not produce any remarkable or uſeful compound with any. It is ſeparated from acids by zinc in the form of a darkcoloured powder, but not by iron. A mixture of nickel with the calx oſ cobalt very glaſs. The following proceſs is ſeparating them when the cobali quantity:: Saturate a ſolution of iitrous acid, and drop it into liq The cobalt then is inſtantly re- dis a garnet colour; when filtered a g on the filter, which ĩs the nic C H A P. XXV. BIS MUTH. External Qualities of Biſmuth—⸗4 powerſul Diſſilver of Earths. Pearl IVtite, a ternicious CoſineticCuricus ExperimentA metallie Compoſition, which melts in boiliug Water.Various Uſes of Biſmuth in the Arts, 3 ISMUTH is extremely brittle, ſo that it may be eaſily ſeparated, and even reduced to powder by the hammer. When broken it exhibits at the place of fracture large ſhining plates, diſpoſed in æ variety of directions. It is conſiderably ponderous, and is of a yellowiſh white colour; when in thin plates it is in ſome degree ſonorous. It ĩs very fuſible, and melts at a temperature not exceeding 460 of Farenheit. Biſmuth is ſcarcely altered by expoſure to air and light. In cloſed veſſels it ſublimes without alteration; it cryſtallizes the moſt eaſily of any metallic ſubſtance. If biſmuth is kept in fuſion in contact with air, its ſurface becomes covered with a pellicle, which changes into an earth-like matter of a greeniſh grey or brown, named calx of biſmuth. Nineteen drachms of biſmuth, calcined in a capſule of glaſs, afforded M. Baumẽ twenty drachms thirty-four grains of calx. Biſmuth heated to redneſs burns with a ſmall blue flame, ſcarcely ſenſible. Its calx evaporates in the form of a yellowiſh ſmoke, which condenſes on the ſurface of cold bodies, into a powder of the ſame colour, called flowers of biſmuth. This powder owes its volatilization only to the rapidity with which the biſmuth burns; for ifit is expoſed in cloſe veſſels to fire, it melis into a greeniſh glaſs without ſubliming. Geoſſroy the younger obſerveq, that tiæ flowers oſ bi ſmuth, which riſe the laſt, are oſa beautiful yellow, reſembling orpiment. The grey or brown calx, the yellow flowers, and the giaſi, are nothing more than combinations of this netal with the baſis of vital air, which are not reducible without the addition of ſome ſubſtance that actracts the oxygen. Calx of biſmuth is one of the moſt powerſul diſſolvers or liquefiers of earthy bodies, or of the calces of other metals, and gives a yellowiſh tinge to glaſſes, into the compoſition of which it enters. Bifmuth is alſo readily calcined by nitre, but without detonation. The alkalies have little effect on biſmuth; when applied, however, in a cauſtic ſtate, they diſſolve part of the metal. he vitriolic and murtic acids do not act on biſmuth, unleſs aſſifted by heat. The nitrous acid, however, diſſolves ĩt with great rapidity, and during the ſolution copicuſly emits denſe red vapours. This ĩs one of thoſe ſolutions ſrom which the calx is moſt eaſily ſeparated by water. On being dropped into vater a bright powder is depoſited, called magiſtery of biſmuth. This is ſuppoſcd to be the ſame with the ſubſtance called zeari white, well known as a coſmetic; for when rubbed on the ſin it gives it a white ining colour. But in reality all theſe metallic ſubſtances ultimately darken the ſkin, for a calx when long expoſed to the æir, and the exhalations of animal bodlies, parts with iĩts oxygen to the inflammable matter, and aſſumes a dark colour. Biſmuth, moreover, poſſeſſes many properties in common with lead, and there are ſome inſtances in which the external uſe of il this metal has produced the vorſt effects. Solutions of biſmuth are particularly aſfected by fetid odours, which proceed from putrefying ſubſtances. This ſeems chiefly to depend on the ſulphureous particles which are exhaled in thoſe proceſſes, and is illuſtrated by a ſtriking experiment. If characters are written with a ſolution of biſmuth on the firſt page of a book of fifty leaves, and the Iaſt page is impregnated with a ſmall quantity of the liquid liver of ſulphur, a ſhort time afterwards the hepatic vapour, carried by the air which circulates between all the leaves, arrives at the other extremity of the book, and converts the colourleſs cheracters marked on the firſt page into a deep brown. It is affirmed that the hepatic gas paſſes through the paper; but ĩt is ſuſficiently proved that the air carries the gas in this manner from one leaf to another, ſince the effect does not taie place when the leaves are glued together. This experiment evinces, in the cleareſt manner, the impermanency of the beautifying effect of the calces of biſmuth. The nitrous ſolution of biſmuth is without colour, and when well ſaturated aſfords cryſtals without evaporation. But by evaporation and cooling theſe cryſtals may always be obtained. The nitre of biſmuth detonates feebly, and with redliſa ſcintillations; after which it melts and inflatcs, leaving a calx of a greeniſh yellow colour. This ſelt expoſed to the air loſes its tranſparency, at the ſame time that the water of cryſtallization ĩs diſſipated. The acetous acid diſſolves biſmuth ſlowly, and in ſmall quantities. Inflammable gas alters the colour of biſmuth, and gives it a violet tinge. Sulphur unites with biſmuth, eſpecially with its calx; in which ſtate it reſembles crude antimony. It unites with all the metals, except Zinc and regulus of cobalt, and takes away their mali Ieability and ductility, and increaſes their diſpoſition to calcine; it alſo increaſes their fuſibility, hence its uſe n ſoldering lead and tin. If added to a mixture of lead and tin, in certain proportions, it produces a metallic compound, hich retains the ſtate of fluidity in the heat of boiling water. Biſmuth is chieſly uſeſul for mixing with tin to produce pewter, rendering it harder, and better to be caſt into molds. It is alſo uſed in making printers' types; for by giving a greater tenuity to the ſuſed maſi, it fits ĩt for receiving a neater impreſſion. An amalgam for foiling glaſs globules is made of ten parts of mercury, two of biſmuth, and one of lead and tin. It may be ſubſtituted inſtead of lead in the art of cupelling the perfect metals, becauſe, like that metal, ĩt has the property of flowing into a glaſs which is abſorbed by the cupels. Biſmuth is often found native. It is alſo ſound united with arſenic, ſulphur, iron, and ſometimes in a calciform ſtate. The ſulphureous ore of biſmuth is of a whitiſh grey, inclining to blue; it has the brilliancy and colour of lead ore or galena, and almoſt always exhibits ſquare facets, but it is never found in fragments truly cubical. It is very rare, and is found C u a r. XXVI. ANTIMONY. Natural Hiſlory of AutimonyRegulus Sno of Aatimony. Cal Ination of Autimony.Combinations with Acidsi—Butier of Antimong.Antimonial VineUsſes of Autimony in MedicincFlores AntiueniiClaſi f AntimenyCrocus of Autimony,Sulphur of AutimonyTartar EncticJames's Pouder. r?HE ſubſtance, which is commonly known by à the name of antimony, is a combination of that metal with ſulphur. This mineral is of a blackiſh grey, in brittle plates or needles, of various magnitudes, joined together in different forms. It is ſometimes mixed with other metals, particularly lead and iron, and ĩs very common. in Hungary, and in ſome of the provinces of France. From this ore the regulus of antimony is ſeparated by ſuſion. The antimony then forms a maſs oſ metal at the bottom of the veſſel, while the other matter becomes a ſcoria above it. The appearance of antimony is bright, approaching, vhen very fine, to that of ſilver. It is very brittle, and it is compoſed of oblong plates or lamin?. When melted it forms a ſmooth maſs like other metals, but upon breaking it, we findthe plated appearance on the inſidee The plated appearance depends on the cryſtallization, which begins at the part that ſirſt congeals. The regulus of antimony, which is prepared for commercial purpoſes, is caſt into flat and circular pieces, which have a cryſtallization on their ſurface, in the form of the leaves oſ fern. quiring a perceptible degree of red heat beſore it becomes fluid. In the ſame degree it emits vapours copiouſly if ſi: air is admitted, which always promotes the volatility of metals. If theſe fumes are condenſcd, they form a white powder. In particula circumſtances they cryſtallize. They are, indeed, a perfect metallic calx, to which the names of argentine; and ſoow of antitnony, have been appliedc. This ſubſtance ĩs ſo highly eharged uith the oxygenous principle, as to be ſoluble in water, and to approach to the nature of an acid. To calcine antimony by heat and air alone, let the metal be powdered, then lay it on a broad ſhallow veſſel, and apply heat not ſuſicient to convert it into fumes. This operation cannot be well perſormeq, unleſs the antimony is in a ſtate of minute diviſion, ſo as to preſent a large ſurface to the ai. The proceſs muſt be conducted with caution at the beginning, on account of the fuſibility of this compound of ſulphur and antimony; but in proportion as the ſulphur is diſſipated, the remainder becomes more refractory, and the fire may be raiſed to ſuch a degree as to make the veſſel in which the antimony is contained red hot. The ſurface of the metal becomes at firſt tarniſhed, and ſoon afterwards ĩt is changed into an earthy powder of a duſky colour, which, by continuance of the proceſs, becomes white. Theſe calces have a different degree oſ fuſibility according to the degree of calcination. When little calcined a ſtrong heat converts them into a glſ of an opake or black colour. When further calcined more heat is required, and the glaſę is a deep yellov. When calcined to whiteneſs, the moſt violent heat will not melt them without the addition of borax, and the maſs is then of a pale yellow. Here we obſerve the effect of the preſence of oxygen in rendering this calx leſs fuſible, and depriving it ol colour. Theſe calces may be reduced, but moſt readily when little caleined, by adding an equal quantity of black flux, or one-fourth of charcoal or ſoap. The foſil fixed alkali brings antimony neareſt to the ſtate of the perfect metals. For this diſcovery we are indebted to Maergraſf, vho melted two ounces of regulus oſ antimony with one of foſſl alkali. He repeated the fuſion eight times, and every time he uſed freſh alkali; but the three or four laſt times he did not uſe quite an ounce of alkali, but employed a mixture of alkali and flint. Every time it was thus melted the regulus loſt ſome of its weight, and the alkali, having diſſolved part oſ it, was tinged green. The remaining metal was always whiter and brighter, and acquired a ſmall degree of toughneſs. The texture was much finer than before, and it would eaſily amalgamiſe with mercury. The veight oſ the regulus was reduced to about one half by eight operations. With the vegetable fixed allali the eſeẽt as ſimilar, but not ſo remarkable. The regulus of antimony is calcined with great rapidity by the nitrous acid, but the muriatic and vitriolic ſcarcely act on it, unleſe aſiſted by heat. By the union of antimony with all theſe acids, ſaline compounds are produced, which are deliqueſcent, and which are decompoſed by water, or the ſimple application oſ heat. The oxygenated muriatic acid and aqua regia diſſolve the regulus of antimony vith great facility. But beſides theſe methods of aſiſting the æction of the murĩatic acid on antimony, there is another proceſs for combining the muriatic acid with the regulus. A quantity of mercurial ſublim⸗ ate in powder being mixed with the regulus of antimny, the acid acts upon the antimony immediately, ſo as to render the mixing of them dangerous, ſrom the corroſive fumes vwhich ariſec. The common way is to p wder th/m and mix them, and heat being applied, the muratic acid of the ſublimate attracts the æntimo7 and riſes vith it in the form of a very voletile compound, vhich condenſes in the neck of the retort, of a conſiſtence between ſolid æand fluid, and is hence called butter of antimony. It is very cauſtic, and is uſed to conſume the callous lips of ulcers, but is too violent to be uſed internally. If it is ſubjected to a ſecond operation, it comes over fluid. The ſame proceſs is employed to combine other metals with the muriatic acidl. When butter of antimony is thrown into pure water, àn abundant white precipitate or calx falls down, which is a violent emetic, and is known by the name of powder of algaroth. The vegetable acids alſo act upon antimony weakly when applied to it in ĩts metallic ſtate, but much more ſtrongly when it is ſlightly calcined. A ſolution of this kind was formerly uſed under the name of antimonial wine. A quantity of the regulus was caſt in the form of a cup, which was occaſionally fiiled with wine, and having ſtood a day or two, it became emeticc. The quantity of antimony diſſolved was very ſmall, but was diſcoverable on ædding an alkali, and precipitating it. To give crude antimony any action as a medicine, it is neceſſery to deſtroy a part of the ſulphur, and 2lſo in ſome meaſure to calcine it. The more ſulphur it retains, the leſęs active it is. If we calcine it 100 much ve alſo deſtroy Its effects; for in the ſtate oſ a white calx it has little or no medical eſficacy. The ſlores antimonſi ĩs a preparation in which the anl timony is nearly deprived of ſulphur, and at the ſame time furniſhed with ſome oxygen. It is extremely violent in ĩts eſfects; a very minute quantity producing convulſions and vomiting. Antimony indeed may be reduced to ſuch a ſtate as to aſfect the body in ſmaller quantities even than arſenic. When antimony is combined with ſulphur, and urged with a ſtrong heat, it aſſumes the appearance of glaſs. The glaſs of antimony, though not much employed as a medicine, ĩs very uſeful as a preliminary to the moſt valuable preparations. Few of the metalt, indeed, have ſo much attracted the attention of chemiſts as antimony, and its preparations have been accordingly very numerous. To avold, therefore, unneceſiary prolixity, it wi Eè proper to conſine the readers attention to thoſe which have been ſound moſt uſeful. BY deſlagrating antimony with nitre, the metal is calcined, as well as when expoſed to heat in contact with air. The antimonium calcinatum of the London Pharmacopœia is prepared by throwing a mixture of cight ounces of antimony, with two pounds of nitre, into a crucible heated to a white heatt. The white matter is burnt for half an hour, and, when cold, is powdered and wahed with diſtilled water. This preparation is ſo inert, that it has been doubted whether it is capable of any action whatever on the human body. When the antimony and nitre are in equal quantities, they form a more active compoſition. The mixture burns with violence, and ought to be injecteq, in ſmall quantities at a time, into the heated crucible. After the combuſtion there remains a mixed matter, partly of a dark red, and partly whitih. Upon melting, it ſeparates into a heavier part oſ a deep red, and a ſaline part above of a paler colour. The former is the object of the operation, and is called crocus oſ antimony. The College direct a ſmall quantity oi ſea ſalt to be uſed in this preparation, which promotes fuſion, and probably increaſes the activity of the compoſition. Fixed alkalies have a great degree of activity with crude antimony, on account of their attraction for the ſulphur. The eaſieſt mode of combining them is fuſion. The firſt effect of the allali is to combine with the ſulphur, and form a liver of ſulphur, which by a continuance of heat ſeems to diſſolve the regulus of antimony. This compound is readily diſſolved by boiling water, and if we add to the ſolution æn acid, the metallic matter and ſulphur are depoſited of a yellow colour. This ſubſtance, however, which is called ſulphur antimonii præcipitatum, may be obtained in an eaſier manner, by boiling erude antimony in a ſolution of alkali, and then precipitating the ſulphurated antimony with the vitriolic acid. The antimonium tartariſatum, or tartar emetic, may be obtained either by the uſe of the crecus or the glaſs of antimony. The former is, however, preferred by the London College, who adopt the following proceſs: Take of crocus of ant mony powdered one pound and a half, cryſtals of tartar two pounds, diſtilled water two gallons; boil them in a glaſs veſſel about a quarter of an hour; filter the liquor through paper, and ſet it by to cryſtallize Tartar emetic conſiſts of the acid of tartar united to vegetable alkali and antimony paitially calcined. The pulvis antimonialis of the pharmacopœia, v hich ũ thought to be nearly the ſame as James's powders, is prepared by expeſing equal parts oſ antimony and harthorn ſhavings to a moderate heat, ith a ſice acceſ”o oſ air. With reſpect to the peculiar of James's powders, they have never been either in theory or practice. The circumupon which the effects of antimonial preparaepend are well known, and though we cannot rtainty aſcertain the proceſs of Dr James, there eaſon to think that it is preferable to that of armacopœia, in the preparation of the pulvis nialis. The love of myſtery, however, has had an influence over mankind, and there is no to believe that the period for its ceſſation is at regulus of antimony is employed in the manuof printers types, and in making ſhot. r C u A P. XXVII. Z INC. General Dę cheription of ithis MetalPhiloſophers Wool Union with Acids li bite VitriolDetonation of Ziuc with Nitr.Comlination vith MetalsPeieorIts U lſe in Fire-worksNatural Hijtory of ZincCalamine Black JactEBraſi, how made Tuitpinchbect. HIS metal is in ſome degree malleable, and therefore holds a middle place between the ſemi- metals and metals, though it is uſuaily referred to the former diviſion. Its appearance is blue and brilliant, and when broken it is found to be eryſtallized in narrov plates. It melts when red hot; if heated in cloſe veſſels to a vivid red or white heat, the whole of it riſes in vapour, and may again be condenſed without anv change. When heated, however, in contact with air, ĩt burns rapidly withr a white flame and crackling noiſe, and is converted into a white, ſoſt, and flocculent ſubſtance, called iwers of Zinc, or lana philoſophorum. If the Zinc is burnt in a deep crucible, this calx attaches itſelf to the upper part of it, though ſome part is always loſt even in the deepeſt veſſel, which will admit the air with ſuſficient freedom to maintain the combuſtion. If a gentle heat is applied no light is produced, and the ſurface of the 2inc becomes gradually covered by a grey calx, which changes to white, by being afterwards heated in contact with air. Zinc is ſo apt to undergo this change that it is dificult to melt ſmall pieces of it into a maſs, ſor in the moment aſter they arrive at the melting pointthey are covered with a ſkin, which prevents their union. The caælx of zinc is not very eaſily reduced to a reguline ſtate, as the heat neceſſary for this effect is apt to volatilize the metallic product. Zinc is readily acted on by all the acids, and no metal ſhews a greater attraction for therm. It produces with them metallic ſalts, in which the acid' is more neutralized than in the other metallic compounds oſ the ſame deſcription. The acids do not depoſt the Zinc when they are diluted with water. The concentrated vitriolic acid does not act on Zinc, unleſs aſſiſted by heat, and it then gives out ſulphureou; fumes. It is diſſolved, however, with rapidity, and without the aſiſtance of heat, by the ſame acid in a diluted ſtate, and this proceſs is attended withthe copious production of hydrogen gas, which indicates the decompoſition of the water. From this ſolution may be obtained white vitriol, which, as well as the flowers of zZinc, is employed in medicine. The diluted nitrous acid acts on zinc with ſingular violence, and nitrous gas is ſo copiouſly diſengaged, that the mixture ſometimes exhibits the appearance of boiling. The ſolution is very cauſtic, and affords cryſtals by evaporation and cooling, which ſnightly detonate on hot coals, and leave a cal5 behind. This ſalt is deliqueſcent. The diluted muriatic acid acts on zinc with the ſame production of hydrogen gas as the vitriolic; but this ſolution does not afford eryſtals. The vegetable acids acquire from 7inc a ſweetiſ taſte and Tipriciy. The action of, the fluoric and boracic acids on Zinc are not known.. Water i impregnated with carbonic acid, diſſolves a conſiderable proportion of zinc. All the ſolutions of zinc in acids are precipitated by lime, magneſia, the fixed and volatile alkalis; the r4 latter latter re- diſſolves the precipitate if it is added in exceſs. Zinc has the property of decon poſing ſeveral neutral ſelts. If it is conſiderably heated with vitriolated tartar in a crucible, it decompoſes the ſalt, and forms a liver of ſulphur, in the ſame manner as the regulus of antimony does. In this experiment the metal ſeizes the oxygen of the vitriolic acid, and the acid paſſes into the ſtate of ſulphur, which the alkali diſſvlves. The hepar formed by this combination diſſolves ⸗ portion of the calx of Zinc. All the vitriols are likeviſe decompoſed by Zinc. When pulverized zinc is added to fuſed nitre, or pròjected together with that ſalt into a heated crucible, a very violent detonation takes placee The activity of the inflammation is ſuch, that portions of burning matter are thrown to a diſtance out of the crucible, in ſuch a manner as to require precaution on the part of the operator. Only imall quantities oſ the mixture ſhould be caſt into the crucible at once The Zinc buins by the aſſiſtance of the oxygencus gas aſforded by the nitre, and is aſterwards found in a calciform ſtate, more or leſs perſect, according to the proportion of nitre uſed. Part oſ the calx combines with the alkali, and forms a compound ſoluble in water. Zinc decompoſes common ſalt, and alſo ſal ammoniac, by ſeizing the marine acid. The filings of Zinę alſo decompoſe alum when boiled in a ſolution of that ſalt. The relation of Zinc to ſulphur is remarkable, as it is the only metal which does not unite with it in a reguline ſtatec. M. Morveau, however, has diſcovered, that the calx of zinc unites eaſily with ſulphur by fuſion. The regulus of zinc is capable of being united with that of arſenic, but it more readily unites with arſenic in its calciform ſtate. Zinc diſtilled with white arſenic deprived it of part of ĩts oxygen, and was converted Into a calx, while a correſponding quantity of arſenic was reduced to a regulus. Zinc does not combine with biſmuth, and vhen theſe two metals are fuſed together, the biſimuth takes the lower 1 Iace cn account of its greater gravity, and may be ſeperated by a ſtroke of the hammer. It vili not unite with nickel. Its volatility renders it extremely difficult to combine it with metals which are of diſicult fuſion, as iron and copper. It is, however, united to ſeveral metals for particular purpoſes in the arts. It is added in ſmall quantities to tin, or o a mixture of tin and lead, in the compoſition of ewter, which ĩt improves both in adding to the whiteneſs and brilliancy, and increaſing the hardneſs. It is employ ed in many alloys, perticularly in tombac, prince's metal, and the various kinds of braſs. Fine filings of Zinc are uſed to produce brilliant ſparks in fire works. Some perſons have propoſed to ſubſtitute zinc for tin in lining copper veſſels; the latter metal, in conjunction with lead, having been ſuppoſed inſufficient to prevent the dangerous effects of the lead. Macquer allows tnat this metal ſpreacds more evenly on the copper, is much harder, and leſs fuſible, than the lining of tin, but objects to it, becauſe ĩt is ſoluble in vegetable acids, and has a conſiderable emetic power. Mr. De la Plance, however, has taen the ſalts of zinc, formed by the vegetable acids, in greater quantities than they can be contained in aliments which have been dreſſed in veſſels lined with Zinc, without experiencing any dangerous efſect Experiments are yet wanting to prove the ſuperiority of Zinc lining pver that of tin, Zinci is found in the following ſtates: It is ſometimes, though rerely, diſcovered native in flexible, greyiſh, and inflammable fibres. Zinc in ĩts ore is generally i in the ſorm of a calx; when the ore contains no other metal but Zinc ĩt ĩs never in any other form, but. it is oſten mixed with other. ores, which contain ſulphur and arſenic, and theſe muſt be evaporated by roaſting. The richeſt ores are compact and ponderous, and are called lapis calaminaris, or calamine; they are found in the pariſ of Holywell, in Flintſhire. Margraff has aſcertained the quantity of zinc contained in differeſit ſorts of calamine: j Parts. Parts. Calamine, from nearj : u 16 gave zinc Cracomo -] Bll b Calamine, from England 16 3 from Breſaw 6  43 —from Hungary It  20. —ſfrom Holywell 1IVY In one hundred parts of lapis calaminaris were found eighty four of calcined Zinc, three of calcined iron, about one of pure clay, and twelve of ſiliceous earth, according to Bergman, There is another ſpecies of mineral uſed in making braſs called blende, mock lear, or black jack, which conſiſs of Zinc mineralized by ſulphur, and ſometinies by i iron. The method of making ordinary braũ ĩs as follows: Copper in thin plates, or; which is better, copper reduced (by being poured when melted into water) ĩnto grains of the ſize of large ſhot is mixed with calamine and charcoal, both in powder, and expoſed in a melting pot for ſeveral hours to a fire not quite ſtrong enough to melt the copper, but ſuſficient to reduce the Zinc, and convert it into vapours. Theſe vapour; penetrate the copper in proportion to the ſurface expoſed to their action, changing its colour from red to vellow, and augmenting its weight in a great proportion. When they make braſs, which is to be caſt into plates, ſfrom Which pans and kettles are to be formed, and wire is to be drawn, they uſe calamine of the fineſt ſort, and in greater proportion than in the compoſition of common braſs. Tutty is the flowers of Zinc taken from the furnaces in which the ores containing this metal are wrought. It varies in colour and conſiſtence according as the calx is more or leſs perfect, and is mixed with more or leſs of an argillaceous ſubſtance. Newman ſays, that the lapis tutiæ is compoſed of clay beaten up with a ſmall quantity of lapis calaminaris. Zinc and copper, when melted together in diſferent proportions, conſtitute what are called pinchbeck, &c. of different ſhades of yellow. Margraff melted pure zinc and pure copper together in a great variety of proportions, and he found that eleven, or even twelve parts of copper, being melted with one of zZinc, gave a moſt beautiful and very malleable tombac or pinchpęck, C H A P, XXVIII. OF THE NEWLY DISCOVERED SEMI-METALS. Sylvanite. Mcnachinite Uranite. and Titanite-  ET ORE ihe account of ſemi-metals is concluded,  it is proper brieſly to notice ſour ſemi- metallic ſubſtances which have lately fallen under the obſervation of mineralogiſts, but which have not yet undergone a complete examination. A new ſemi metal has been diſcovered by Facebay, to which Mr. Kirwan gives the name of SYLVANITE, from its being found in Tranſilvania. Its colour is grey inclining to red, its fracture broad or granularly foliated, with a ſlight degree of malleability. Its weight is about ſix times that of water. When heated it melts as eaſily as lead, gives a thick white ſmoke, and at lat a brownih flame. In cooling it ſews ſome diſpoſition to cryſtallize. By continued heat it entirely evaporates. It eaſily amalgamates with mercury by ſimple trituration. It combines with ſulphur, and forms with it a ſtriated maſs like crude antimony. Sylvanite is ſoluble in concentrated vitriolic acid, and the ſolution in a moderate degree of heat is crimſon red, but by the addition oſ water or heat it is precipitated. It may alſo be diſſolved in a ſmall proportion in nitrous acid, and the ſolution until it heats is greeniſh. The beſt ſolvent is aqua regia, with which a yellow ſolution is produced. Its calx ĩs of an acid nature and unites with alkalis; it is alſo ſoluble in acids. This ſingular ſubſtance was at firſt taken for regulus of antimony, and afterwards for ſulphurated biſmuth. A ſubſtance of a peculiar nature was diſcovered by Mr. McGregor in the valley of Menachan in Cornull, which has been therefore called MENACHANITE, and is conſidered as a ſemi- metal. It is fourd in the form of ſmall black grains reſembling gunpowder, of no determinate mape, and oſten mixed with a grey ſand of great ſubtilty. Its ſpecific gravity when in grains is 44275 in a high heat it ſlightly agglutinates and acquires a ſmall increaſe of weight. When in grains it is eaſily pulverized, and is poſſcſed of ſome magnetiæe power. It is inſoluble in acids except by particular management; but is then found to conſiſt of about equal proportions of iron, and a peculiar white calx witha little ſilex. The ſolution of menachanitic calx in vitriolic acid, is precipitated deep green by Pruſſian alkali, white by common alkali, and becomes orange coloured with tincture of galls. With ſeveral other ſolvents jt exhibits properties ſo peculiar, as to entitle it to be conſidered as a new ſubſtarce. UranITE Was firſt diſcovered by Kiaproth, Who found it to poſſeſs the following properties. Its colour is dark ſteel or iron grey, internally ſomewhat browner. Its ſpecific gravity 6,440. It is rather more difficultly fuſible than manganeſe, and has as yet only been produced in ſmall globules imperſectly agglutinated. It is ſoluble in nitrous cid; but it does not appear that other acids have been tried. Its calx is yellow and manifeſts the ſollowing properties. It is eaſily ſoluble in acids; vith the dilute vitriolic acid ĩt affords yellow cryſtals. With the concentrated acetous acid it aſforls yellow quadrangular cryſtals. It ĩs alſo ſoluble in many other acids, the products of 7hich ſolutions va ary conſiderably both in colour and form. Uranitic calx is inſoluble in alkalis, eĩther in the molſt or dry way, which ſully diſtinguiſhes it from tungſtenic calx, which it reſembies in colour. : TriranTE, which many mineralogiſts have conſidered as a red ſhirl, has been lately transſerred to the claſs of metallic ſubſtances by the labours of Klaproth. Its colour is browniſh red. Tt occurs cryſtallized in right angled quadrangular priſms, longitudinally ſtreaked or furrowed. None of the acids have been found to have any action on this ſubſtance; even when heatedl. The calx of titanite is white, and is ſoluble in the mineral acids. Fiſty grains oſ the calx were by ignition ræduced to twenty-eight. Mr. Kirwan is of opinion that titanite is red when in its metallic ſtate, that is, as it is found in nãture. Heated on charcoal ĩt becomes roſy red, and afterwards ſlate blue, and finally melts into an imperfect bead with a fine ſtriãted ſurface. The diſfferent productions of nature ſeem univerſally to paſs into each other; and titanite, as far as we can judge, from what is as yet known concerning chp 557. I 159 llll C H A. xxix IRON. \ : i Exten oſive Uiility of this Metal Ii PrepertiesNatural Hiſlory of Iron Eagle- Stones. Bleod- Stones. The Loaæſtone. Emery. Ochres. S melting of Iron. >Forginẽ of Iron. Mating of Steel Tempering of Steel —Caſ? SteelGreat Diſteſition in Iron to unite ith other Bodics. Crin Vitrivl, how procured, Pryſian Blue. InkInflammation of Sulpbur and Iron. 7inning of Iron. DPretarations of Iron uſed in Modtcue: F all metals, and I might perhaps be juſtified ĩ in adding, of all mineral Tubſtances, the moſt generally uſeſul is iron. To ſpecify its uſes would be to produce a catalogue of every thing that contributes to the ſuſtenance and the convenience of li fe. By the alſiſtance of this metal we till the land, and obtain the fruits of the earth in greater abundance and perfection than we could by any other means; by its agency we are enabled to penetrate the earth itſelf, and procure whatever ĩt contains that may he uſeful or ornamental to man; there is ſcarcely a mechanical trade, which could be conducted on the preſent principles vithout its aid, and many of them could not even exiſt were we deprived of it: even in domeſtic life our ſafety, our comſort, and our pleaſure, all ſeem in ſome meaſure to depend on this moſt valuable production of the earth. As the quantity of this, as well as of ſome other minerals, which appear almoſt neceſſary to ſocial exiſtence, muſt be limited, I have often thought that the vant of a ſuficient ſupply, which, on the ſuppoſition of the preſent ſyſtem of things being continued for ever, muſt at ſome time neceſſarily tale place, ſorms a forcible urgument againſt the abſurd and ignorant hypotheſis oſ the eternity of the world. The external appearance of this metal is well known, and its hardneſs and elaſticity are ſeen in the various inſtruments and utenſils which are formed of it. It is the moſt ſonorous of all the metals, except copper; but in ſpecific gravity it s inferior tõ moſt of them, being only about ſeven times and æ half the weight of water. Iron has a conſiderable ſmell, eſpecially when rubbed or heated. It likewiſe has a very perceptible ſtyptic taſte. Iron is very ductile, and may be drawn into wire as fine as a human hair; and it is ſo tenacious, that an iron vire of one tenth of an inch diameter will ſupport a weight of fifteen hundred pounds. Iron may be ignited, or at leat made ſuſficiently hot to ſet fire to brimſtone, by a quick ſucceſſion of blows with a hammer; but ĩt requires a moſt intenſe heat to fuſe it, on which account it is brought into ſhape by hammering vhile it is in a heated ſtate. Iron is alſo poſſeſſed of another property, which ſupplies in a great meaeſure the purpoſes of ſfuſion. When pieces of common ſoſt iron are heated to a certain degree, and are ſuddenly taken out of the furnace and expoſed to the air, ve obſerve their ſurface covered over with an appearance of varniſh, which proceeds ſrom the ſurface of the metal being partly fuſed. If to pieces of iron in this ſtate are ſtruck together, they unite very firmly, and this proceſs ĩs called welding. It is diſtinguiſhed from all other metals by being attracted by the loadſtone. Another property, which diſtinguiſhes iron from all other metals, is that of ſtriking fire with flint. This phenomenon depends on the actual inſlammation of ſmall particles of the metal, which preſent a large ſurface to the action of the air, and which are heated by the ſriction which ſeparates them from the maſs, ſo as to diſpoſe them to inflammation. Theſe particles are ſeldom larger than the two hundredth part of an inch in diameter, and when examined by a magnifier, are found to be brittle, of a greyiſh colour, reſembling the ſcales of burnt iron. Another proof of the inflammability of iron is, that iron wire, heated at one end, and plunged in a jar of oxygen gas, burns with conũderable rapidity, and with a very brilliant ame. Iron is by far the moſt abundant in nature of all the metals. It ĩs not only contained in almoſt every foſi, particularly in thoſe which are coloured, but makes a part of vegetable and animal matter. With reſpect to the ores of iron, however, as they are very numerous, it will be neceſſary only to notice thoſe from which the metal may be extracted with advantage. In theſe ores iron exiſts eſther in the metallic or calciform ſtate, or mineralized by different ſubſtances. Native Iron is known by its colour and malleability. It is very rare, and is only found occaſionally in iron mines. Some naturaliſts think that theſæ apparently native ſpecimens of iron have been produced by art, and have been buried in the earth by accident. In the Philoſophical Tranſactions for the year 1788, vol. Ixxviii. is an account of a maſs of native iron, weighing by admeaſurement about three hundred quintals, which lies in the midſt of a wide extended plain, in the middle of South Americã, in latitude 27° 28° ſouth, and at the diſtance of ſeventy leagues eaſt, one quarter ſouth, from the hamlet of Rio Salado. It has the appearance of having been liquid, and bears the impreſſion of human feet and hands of a large ſize, as wvell as of the feet oſ large birds common in that country. The extraordinary fact of ſuch a maſs of Voi. II. M iron iron being found in the center of a vaſt tract of level land, where there are no mountains, nor even the ſmalleſt ſtone, within a conſiderable diſtance, projecting above the ſurface of the earth, is referred by the writer of the article in queſtion to an ancient volcanic exploſion, of which there are ſome veſtiges near it. The ſame ſuppoſition is urged with equal probability to aceount for the production of another maſs of native iron, in the ſhape ofa tree with ĩts branches, which the ſame author aſſerts, on indubitable authority, is known to exiſ in theſe immenſe foreſts. Some ſpecimens of the iron were preſented to the Royal Society, who aſterwards depoſited them in the Britiſn Muſeum. That large maſſes of iron were really obſerved in theſe ſituations there is no reaſon to doubt, but I ſhould rather attribure the ſuppoſed impreſſions to accidental reſemblances. The largeſt quantities of iron ores are in a calciform ſtate, as in ochres, bog ores, &c. which are diſpoſed in ſtrata, in the manner of ſtones. The ætites, or eagle ſtones, are a variety of the bog ores; they are in different forms, commonly oval or polygonous, compoſed of concentric layers diſpoſed round a nucleus, which is frequently moveable in the center of the ſtone. The hæmatites, or blood ſtones, are named from their colour, which is commonly red. The load, ſtone is a dull iron ore, the varieties of which are diſtinguiſhed by their colour. Emery is a grev or reddiſh ĩron ore; it is very hard and refractory, and is ſound in abundance in the iſlands of Guernſey and Jerſey. It is reduced into powder in mills, and in this ſtate is uſed to poliſh glaſs and metals. Spathoſe iron ore is a calx oſ iron combined vith carbonic acid; it is uſually of a white colour. Nature likewiſe preſents iron in a ſaline ſtate, united to the vitriolic acid, and forming green vitriol. This ſalt is particularly found in mines which contain pyrites. Iron is often found united to ſulphur, and then forms what are called martial pyrites. This metal is alſo found combined with arſenic, both being in the metallic ſtate. There is alſo a black iron ore, which is in ſTome meaſure attracted by the magnet. Iron is ſometimes found in the form of a blue powder. In this ſtate it is called native Pruſan blue. It is mixed with vegetable earths, and eſpecially with turf. It was difcovered ſome years ago, that iron is often united with the phoſphoric acid. The muddy or bog ores are ſometimes of this nature. The ores ofiron do not afford the metal unleſs urged by a great heat. Some ores are melted without addition; but it is neceſſary to aſiſt the fuſion of others by calcareous matters. The limeſtones, the iron ore, and charcoal, are alternately thrown into the furnace, and the whole is covered with a layer of charcoal. The melted ore is reduced by the contact of the coaly matter, and is then ſuffered to run into a cavity uſually formed in ſand. The metal in this ſtate is called crude or caſt iron. A vitreous matter, called ſlag, paſſeꝶ after the iron, and conſiſts of the ſtones which were added to facilitate the fuſion. The metal thus obtained has not the leaſt ductility; but it is deemed better in proportion as its colour is darker. The caſt iron is carried to be refined in a forge furnace, with a hollow hearth, in which it is ſurrounded with charcoal, where the fire is urged by bellows till the metal begins to ſoftenn. When ĩt is in this ſtate, it is repeatedly ſtirred, in order that it may preſent a larger ſurface to the air. By the action of the heat and air ĩt emits ſparks, which proceed from the conſumption of a quantity of plumbago, or black lead which is contained i in the crude iron, and vhich it is commonly ſuppoſed to acquire from the fuel during the proceſs of ſmelting* The iron, by this mode of refining, loſes, beſides the plumbago, a quantity of ſiderite, Vhich Bergman ſuppoſed to be a peculiar metal, but which is now found to be a combination of iron and phoſphoric acid. After the iron has been kept in this ſituation a certain time, it is carried to a large hammer, generally moved by water, where it is formed into bars. The hammering, by bringing the particles of the iron nearer together, preſſes out the impurities, and thus completes what was left deficient by the fuſion. This heating and hammering are repeated a number of times, ũll the iron has acquired the deſired degree of perfection. Crude iron loſes from a quarter to a third of its weight by the proceſs of refining, and is then called forged iron. Steel is made by ſurrounding the bars of iron with a compoſition of which charcoal ; is the chief and only eſſential ingredient, and by keeping them in an intenſe heat a longer or ſhorter time, according to their thickneſs. They are then taken from the furnace, and plunged in cold water. The metal is now found to be more fuſible than it was before, but to have leſs ductility and ſoftneſs. Its texture is finer; it breaks ſhort; its ſracture is always grey, and ĩt has gained a ſimall increaſe of veight. With reſpect to the chemical ſtates of the metal, in the three forms of caſt iron, forged iron, and ſteel, ĩt appears that they chiefly depend on the quantities u Tlumbago conſiſts of carbon, with about one tenth of its weight ęf iron. oſ plumbago. By ſolution in acids, it is found that caſt iron contains a large quantity of plumbago, that ſteel contains ſome of it, but that the moſt malleable forged iron contains ſcarcely any; it therefore appears, that ſteel is in an intermediate condition between caſt iron and forged iron, and that, in making the former into the latter, the metal muſt paſs through the ſtate of ſteel. In ſome foreign works they actually manufacture ſteel by only ſtopping the proceſs oſ refining at a certain point. In theſe manufactories, however, they make uſe of an ore of uncommon purity; and the ſame proceſs does not ſucceed with ordinary ores, becauſe the metal obtained from theſe contains other impurities beſides plumbago, which cannot be ſeparated without reducing the iron to ĩits malleable ſtate. There are differences in the working of iron, according to the ores from which it is obtained, the cauſes of all of which have not been diſcoveredl. The preſence of phoſphoric acid, however, is known to produce a brittleneſs in iron when cold, which occaſions that ſort of iron to be called cold ſbcrt iron by the workmen. Phoſphoric acid is chieſly found in iron obtained from bog ores. The workmen employed in tempering ſteel judęe, by the different colours it aſſumes during the operation, of the degree of hardneſs it has acquired. That theſe colours may be properly obſerved, ſome part of the metal to be tempered ſhould be ſmooth. The changes of colour depend on the calcination of the iron; for if the contact of air is prevented by the thinneſt covering of any oily matter, the effect ĩs entirely prevented. The colour ĩs firſt a pale yellow; iſ a piece of ſteel is then ſtruck off, it will be very hard. If the ſteel is left in the fire for a longer time, 166 Caſt Stecl. Book VI. it acquires a deeper yellow and more toughneſs, with ſcarcely any diminution in the degree of hardneſs; when brought down to the colour of watch ſprings, t is oſ the fitteſt temper for cutting wood. Steel, by being heated in this manner, becomes ſucceſſively white, yellow, orange, red, violet, and Iaſtly blue, which colour remains a conſiderable time; but if the heat is raiſed it becomes whitiſh. Steel ſtrongly heated while in the fire, a ſumes a red and ſparkling appearance, it next becomes very vhite and dazzſing, and then burns with a ſenſible flame. Caſt ſteel is nothing more than ſteel refined by fuſion. During this proceſs ĩt throws up ſcoria, whilſt the metallic matter which remains is much harder than before, and iĩts texture more uniform. Iron is one of the metals which is acted on moſt powerfully by acids. But not only acids, but all ſoline ſubſtances ſeem to aftect ĩt, and even water is capable of acting on it ſo as to acquire from it a peculiar taſte. The tendęncy, indeed, which this metal has to combination with other bodies, particularly with oxygen, which occaſions ruĩt, renders it incapable of permanency, and for this defect no ſufficient preventative has yet been diſcovered. M. Lavoiſier, having expoſed iron with water in a glaſs veſſel over mercury, obſerved that the iron became ruſty, and that the water was diminiſhed in quantity. The iron wãs increaſed in weight, and there was a production of inflammable gas, ſo that in this experiment the water was decompoſed by the iron, even without the preſence of air. Iron 1s acted on by the vitriolic, muriatic, and nitrous acids, with nearly the ſame phenomena as Zzinc. lution of iron in the vitriolic acid is oſ a green colour, and by evaporation produces the green cryſtals, well Lnown under the names of ſal martis, green vitriol, and copperas. The green vitriol uſed in commerce ĩs obtained in the ſollowing menner: Pyrites, which are natural combinations of iron and ſulphur, are expoſed to the action of the air and rain in ſhallow pits lined with clay. After having been in this ſituation a week or a fortnight they grow hot and crumble down, and when careſully examined are found to contain ſmall cryſtals. Theſe are diſſolved by the rain, and conveyed by pipes into a reſervoir in a houſe, vhence the liquor is pumped into a boller made of lead. This liquor is found to have an exceſs of acid, which is remedied by caſting pieces of iron into it when heated ſo as to ſimmer. By the addition of the iron a quantity oſ the earth of alum is alſo depoſited. As the Ilquor cools, the greater part of the ſal martis is depoſited. By the expoſure of the pyrites to the action of air and water, the ſulphur attracts the oxygenous principle, and ĩs thus converted into Vitriolic acid. Sal martis is liable to the watery fuſion; when expoſed to a ſtrong heat the acid begins to exhale, and as it exhales, the natural colours of the calx of iron appear. It is firſt yellow, then orange, then red; if it ĩs calcined to a greater degree, ſcarcely any of the acid is left, and the calx remains of a deep purple colour, and is known under the name of colcothar of vitriol. The nitrous acid acts with ſo much violence on iron ãs to convert ĩt into a brown cals. With the muriatic acid ĩron aſfords cryſtals of a livelier green colour than copperas, which will not, like copperas, part with the acid by the application of heat. All ſolutions of iron, if expoſed to the air, depoſit part of the metal in the form of a calx. Alkaline ſalts the metal of a blueiſh grey cclour, if the ſolution is freſh, but if lorg kept, in the ſorm of æ yellow powder. Mild vegetable allali ſeparates a yellow calx ſrorm the ſolution of iron in the nitrous acid, which ſoon becomes of a beautiful red orange colour. Iſ the mixture is agitated during the eſfcrveſcence, the precipitate is re- difiolved in much greater quantity than by the pure vegetable alkali. This ſolution is known by the name of Stahl's martial alkaline tincture. But the moſt remarkable precipitation is that produced by a fixed alkali prepared vwith animal inflammable matter. The alkali is treated by mixing it, when dry, with twice its weight oſ blood, which has been indurated and reduced to powder; the mixture is put into a crucible, and a gentle heat applied; particular care muſt be taken to uſe the due degree of heat, which is known by the diſappearance of a blue ſlame and ſmoke, which is at firſt obſervable on the ſurſace. The matter thus prepared, being infuſed in water, aſfords an alkaline ſolution, which precipitates iron of a deep blue colour, eſpecially if a little muriatic acid is added. The eſſential ingredients of the matter obtained by the above proceſs ſeem to be a peculiar matter called pruſic acid, and an alkali. The baſis of the pruſſic acid, according to M. Berthollet, conſiſts of carbon, hydrogen, and azote. When the alkali, combined with this peculiar acid, is added to a ſolution of iron, the a'kali takes the acid from the iron, while the pruſſic acid unites with the metal and falls to the bottom in the form of a blue powder. This effect of the alkali, thus prepared, is the foundation of the proceſs for obtaining that valuable pigment, known by the name of Pruman blue. Another ſingular, and not leſs uſeſul circumſtance, in the hiſtory of iron, is the eſfect produced on ĩt by aſtringent vegetable ſubſtances. The principle of aſtringency, which is now found to be a peculiar acid, called, in the new nomenclature, gallic acid, reſides in a great number of vegetable matters, particularly oalk galls, tea, &c. According to M. de la Metherie, however, the acid of galls is only àa variety of the colouring principle. Galls are protuberances on the leaves of the o”k, occaſioned by the puncture of a particular inſec. Any of theſe ſubſtances, added to a ſolution of green vitriol, precipitates a fine black fecula, which may be ſuſpended a conſiderable time in the fluid by the addition of gum arabic. Oak galls are commonly made uſe of in this proceſs, which is that of making ink. The following proportions of theſe ingredients for making ink anſwer very well. One ounce of martial vitriol to three of powdered galls; to which one ounce of powdered logwood may be added, to render the ink more permanent, and one ounce of gum arabic to ſuſpend the colouring matter. Let theſe be infuſed in a quart of water or vinegar for ten days, and ſhaken occaſionally, when the ink will be fit for uſe. The colouring matter of ink ſeems to be produced from an union of the acid of the galls with ſome part of the iron in a calciform ſtate:. A ſmall quantity of any of the mineral acids deſtroys the colour of the ink, by diſſolving the iron, which was imperfectly precipitated; and this colour is again reſtored by the addition of an alkali, which takes away the acid. The black fecula of ink is not magnetical; but it may be converted into a brown magnetic calx by heat. Ink becomes blacker by expoſure to the air, which acidifies more completely the principle combined with the iron; but ancient writing: become more and more yellow in conſequence of the decay oſ the vegetable matter. Their legibility may be reſtored by the uſe of infuſion of galls, or gallic acid. The beſt method, however, of reſtoring the legibility of ancient writings, conſiſts in ſpreading a ſolution of the Pruſian allali thinly with a feather over the traces of the letters, and then to touch it gently, and as nearly upon or over the letters as can be done, with a diluted acid, by means of a pointed ſtick. : The only eſſential ingredients of ink are green vitriol, galls, and water. Dr. Lewis has made many uſeful experiments on the proportions of theſe ingredients which produce the beſt ink. He ſound that equal quantities of galls and green vitriol produced the deepeſt colour, but not the moſt durable; he found, that by increaſing the quantity of the galls the colour was rendered more durable; that with three times the weight of the galls tb one of the vitriol, the colour was very permanent; but that if the proportion of galls was increaſed beyond this, the colour was too wea; in this caſe the writing was much reſreſhed by waſhing it with a ſolution of vitriol. He alſo endeavoured to aſcertain the beſt proportion of the fluids to the vitriol and the galls. He firſt tried water, and found that by conſiderably diminiſing the quantity of it the ink was more durable, but too thick for uſe. He found that all waters were much the ſeme; that white wine and vinegar made a more durable ink; but that both theſe were exceeded by decoction of ſorty ounces of water to one of ſ logre⸗ũ. which of itſelf gives a permanent red ſtain. If the colour of the ink ſhould fail, that of the logwood will remain, and it produces, with ink, a much ſtronger and blacker colour than uſual; for the common colour of ink is a purpliſh blue, which, mixed with red, nakes a deep black. He did nct find any vegetable aſtringent equal in all reſpects to galls. Mr. Nicholſon ſtates an objection to the uſe of vinegar in the making of ink, which is, that it acts ſo ſtrongly on the pens that they continually require mending. Ink is very apt to become mouldy, which is beſt remedied by the addition of a few cloves reduced to powcer; for hot aromatics are excellent preſervers of animæl and vegetable matters. Iron detonates ſtrongly with nitre. It appears to combine with alkalis by fuſion. The calx of iron combines with earths, aũiſts their fuſion, and imparts a green colour to the glaſs. Iron has a remarkable attraction for ſulphur, and combines with ĩt either by the action oſ heat or moiſturee A mixture of equal parts of iron filings and ſulphur, made into a pæſte vith water, becomes hot, emits watry vapours and inflammable air, in a little time the maſs takes fire;/ and, by attracting the oxygen of the water, becomes converted into green vitriol, in the ſame manner as pyrites. This is the mixture uſed in the production of an artificial earthquake, which will be ſpoken of more fully under the head of earthquakes. With reſpect to the relations of iron to the other metals, there is little worthy of note, except its attraction for tin, on which is founded the proceſ of tinning iron. In ſome countries iron is made into plates, by being repeatedly heated and ſubmitted to the action of a heavy hammer. In England, however, the plates are not hammered, but rolled out to the proper dimenſions, by being put between two cylinders of caſt iron, caſed with ſicel. When the iron plates have been either hammered or rollcd to a pręper thickneſs, they are ſcoured with a weak æcid, vhich renders their ſurface perſectly clean and bright, and tales oſf all the ruſt, which would prevent the adheſion of the tin to their ſurface; they are then wetted with a ſolution of ſal ammoniac, and plunged into a veſſel containing melted tin, the ſurface of which is kept covered with pitch or tallow to prevent its calcination. The tin adheres to each ſide of the plate, and intimately combines with the iron to a certain depth, which renders the tinned plates leſs diſpoſed to harden by being hammered, and forms an excellent defence for the iron againſt the action of air and moiſture. Biſhop Watſon propoſes it as a queſtion of ſome importance, whether iron of a greater thickneſs might not be advantageouſly tinned? He deſired a workman to break off the end of a large pair of pincers, which had been long uſed in taking the plates out of the melted tin; the iron of the pincers ſeemed to have been penetrated through ĩts whole ſubſtance by the tin; it was of a white colour, and had preſerved its malleability. It is uſual to cover iron ſtirrups, buckles, and bridle bits, with a coat of tin, by dipping them, after they are made, into melted tin; and pins, which are made of copperwire, are whitened, by being boiled for a long time vith granulated tin in a ley made with ulum ænd taror On theſe circumſtances he founds two queries; . Whether the iron bolts, uſed in ſiip building, ou be preſerved from ruſiing by being long boiled in melting tin? 2. Whether it would be pomble to ſilver iron- plates, by ſubſtituring melted ſilver for melted tin? It is cuſtomary, in ſome places, to ælioy the tin uſed for tinning iron plates  ith about one- ſeventieth part of its weight of copper. Too much copper renders the plates of a blackiſn hu?, but when added © tin in a proper proportion, it enables the manuſacturers to lay on a thinner coat of tin without injury to the colour. This practice, however, is rather of prejudice to the duration of the plates. When the tin ĩs heated to a great degree, t the covering which it imparts to the iron is thinner but more even. The plates are apt, from this cauſe, to have yellow ſpots on them; but this inconvenience may be removed by boiling the plates for two or three minutes in lees of wine, or, vhere they cannot be had, ſour ſmall beer, or other ſimilar fluids, may probably be uſed with the ſame ſucceſs. Iron is juſtly conſidered as a valuable article of the materia medica, and while its utility is conſiderable, it is entirely free from thoſe deleterious and debilitating effects which proceed from moſt of the other metals that are uſed as medicines. The ferrum vitriolatum, or green vitriol, has been already mentioned. The ſcrri fubigo is made by merely expoſing iron ſilings to the air, and moiſtening them with water till they are converted into ruſt. The ferrum tartariſatum is prepared by mixing one part of iron-filings vith two of cryſtals of tartar moiſtened with water, and expoſing them to th air for eight days. In this preparation the iron is chieſly brought to the ſaline ſtate by means oſ the acid of tarta. The ferrum ammoniacale, or ſiores martiales, is made by mixing one pound of iron ſilings with two of ſal ammoniac, and applying a briſk heat. The ſal ammoniac ſublimss and carries up ſo much of the iron as to be changed to a deep orange colour. The flores martiales may be made equally well with the colcothar of martial vitriol as with the iron-filings. The tinctura ferri ammoniacalis, or ammoniacal tincture of iron, is made by digeſting one pint of prooſ ſpirit of wine with four ounces of ferrum ammoniacale. The tinctura ferri muriati ĩs prepared by diſſolving the ruſt of iron in the muriatic acid; and adding a quantity of rectified ſpirit of wine. Wine of jron is obtained by digeſting ruſt of iron with Spaniſh white wine, in the proportion of an ounce to a C n 4 Pp. XXX. TIN. Ceucral Properties of Tin.  ranulateà Tin. ANatural Hiſtory oTin Its Union ith the Acids Uſe of Tin in improving the red Dyes Smoating Liquor of Libavius.Aurum Muſivum. Combinations of Tin vith other Metals—Diſſerent Species of PeterPuttyv, “ slication v Tin in dyingDUVe in Mediciue, /IN, vhen its ſurſace is freſh, is bright, and with ĩ reſpect to whiteneſs holds a middle place between lead and ſilver. Tin is the lighteſt of all metals, being only about ſeven times heavier than water. It produces a cracking noiſe when it is bent, though it yields eaſily. It is very ſoft, and, probably from this cauſe, it is ſcarcely at all ſonorous. It is conſiderably malleable, and may be reduced beneath the hammer into laminæ thinner than the leaves of paper (commonly Iknown by the name of tin foil) which are of great uſe in ſeveral arts, particularly the foiling of looking glaſſes. Its degree of toughneſs is ſuch, that a wire of tin of the Fenth of an inch in diameter ſupports a weight oſ forty-nine pounds and an half without breaking. Tin is the moſt fuſible of metals, and melts at a little above the heat of 4c, which is long beſore it becomes red hot. In paſſing from the fluid to the ſolid ſtate it remains a ſnhort time in an intermediate condition, in which it has little more coheſion than et ſand, and may be broken by a blow of a hammer, or by agitation, into grains. Tin ĩs eaſily calcinable in an obſcure red heat; it at firſt forms a grey pellicle; and in à ſtrong heat it calcines with inſ=lammation into a white powder. The calx of tin reſiſts fuſion more than that of any other metal; ſrom which property it is uſeful to form an opake white enamel, when mixed with pure glaſs in. fuſion. t is obſerved by miners, that though tin is the lighteſt of the metals, ĩts ores are ſome of the heavieſt. Tin is ſeldom or never found in the metallic or reguline ſtate. The ores are oſten cryſtallized, and of different colours. Thoſe which are of a reddiſh colour generally contain a large proportion of iron. There alſo is a ſulphureous tin ore of a brilliant colour, ſimilar to that of zinc, or golden, like aurum muſivum. The more tranſparent ores of tin oſten contain arſenic, and this is ſeparated, almoſt entirely, by repeated roaſtings. In order to reduce the ores of tin, they are firſt cleanſed from foreign admixtures by ſorting, pounding, and waſhing. In the ſmelting of the ore, care is t2ken to add a larger quantity of fuel than is uſual in the revival of other metals, and to avoid a greater heat than ĩs neceſſary to reduce the ore, in order that the loſs by calcination may be as little as poſſible. Almoſt all the tin uſed in Europe comes from Cornwall, which has been famous ſor its tin mines from the remoteſt periods of hiſtory. Tin is ſive times as dear as lead, and as a ſmall quantity of the latter mixed with a large quantity of the former is with difficulty diſcovered, the temptation to adulterate tin ĩs great, and the fear of detection ſmall. Biſhop Watſon ſtates, in his Chemical Eſiays, that in Cornwall the purity of tin is aſcertained, before it is expoſed to ſale, by what is called ĩts coinage. The tin, when ſmelted from the ore, is poured into quadrangular moulds of ſtone, containing about three hurdred and twenty pounds of metal, which when hardened, is called a block of tin; each block of tin is coined in the following manner: the oſficers appointed by the duke of Cornwall aſay it, by taking oſf a piece of one of the under corners of the block, partly by cutting and partly by breaing, and if well puriſied, they tamp the face oſ the block with the impreſſion of the ſeal of the duchy, which ſtamp is a permiſion for the owner to ſell, and at the ſame time æn aſiurance that the tin ſo marked has been purpoſely examined, and found merchantable *. The concentrated vitriolic acid acts on tin with the production of ſulphureous vapours, part of the oxygen of the acid, as is uſual in the ſolurions of metals in deir reguline ſtate, being abſtracted. The ecid diſſolves about half its weight of tin, but not without the aeſſiſtance of heat. The ſolution is very cauſtic. Tne nitrous acid is decompoſed by tin, as it is by moſt of the metals, with great rapidity. The tin ĩs converted into a white calx, which it is very diſficult to reduce. M. de Morveau has remarked the formation of æ quantity of volatile alkali during the ſolution of tin in the nitrous acid. This is probably owing to a combination of the aZote, produced by the acl vith the hydrogen, derived from the decompoſition of the water contained in the menſtruum. The advocates for the phlogiſtic hypotheſis, however, ſay, that the hydrogen is the phlogiſton of the tin ſet at liberty during the ſolution. The fuming muriatic acid acts ſtrongly on tin, inſtantly loſing its colour and its property of emitting fumes. The muriatic acid diſſiolves more than half its weight of tin, and does not Iet ĩt fall by repoſe. By evaporation it produces brilliant and very regulurly Eti 1 : i æ Dorlaſęs Hlſtory of Cornvwall, p. 193. formed needles, which ſlightly attract the humidity of the air. The oxygenated muriatic acid diſſolves tin very readily, and without the leaſt ſenſible efferveſcence. Aqua regia, conſiſting of two parts nitrous and one muriatic acid, combines with tin with eſſerveſcence and the developement of much heat. The ſolution of tin in aqua regia is uſed by dyers to heighten the colours of cochineal, gum lac, and ſome other red tinctures, from crimſon to a bright ſcarlet, in the dying of woollens. By firſt diſſolving tin in the marine acid, and then boiling the ſolution with nitrous acid diſtilled from manganeſe, M. Hermſtæct has ſucceeded in acidifying tin to ſuch a degree as to convert it into an acid; it had then the form of a white powder, ſoluble in three times its weight of water. Tin has a ſtronger aſfinity with the muriatic acid than mercury has, and decompoſes the corroſive mercurial ſublimate. To efſect this, the tin is ſirſt divided by the addition of a ſmall portion of mercury; equal parts of this amelgam and the corroſive ſublimate are triturated together, and the mixture expoſed to diſtillation in a glaſs retort with a very gentle heat. A colourleſs liquor firſt paſſes over, and is followed by a thick white vapour. The vapour becomes condenſed into a tranſparent ſiuid, which continually emits a thick, white, and very abundant fume. It is called the fuming liquor of Libavius, and is a combinatjon of the muriaetic acid and tin. The ſmell of this ſiuid is very penetrating, and excites coughing. The vapours are not viſible without contact of æir, and ſeem to conſiſt of a peculiar gas, which is decompoſable by air, and which then depoſits the calx of tin in the fame maænner as the hepatic gas of Bergman depoſits ulphur by the conract of air. M. Fourcroy proſę it 25 a query, whether this elaſtic fluid is a compoſition of the oxygenated muriatic acid and tin? When water is added to this fuming liquor in a certain quantity, it becomes ſolid, and ceaſes to emit fumes. It is found that this concrete ſubſtance, when rendered ſluid by an increaſe of temperature, is capable of diſſolving more tin without the eſcape of hydrogen gas. Hence it appears that the oxygen neceſſary for the ſolution of this additional quantity oſ metal is not derived from the water but the acid, and that the acid to impart it muſt be in an oxygenated ſtate. The experiments of M. Adet have thrown much light on the nature of the fuming liquor of Libavius, and are publiſhed in the Annales de Chemie. Tin is capable of decompoſing all the vitriolic neutral ſaltss Tin has a conſiderable attraction for ſulphur, and eaſily unites with ĩt, when in a ſtate of fuſion, into a black maſs. Aurum muſivum is a combination of tin and ſulphur, obtained by a partſcular proceſs. Arſenic cannot eaſily be united to tin, on account of the volatility of the former metal. Cobalt unites by fuſion with tin; and forms an alloy in ſmall cloſe grains of a light violet colour. Biſmuth in ſmall quantities as well as Zinc, impart a firmneſs and whiteneſs to tin. Mercury diſiolves tin with great facility, and in all proportions. The uſes of tin are very numerous. It is applied to many purpoſes in the arts. Its amalgam with quick ſilver or mercury is applied to ſilver lookingglaſes. The uſe of tin in covering plates oſ iron has been already ſpeciſicd; and it is alſo employed in lining the inſide of copper veſſels. It enters into the compoſition of bronze and bell metal. It is the chieſ ingredient in the compoſition of pewter. Pewter conſiſts of tin united to ſmall portions of other metalli⸗ Iubſtances, ſuch as lead, zinc, biſmuth, and antimony. We have three ſorts of pewter in common uſe; they are diſtinguiſhed by the names of plate; trifie; ley. The plate pewter is uſcd for plates and diſhes; the trifle chieſly for ale pints, quarts, &c. and the leymetal for wine meaſures and other coarſer uſes. Our very beſt pewter is ſaid to conſiſt of one hundred parts oſ tin to from ten to ſeventeen of antimony. To this compoſition the French add a little copper. In general the lighteſt pewter is the beſt. The inferior kinds are heavier and ſofter, from a quantity oſ lead with which they are adulterated. Putty is prepared ſrom the white calx of tin. The ſolution of tin in aqua regia has been already mentioned as uſeful in dying. When it is mixed in the dyers bath ĩt forms a precĩpitate, which carries down the colovring matter, and depoſits it on the ſtuſf which is to be dyed ſcarlet. The operation of tinning copper will be afterwards deſcribed. The pouder of tin has been uſed as a remedy againſt worms in large doſes, and therefore the ſcruples which have been entertained againſt the uſũe of veſſels lined with tin muſt be wholly without foundation. Tin has becn analized by many chemiſts, with a view to diſcover the quantity of arſenic contaired in it. The reſulis of theſe experiments have been by no means uniform. The largeſt proportion, however, which has been detected in any tin uſed in commerce, is a grain in an ounce, or one five hundred and ſeventy-ſixth pert of the compound; but more frequently no arſenic whatever has VDICH 4r. XxXXI. lEEEE LE A D/ General Properties of Lead.Rea LeadLithargeNatural Hi iſtory of Lead.SlickenſidesCuricus PhenomenonSmelting Lead Ores. VUnion th Acids Plumbum CorneumvWhite Lead; how made.Sugar of LeadUnion with other MetalsCommon Solder. VUrVes of LeadCreat Danger from lenden Veſſels Devonſbire ColicMeans of detecting Lead in Liquors. AMedical Uſes v Lead. tſ& of its Calues à in the Arts. rHE appearance of this metal is well known. It i is ſo ſoft as to be cut with a kniſe without much difficulty. It is neĩther ſonorous nor elaſtic. It has very little tenacity, and therefore cannot be drawn into fine wire. It ſpreads eaſily under the hammer, but cannot be extended into very. thin leaves like gold, ſilver; and tin. Its ſpecific gravity is rather greater than that of ſilver, being eleven times heavier than water, and it is exceeded in this reſpect by only three metals, gold, platina, and mercury. Lead melts at the five hundred and fortieth degree of Fahrenheits thermometer, hefore it becomes red hot. Lead, like tin, at a certain point between its ſluid and ſolid ſtates, poſſeſſes very little coheſion, and may he ſeparated by a ſmart blow vith a hammer into grains, which are uſed in i aſſ-ying t the ores  of ila and ſilver. Lead, ſoon aſter it is melteq; acquires a film on its ſurface, Which preſents in ſucceſſion a variety of coIours. This film becomes thicker, and of a grey colour, by the continuãnce. of the calcination, and is then called- plumbum uſtum. If the firſt pellicle is removed, another is quickly formed, and. in this way almoſt the whole oſ the lead may be converted into a greyiſh powder tinged with green and yellow. This powder, being ground in a mill and waſhed, becomes of a more yellow colour. By further expoſure to a moderate heat, aſiſted by the reverberation of the flame of the fuel on the ſurface of this calꝶ, it gradually aſſumes an orange, and then a bright red colour, and is thus, in about forty-eight hours, converted into the ſubſtance called minium, or red lead. If lead is, in the phraſe of the chemiſts, urged with a more violent and ſudden heat, the appearances whih it cxhibits are diſferent. It is ſirſt converted into a ſlaky ſubſtance, called litharge, which by the proceſs juſt deſcribed, may be converted into minium, but which, by an increaſe of heat, becomes ſluid, and acts ſo powerfully as a ſolvent on earthy ſubſtances as quickly to make its way through ordinary crucibles. All theſe calces of lead may be eaſily reduced to the metallic ſtate, by melting them in contact with inflammable ſubſtances. In calcining and reducing ſixty hundred weight of lead, there is found to be a loſs of eight hundred. This loſs was explained by the old chemiſts on the ſuppoſition of the elcape of a volatile ſubſtance called by them mercurial earth, but which was never proved to have any exiſtence. The loſ, however, ought to be attributed in ſome meaſure to the evaporation of part of the lead itſelf, and partly to the imperfection of the proceſs, as it is ſeldom performed ſo accurately as to reduce the whole of the calx. Lead is very rarely found native. It is ſometimes found in the form of a calx, called native ceruſe, or lead ochre, or in that of lead ſpar of various colours, and which are in general either rhomboidal or cubical. Lead combined with ſulphur is called galena, which is compoſed in general of laminæ? which have nearly the colour and aſpect of lead, but are more brilliant, and very brittlee. A great variety oſ theſe ores have Eeen diſcovered, which it will not be neceſſary to enumerate. One ſpecies however is too curious in its nature and effects to be omitted. It is called by the miners ſickenſides, and conſiſts of galena united with phoſphorated hydrogen. The mineral has the appearance of black marble, and breaks with a poliſhed ſurface, not truly plane, but lying in waves. It is found in fiſſures of lime-ſtone in Haycliff and Leædywah mines at Eyam, and in Oden at Caſtleton, in Derbyſhire. It is divided into to equal parts or ſlabs, by a line parallel to the ſides of the fiſſure, and theſe ſ=labs are joined by two poliſhed faces, which ſeem to be in perfect contact without any coheſion. The ſurfaces are of the colour of lead, but the covering is as thin as that from a black lead pencil. Ifa ſharppointed tool, which the workmen call a pick, ĩs drawn over the vein with ſome force, the mineral begins to crackle like ſulphur excited by electricity; in a few minutes after which the laminæ explode with violence, and fly out as if they had been blaſted with gun-powder, inſomuch that the weight of forty tons has been blown out together. Theſe dangerous effects deterred the workmen from proceeding for ſeveral years; but at length it occurred to them that tis power might be uſed for the carrying on of their works with better advantage than by the common method of blaſting with gun-powder. Accordingly a workman makes a ſcratch with his tool upon the joint of the ſickenſides, and runs avay as faſt as he can, to eſcape the exploſion, which, it is ſaid, looſens as much oſ the rock as ten men would have brought away in three months, by the ordinary methods. 134 aturel iſioy of Lead. [Book VI, From the component parts of this mineral, the reaſon of the exploſion will eaſily be underſtood. By the ſriction, the phoſphorated hydrogen gas, which it contains, is inflamed, but being encumbered with the maſs of galena with which it is united, the inflammation ĩs rather gradual than inſtantaneous. ILead, in ſome inſtances, has been found combined vith various acids; the vitriolic, the phoſphoric, the ca: boric, and the arſenica. The ores of lead very commonly contain ſilver, and ſometimes antimony. In ſirelting lead ores the ſulphur is diſſipated for want of a proper apparatus for collecting it. According to biſnhop Watſons experiments, the Derbyſhire lead ores contain in general from one- ſeventh to one- eighth part of their weight of ſulphur. One of the chief circumſtances to be attended to in the ſmelting of lead ores, particulatly ſuch as contain much ſulphur, is to keep them for ſome hours in a moderate heat, by which that ſubſtance may be gradually diſũipated. After this the fire muſt be raiſed to fuſe the ſ completely, by which the metal flows through he ſcoriæœ, and is collected in the cavity at the bottom t the ſurnace. The ſcoriæ being then thickened by the ædJition of lime, ſo that they may be raked aſide, a ſt:pper is drawn out, and the lead ſuſfered to fibw into an iron pot, whence it ĩs laded into moulds, which form it into the maſes called pigs of lead. LDLead is ſoluble in the concentrated vitriolic aæci by the aũſtance of hæat only. The lead then forms, vh the vitriclic acid, a ſubſtance ſcareely ſoluble ir waer. It ſeerns to have aæ peculiar aſfinity with this cidl, arũ Ieaves all others to conbine with it, whicli  not the caſe with the othær als. ĩ he nitrous æcid ucis ongſy o on lead. When the  is : coneentr⸗ ted, i it corrode 5 the lead into a æhite calx; but if it is conſiderably diluteq, it diſſolves the lead. This ſolution does not afford a precipitate on the addition of water. Its cryſtals, obtained by cool⸗ ing, are of an opake white. This ſalt decrepitates in the æ and melts with a yellowiſh ſflame when laid on ignited charcoal. The calx, which &s at firſt yellow, is quickly reduced into globules of lead. The vitriolic acĩd added to this ſolution combines with the metal, and forms a precipitation. The marire acid, in the ſame manner, ſeizes the lead, and forms a combination, which, if expoſed to heat, melts into a maſs of a brown colour, called plumbum corneum, from ſome reſemblance to the combination of the ſame acid vith ſilver, called argentum corneumm, li The acetous acid, or vinegar, acts on lead, particularly when applied to it in ſteam, in which proceſs the action of the air probably aſſiſts that of the acidc. To procure white lead, ſheet; of lead are rolled up ſpirally, ſo as to leave the ſpace of about an inch between each coĩl, and placed vertically in earthen pos, w hich have ſome good vinegar at the bottom. The] pots are covered, and expoſed to a gentle heat for æ  nſiderable time by ſurrounding them with horſc dung. The ſteams of the vinegar circulte ĩ in the veſiæl, ai 3 attach themſelves to the ſurſace of the lead, converting it into white flakes, vhich come off when ihe lead is uncoiled. The remaining lead ĩs agæin expoſed to the ſteams of the vinegar, till another cruſt is formeò, and the proceſ is repeated till its whole ſubſtince is converted into the white flaley matter calle c⸗ ruſe, or vhite lead.. llilli EE Such are the deleterions eſfects of lea hen taken into the human body, that the wre œ ourers in white lead works are ſeldom knovn 10 ſurvive more pain ſrom the Devorſhire colic, loſe the entire uſe of their limbs, or gradually pine away by a waſting. maraſmus. In a vell regulated community ſuch works ought to be entirely prohibited, or at leaſt only carried on by the worſt of felons, whoſe lives would be otherviſe forfcited. Lead, aſter being thus reduced to the ſtate of ceruſe by the ſumes of the acetous acid, may be eaſily diſfſolved in the ſame acid in a fluid ſtate, and the ſaline matter thus formed, is then called, ſrom its ſWeet but aſtringent taſte, ſugor of lead. To have this ſalt of lead in the form of tranſparent cryſtals, it is neceſſary to uſe much acid; if there is not a redundancy of acid, moſt of the cryſtals are ſmall and mealy. This may be remedied by diſſolving them again in ciſtilled vinegar, and repeating the cryſtallization. In this manner ſo much of the acid muy be united to the metal as to change the appearance of the ſalt to that ofan oily fluidl. This metallic ſalt, like orhers, may be decompoſed by an alkali. In all theſe caſes the precjpitates of lead are white, but the calces are coloured. The ſaccharum ſaturni, or ſuger of lead, may be decompoſed by heat alone, for, when expoſed to a gradual heat, the acid riſes in a very concentrated ſtate. This proceſs is attended with the remarkable phenomenon of the production of a quantity of ardent ſpirit*. To uncerſtand the cauſes of this phenomenon, it is only neceſſãary to be informed that alcohol, or ardent ſpirit, is a combination of hydrogen, chaærcoal, and a ſmall quantity of oxygen. Now all theſe principles  By the p-logiſtic hypotheſis this fact admitted of explanation, by ſuppoſing that the principle of inflammubility of the metal combined ĩtſelf with a portion of water, contained in the acetous acid, and thus formed alcohol, or ſpirit. exiſt in vinegar, the baſis of which is hydrogen and charcoal, brought to the ſtate of an acid by their union with a large proportion of oxygen. The chief difference, thereſore, between vinegar and alcohol is, that the former contæins much more oxvgen. As part of the oxygen, however, aſter this operation, is ſtill retained by the lead, which is not reduced to its metallic form, it is very natural to ſuppoſe that part of the fluid which paſſes over ſhould be reduced to the ſtate of alecohol. Nitre, heated with lead, calcines ĩt into a yellow ſubſtance, but without producing deſlagration. Sal ammoniac and common ſalt are decompoſed by being heated with the calces of this metal, but the neutral ſalts, in general, are not acted on by it. Sulphur readily diſſolves it by the aſiſtance of heat, and produces a brittle compound of a deep grey colour and brilliant appearance. Phoſpherus may be united with lead, and forms with it a malleable and ſoft compound, not very different in appearance from lead itſelf. Lead combines with biſmuth, and aſſords a metal of a fine cloſe grain, which is very brittlee. The alloy of lead with arſenic has not been examined. Nickel, manganeſe, cobalt, and Zinc, do not unite with Iead by fuſson. With antimony it forms a brittle alloy, vith ſome brilliant facets. Mercury diſſolves lead with the greateſt facility. Lead unites very eaſily with tin. Two parts of lead with one of tin form an alloy more fuſible than eĩther oſ the metals taken ſeparately, and which is, therefore, uſed by plumbers as a ſolder. ILead is uſed for a great number of economical purpoſes. Leaden veſſels, however, are very apt to communicate injurious properties to all fluids which are kept in them for any length of time, and ſhould vholl ly be rejected in. the management of ſuch fluids as contain an æcid capableof acting immediately on the meta l; as ſuch fluids, if impregnated with even a ſmall portion of lead, will be found, when taken into the body, Irreparably to injure the conſtitution of perſons who are in the habit of uſing them. Inſtances in which lead received into the body has produced the lingering and painſul diſorder called the painters colic, or the colic of Poitou, are too numerous to leave any queſtion as to the pernicious effects of this metal. The liquors in which n admixture of lead is moſt to be apprehended are, cyder, vines, and rum. In Devonſhire, from the great uſe of cyder, and the i improper methods of making it, Hy which, either through careleſneſs or deſign, lead becomes diſſolved in it, the diſorder above mentioned prevails ſo much, as to have obtained the name of the Devonſhire colic. Itis unfortunately the aſ that Iead diſſolved ĩ in vinous liguorsi is capable of i imparting a rich and agreethey have become conſderably acidulated The temptation to uſe lead, therefore, in this vay, is great; eſfects of his metal, or ant honeſy to preſer the ſaſety of their cuſtomers to their own profit, there is no reaſon to hopę that the habit of occaſionally uſing it will be aboliſnied. The adulterating of wines in this manner was ſo common a few years ago n France, that- it. was unſaſe ſor. ſtrangers to uſe the vines which ere ſold at their i inns, It ĩs very deſirable to be furnited with the means of detecting this pernicious ingredient, and the ſollowing are recommended by an author, whoſe ſpeculations even on the moſt common ſubjects have ever been directed to the public tage*: Boil together, in a pint of water, an ounce of quick lime and half an ounce of ſlovers of brimſtone, and when the liquor, which will be of a yellow colour, is cold, pour it into a bottle, cork ĩt up, and reſerve it for uſe. A few drops of this liquor, being let ſll into a glaſs of wine or cyder containing lead, will change the whole into a colour more cr leſs brown, according to the quantity of lead which it contains; if the wine is wholly free ſfrom lead, it wiil be rendered in ſome meaſure turbid by the liquor, but the colour will be rather a dirty white than a blackiſh brown. In general, a ſolution of common liver of ſulphur will precipitate the lead, but unfortunately iron as vell as lead is precipitated by both theſe teſts, and it is ſaid that many honeſt wine merchants have been ruined by this means, by having unjuſtly fallen under 1he ſuſpicion of adulterating their wines with lead. M. Hannemann has publiſned a paper in the Journal de Phyſique, in which he aſſures us, that the ſollowing liquor, whilſt ĩt does not precipitate iron, will precipitate lead and copper of a black colour, and arſenic of an orange. Mix equal parts of oyſter ſhells and crude ſulphur in fine povder, and put them into a crucible; apply a briſk fire in an air furnace, ſo as to make the crucible of a white heat for about ſifteen minutes. The maſs, when cold and powdered, ſinuld be kept in a bottle well corked. To prepare the æ Biſiop Watſon. his excellert and trul; reſpectable author, iLis great ornament of the Engliſ church, will, I flatter myſelſ, ſorgive the very free and frequent uſe I have made of Lis incomnparable Eſſays. He las ever been  Mihil magnus Apollo.”  My guide, philoſopher and, if I was not aſrald of preſuming too far, I ould ædd the concluſion of that well huown Iſvæ, » liquor, put one hundred and twenty grains of this powder, and one hundred ard eĩghty grains of cream of tartar, into a very ſtrong bottle, fill it ith water, let it boil for an hour, and then cool. Cork the bottle, and frequently ſhake up the ingredients. After it has ſtood for ſome hours to ſettle, pour off the clear liquor, and put it into little bottles, which contain about an ounce; having previouſly dropped into each twenty drops of marine acidc. Cork them cloſe by means of wax mixed with a litrle turpentine. One part of this liquor, mixed with three parts of the wine ſuppoſed to contain noxious metallic particles, will diſcover, by a black precipitate, the ſmalleſt particle of lead or copper, but will not aſſect the iron contained in it. Pure vines are not diſcoloured by the addition of this liquor. The deleterious eſfects of lead are not confined to its action on the ſtomach. Men who work in the manufactories for the diſferent preparations of lead are liable to complaints very ſimilar to thoſe who drink liquors containing lead. Painters are ſo liable to this cormplaint, from the lead contained in paint, that it has obtained, on this account, the name of the painter's colic. Lead is the moſt powerſul article in the materi⸗ medica in reſtraining hemorrhages and exceſſive diſeharges, but its uſe is ſo dangerous that ĩt is not very oſten employed internally by phyſicians.The preparations of lead are, however, highly beneficial, without belng generally dangerous, as ingredients in plaſters and other external applications, particularly in the vell known Goulard's extract. The calces of lead are uſed in making ſome kinds of glaſt, of which they increaſe the ſolidity, and to which they impart a kind of unctuoſity which fits them for being cut and poliſied with leſs danger of breaking. Lead enters particularly into the compoſition of flint glaſs, and the compoſitions called paſtes, or artificial gems. The chief defect of flint glaſs ĩs, that it is apt to be of unequal denſity, which renders it diſficult to find pieces of any conſiderable dimenſions free from ſtri?. Litharge is alſo employcd by potters for glaæing their ware. The uſes oſ red and white lead, as pigments, are vell known. The common red wafers are coloured with red lead, a may be eaſily ſcen by holding one of them in the flame of a candle, when the lead will be reduced, and appear in little globules; theſe wafers ſhould, therefore, never be leſt in the way oſ children, as they may be induced to ſwallow them, and may conſequently ſubject themſelves to all the ill effects ariſing from this fatal poiſon. The beſt red wafers C u A P. XXXXII. - li COPPE R General Properiies of CopperlIts Naturel Hiſtory—Turquoiſe Gem. Smeltiug and reſining of Copper Antique Statues preſerved & ihe Green Ruſt. Union wvith Acids. Blue Vitriol. —Cilourin ng f Guns. Cuprum Anmoniacum —Verdigris.Union acith Ataliiſ hite Ccrp60.PiuchtechGun MetalBell Metal.Mctal of ancient StatuesDBronœe. Speculums of Reſecting Teleſcopes. Pot Metal Tinning of Copgcr. OPPLER is a metal of a peculiar red colour,  and when its ſurface is freſn and cleæn iĩt has a conſiderable degree of ſplendor. It is hard, ductile, and malleable to a conſiderat e degree, and remarkably ſonorous. Tt has a peculiar ⸗ 2nd unpleaſant ſmell, particularly when rubbed. Its taſte is ſtyptic and nauſeous. Its tenacity ĩs ſuch, that a copper wire of one tenth of an inch in diameter is capable of ſupporting a weight of about three hurdred pounds. Its fracture exhibits the appearance of ſmall grains. Its gravity is about nine times that of water. Copper has a great degree of ſtrength and rigidity, approaching to thaet of iron. It is not inflammable like iron, and is therefore uſed in gun- powder works, inſtead of that metal. It does not admit, like iron, oſ being velded, but this defect is compenſated by its greater fuſibility, by which it may be always formed into the deſired ſhape. It requires for its fuſion about the ſame heat as gold and ſilve. When in fuſion, for which ĩt requires a ſtrong white heat, it appears of a lueiſh green colour, which ariſes from a flame of that colour on its ſurface. By a very violent heat ĩt boils, and is volatilized partly i in the metallic ſtate. Copper, in a heat far leſs than is ſuſficient to melt it, becomes calcined at ĩts ſurface, and exhibits various colours. In a greater heat than is ſuſficient to produce this effect, its ſurface is converted into thin feaes, hich may be eaſily ſcraped off. Copper i is ſometimes found native, having the metallic ſplendor, the malleability, and all the properties of ordinary copper. ĩt has ſometimes the form of plates, ſometimes that of fibres or branches, and is ſometimes cryſtallized. Copper, in its metailic ſtate, is ſometimes found depoſited on ores of iron, in w hich caſe it muſt be conſidered as having been ſeparated from native vitriol of copper by the ſuperior attraction of iron for the vitriolic acid. The native ſolutions of copper oſten depoſit that metal in a calcined ſtate in beds of calcareous earth. The turquoiſe ſtone is the tooth of an animal, penetrated with the: blue calx of copper. Copper is generally found, however, in ores. Theſe are frequently mineralized by ſulphur. What are improperly called the vitreous ores of copper are of this kind; they are brown; red, and grey, and theſe colours are frequently mixed with a greeniſh or violet tinge. Theſe melt e⸗ aſily, are very ponderous, may be Tſcratched or even cut with a knife, and are very rich in metal, as an hundred pounds of them uſually yields from eighty to ninety of copper. The azure copper ore differs from the former chiefly in containing a conſiderable quantity of iron. The grey copper ores, which have not much ſplendor, conſiſt of copper, ſulphur, arſenic, and ſomè ironn. What are called copper pyrites contain in reality more iron than copper, but yield enough of the latter metal to anſwer the expence of working them; they are generally of a yellow and brilliant aſpect. Copper is alſo, in ſome ſpecimens, found united with ſlate, pitcoal, Zinc, and antimony. Copper is ſeperated from its ores by different proceſſes, according to the nature of thoſe ores. If they contain much ſulphur, aſter being pounded and waſhed, the7 are roaſted in the open air to diſpel the ſulphur, vhich in a great meaſure ſupplies the want of other fuel. The ore is aſterwards roaſted oncæ or twice more with vood, and is melted in an open fire into a maſt called a mat of copper. In this ſtate it ſtill contains a large quantity of ſulphur, which the workmen continue to expel by repeated roaſtings and fuſions, till the metal acquires a certain degree of purity, and is called black copper, which is ſomewhat malleable, but ſtill contains ſulphur, iron, and generally ſome other impuriticc. In order to clear it entirely of theſe, the cõpper is haſtily fuſed with three times its weight of lead. The lead unites with the copper and expels the iron, and the imperſect metals, which happen to be mixed with the copper, ære expelled by cupellation. The eopper Is aſterwards refined, by keeping it heated in crucibles for a conſiderable time, ſo that it may throw up all the foreign ſubſtances it ſtill contains in the form of ſcoriæ?. It is examined, ſrom time to time, by immerſing iron rods in it, which become coloured with a ſmall quantity of copper, and ĩts purity is judged of by the brilliant redneſs of theſe ſpecimens. Copper Is not ſo eaſily acted on by the air as iron. In ſituations, however, where it is expoſed to the action of moiſt air, it becomes gradually covered with a green ruſt or calx, which is ſapid and ſoluble in water. This ruſt never penetrates into the ſbſtance of copper, but ſeems rather to contribute to the preſervation of its inrernal parts, as may be ſeen in antique medals and ſtatues of this metal. Copper does not unite with earthy matters; its calx, however, promotes their fuſion, and ſorms vith them glaſſes of a deep brown. Cauſtic fixed ælknlies, digeſted ; in the cold with filings of copper, aſume, aſter a time, a light blue colour, the copper becoming covered with a powder of the ſame colovr. Copper, treated in the ſame manner with volatie ælcali, produces, in a few hours, a deep and moſt beatſſul blue, the quantity of copper taken up being ver; inconſiderable. From the ſtrong blue colour produced by the action of copper and volatile alkali, they become excellent teſts of the preſence of each other in any body,; fluid or ſolid. Copper is in general eaſily acted on by acids. The vitriolic acid, however, does not act on it unleſs concentrated and aſſiſted by heat; it then corredes the copper into a brown matter of a thick conſiſtence, vhich, by the addition of water, aſfords a ſolution of a deep blue colour. If this ſolution is evaporated to a certain point, and ſuſfered to cool, long rhomboidal cryſtals are aſforded of a deep blue colour, cã lled vitriolated copper, or Elue vitriol; it appears therefore that vitriolic acid forms, with iron, green cryſtals; with Zinc, white cryſtals; and with copper, Ulue ;tals. Copper may be obtained from the ſolution of blue vitriol, by dipping into it pieces of iron. The vitriolic acid diſſolves the iron in preference to the copper, and depoſits the latter, in its metallic form, on the ſurface of the iron. Upon this circumſtance is founded the proceſs for browning ſowling-pieces. The barrcs are moiſtened with a ſolution of blue vitriol, which diſſolves the iron to a very inconſiderable depth, and depoſits in its place a thin lamina of copper. Blue vitriol has a ſtrong ſlypue taſte, and ĩs in ſome degree cauſtic. Expoſed to heat ĩt parts with ĩts water of cryſtallization, melts, and becomes of a pale blue colour. A ſtrong heat is required to ſeparate from iĩt the vitriolic acid, which adheres more ſirmly to copper than iron. Blue vitriol is decompoſcd by magneſia and by Iime. If the mild vegetable alkali is poured into a ſolution of blue vitriol, a precipitate is formed of a pale blue colour, which, however, becomes green by expoſure to ir: in this ex xperiment no efferveſcence takes place, and we may therefore conclude that the carbonic acid of the mild alkali unites with the calx of copper. Volatile alkali precipitates the ſolution of blue vitriol, in the ſame manner, of a blueiſh white colour; but the mixture very ſoon becomes of a deep blue colour, which happens from the alkali re-diſſolving the precipitate. In order to obtain the cuprum ammoniacum, which has been recommended as a remedy for epilepſy, add volatile alkali till the whole precipitate of copper is re-diſiolved, then ſet the ſolution before a ſire in a flat veſitl, and let ĩt gradually evaporate, which ſould be done with a heat not exceeding that of the human body; the matter which remains at the bottom, in the ſorm of a cruſt, muſt be rubbed in a mortar, that it may be intimately mixed. The blue vitriol of the ſiops is made by means of the action of ſulphur vpon copper; theſe are gently calcined toge ther : the ſulphur attræcts the oxygen of the atmoſphere, ⸗ and unites with the coꝑper into a ſoluble powder, vhich is aſterwards cryſtallized into blue vitriol. A beautiſul green paint may be precipitated from blue vitriol, by means of white arſenic diſſolved in water together vith vegetable alkali. The nitrous acid diſſolves copper with great rapidity, without the aſiiſtance of heat, vith the production of a large quantity of nitrous gas. Part of the metal falls down in the form of a calꝶ, and the filtrated ſolution, which is oſ a much deeper blue colour than the vitriolic ſolution, affords cryſtals by ſlow evaporation. This ſalt is more corroſive than vitriolated copper; it ſo powerſully attracts the humidity of the atmoſphere thet it deliqueſces, unleſs kept in cloſe veſſels or in a very div placee When melted in a crucible iĩt emits large quantities of nitrous vapour and becomes brown, in vhich ſtate it is merely a calx of copper. In a dry and hot air this ſalt becomes covered with a green efiloreſcence. It detonates lightly on burning coals. The muriatic acid acts with great diſſiculty on copper in its inetallic ſtate, but diſſolves its calces with conſiderable rapidity. This may be eaſily accounted for ſrom the ſtrong attraction which the baſis of the murſitic acid has for oxygen, ſo that it will not pert with any of it to oxygenate the metal, and no metal is ſoluble in acids without being oxygenated. When, however, the metal has been prepæred for ſolution by an union with oxygen, that is by being calcined, the acid then diſſolves it, and adheres very cloſely, ſo that ĩit is with great diſſiculty ſeparated by heat. The muriatic ſlution of copper is of an agreeable green colour, and affords cr; ſtals of the ſame, and in this particular differs remarkably ſrom the vitriolic and nitrous combinations of copper, which are of a deep blue. The vegetable acids diſſolve copper when calc? but ſcarcely act on it in its metallic ſtate. It is a curiou⸗ circumſtance, which has never been ſuſiciently explained, that vegetable acids act more powerfully on copper when cold than when they are heated. Thus pickles, or even lemon juice, may be boĩled in clean copper veſſels without danger; and yet, if leſt for a few hours, when cold, in co; bper veſſels, they are apt to contract a metallic impregnation ſuſficient to produce dangerous effects. This fact has by ſome chemiſts been attributed to the ſteams of the boiling fluid keeping oſ the air, which is thought to aſſiſt the action of the acids. Verdigris is a very beautiful green ruſt or calx of copper, much uſed by painters, and prepared in large quantities near Monipelier in France. The proceſs for making verdgris was thus deſcribed by M. Monnet, of the Royal Society oſ Montpelier, about the yvear 750. Vine ſtalis, well dried in the ſun, are ſte. ed, during ei-nt days, in ſtrong wine, and aſtervards drained, hey are then put into carthen n pots, and wine is i upon them; the pots are kept careſully covercd. The wine undergoes the acetous fermentation, which in ſummer is finiſhed in ſeven or eight days, but requires a longer time in winter, though this operation is always perſomed in cellarss. W hen the ſermentation is ſuſicient ly advanced, which may be known by obſerving the inner ſurſace of the lids of the pots, which, during  the piogreſò of the fermentation, are continually wet by the moiĩſture of the riſing vapours, the ſtalks are to be taken out of the pots. T it ſtalks are by this method impregnated vith all the acid of the wine, and the remaining liquor ĩs only a very weak vinegar. The ſtalks are now drained ſome time in baſkets, and layers of them are put into ęn rthen Dots with plates of Swediſh copper, ſo diſpoſed that each plate may reſt on and be covered with Iayers of ſtalks. The pots are covered with lids, and the copper is thus leſt expoſed to the action of the Vinegar for three or four days or more, in which time the plates become covered with verdigris. The plates are then taken out of the pots, and lIeft in the cellar three or four days, at the end of which time they are to be moiſtened with water, or ſome of the weak vinegar above mentioned, and leſt to dry. When this moiſtening and drying of the plates has been repeated three times, the verdigris will be found to have increaſed conſiderably in quantity. and it may then be ſcraped off for ſele. A ſolution or eroſion of copper may  be obtained by employing ordinary vinegar inſtead of wine, as is directed in the above proceſs. It would not, however, have the unctuoſity of the beſt verdigris, which quality is neceſſary for painting. Good verdigris cãnnot be prepared, except with a vinous acid, or a ſolvent partly acid and partly ſpirituous. Accordingly the ſucceſs of the operation. depends chiefly on the degree of acerous fermentation to which the wine has been carried. By diſtilling verdigris, the acetous acid may be ſeparated i in a concentrated ſtate, and of a ſtrength equal, or perhaps ſuperior, to the muriatic acid. Copper is capable of a very ſlight detonation: vithnitre. It decompoſes ſal ammoniac, and at the ſame time the volatile alkali is in ſome meaſure reſolyed i into jts conſtituent parts, azote and hydrogen. Sulphur and phoſphorus may be united to copper; they deprive it of its metallic ſplendor, and change it to a black colour. If plates of- copper are ſtratfied in a crucible with ſulphur, they unite, and form à sompound which is uſed in the dying àand pating of calicces. Liver of ſulphor and hepatic gas have a ſtrong action on copper; the former diffolves the metal b the dry, as well as by the humid way; the latter ſtrongly colours the ſurface, but iſs effect has not vet been well examined into. Olls alſo diſolve copper, particularly thoſe of an aromatic kind. There are fev metals which will not form aelloys with copper. A metallic compound is made with copper and arſenic j in imitation of ſilver, but ĩt ſoon tarniſhes. In treating ofzinc, the proceſs for maing braſs has been deſcribedt Pinchbeck is a kind of braſs made in imitation of gold.. Cepper is the baſis of gun metal and pell metal. Gun metal is ſaid to conſiſt of copper, with about one- tenth part of tin; bell metal, of copper with about one-fifth of tin. It may in general be obſerved, thaet a leſs proportion of tin is uſed for making church bells than clock bells, and thot a little zinc is added for the bells of repeating atches, and other ſmall bells. Copper, in a ſtate of uſion, is liable to a violent exloſion if touched with any humidity. In the caſting of belis and cannon they are particularly careful to Have the moulds dry; for if the leaſt moiſture finds acceſ;, it is ſuddenly converted into vapour, and by its rxpanſion throws the metal to a conſiderable diſtance, to the great danger of the perſons preſent, The beſt poſſible proportions of copper and tin, for the above pur rpoſes, have never, I believe, been accurately aſcertained. The metallic compound uſed by the Romans ſor their ſtatues and plates ſor inſcriptions, is deſcribed by Pliny the naturaliſt. They firſt melted a quantity of copper; into the melted copper they put a third of ĩts eight of old copper, which had been long i in uſe; to every hundred pounds veight of this mixture they nãęQ twelve e pounds and  an an half of a mixture compoſed of equal parts of lead and tin. Tin melted with copper forms the compound called bronze. Of this compound the ſpecific gravity is always greater than would be deduced by computation from the quantities and ſpecific gravities of its component parts. There ſeems to be a happy reIation'between theſe metals, which fits them for forming, in conjunction, compounds of great firmneſs, denĩty, and cloſeneſs. From theſe properties they admit of an excellent poliſh, and Pliny accordingly informs us, that the beſt looking-glaſes of his time were made of a compoſition of copper and tin. But the attention of philoſophers is more particularly directed to the mixture of copper and tin, on account of its being the ſubſtance oſ which the ſpeculums of reftecting teleſcopes are made. Mr. Mudge found, after a number of trials, that fourteen ounces and an half of grain tin, with tvo pounds of copper, made the beſt compoſition for this purpoſe; an addition of half an ounce more of the tin rendered the compoſition too ii to be properly poliſhed. Pot metal is made, of copper and lead, the Itter being one-fourth or one-fifth of the weight of the former. Lead, however, doẽs not ſeem to have any remarkable attraction for copper, and does not promote its fuſion, unleſs the lead is heated to a high degree; the copper then diſſolves with ſome degree of efferveſcence. On allowing the compound to cool, the copper ſeparates again, and forms litile grains in the maſs, through which the lead remains diſperſed.. It is eaſy to ſeperate thè Iead again from the copper, if the maſs is expoſed in a Runæo; for the lead melts firſt and leaves the copper; the lead, however, which runs off at firſt, contains ſome of the copper, which may be caſily ſeparated by melting the lead and taking off the ſcum, vhich contains the copper. Silver is ſeparated from copper by melting the latter with three times its weight of lead; the lead ĩ is then melted out, and carries vith it the ſilver. The ſilver is àſterwards ſeparated ſrom the lead by the calcination of the latter metal. From the pernicious eſfects which have been experienced from impregnations of copper in aliments dreſſed in copper veſſels; it has become a very general cuſtom to cover theſe veſſels with an internal coat of ſome other metal. The method of tinning iron has Been deſcribed, and that of tinning copper is very ſimilar, except that the compoſition for covering the ſurface of copper conſiſts of about one part of lead to two of tin, whereas iron is covered with tin alone. Zinc has been recommended as a ſubſtitute for tin in theſe operations, and has the advantage of ſuperior hardneſs. The method of tinning copper veſſels is by making their internal ſurface perſectly bright, and then waſhing them vith a ſolution of ſal ammoniac. The veſſel is next heated, and the tin or metallic mixture is melted and poured into ĩt, and bẽing made to flow over ęvery part of the ſurface of the veſſel, it incorporates with the copper, and vhen cold remains united with it. Roſin, or pitch, are ſometimes uſed to prevent the tin ſfrom being calcined, and the copper from being ſcaled, either of which circumſtances would prevent the adheſion of the tin. Biſhop Watſon eſtimated the quantity of. pure tin which is uſed in tinning a definite ſurface of copper, and found that half an ounce of tin was ſpread over two hundred and fifty- four ſquare inches, or ſomewhat leſs than a grain of tin'on each ſquare inch; but the ſame author ſuſpects, that noòt a quarter of a grain of tin is ſprea ad over a ſquare inch in the ordinary mode of tinning, and therefore recommends it as a neceſſary caution ogain© the coat being rubbed off; off, and the copper becoming expoſed, to make &t as thick as poſſible, and to uſe tin nearly pure. A very excellent method of tinning, and one much practiſed in England, is, to make uſe of pure tin, and hammer it on the copper. It ſeems probable, however, that when copper veſſels are kept well ſcoured, that no danger vill ariſe ſfrom them in the dreſing oſ animal food, or even of vegeæble aliments, unleſs ſuffered : ERCURY. - ltl Creat dtraim of this I Vual for 0 Matier o Heat. D~uicſilver; rendered ſulia ; mallialleCGeneral Properties of Quichſiluer EHpdrarę g”rus calcinatusNatural Hiſiory of MercuryCinnabar Native Vermilion4dction of Acids on this Metal Turbith MineralRed PrecipitateWhite PrecipitateCorroſive Sublimate CalomelKe3ſer's PillsEthicps MineralVermilionAmalgams,Gold made brittle by Merew 7.DMMode of gilding Metals Uſe of Quickſilver in extracting the precious Metals from the Earib. LMating of Looking Glaſſes. Conditions neciſſary for ihe Operation of Mercury on vhe human ody. HE circumſtance which moſt remarkably diſtinguiſhes mercury, or quickſilver, from the other metals, i is its ſtrong attraction for caloric, ſo that it retains the ſtate of Auidity at the ordinary temperature of the atmoſphere, and at the temperature of 600 degrees of Fahrenheit is converted into vapour; few of the other metals, thereſore, melt at ſo low a point as that at which mercury bolls and is volatilized. It was long taken for granted that there was ſomething peculiar in mercury, which rendered it nece ſſarily Auid, but the academicians of Peterſburgh have proved that this is an erroneous idea, and have Themn that mercury differs from otier metals merely in the degree of heat at which it paſſes from i its ſolid to iĩts Auid ſtate. The congelation of mercury has been eſffected in a variety of inſtances by the help of the nitrous acid and ſnow, or pounded ice, commonly called the freezing mixture, and the congelation is found to take plate at the thirty-ninth degree below o of Fahrenhẽit's thermometer. Mereuty, in its ſolid form, is found to have conſiderable malleability, but this cannot be proved to its fulleſt extent, becauſe the hammering of it prod luces very ſoon a degree oſ heat ſuſficient to melt itt. Mercury being a metal in a ſtate of fuſion, always aſfects the form of globules when it is divided; ænd when it is confined in a bottle, its ſurface is convex, from the ſtrong attraction of its particles for each other. If the veſſel, however, in which mercury is confined, is metallic, ĩts ſurface appears concave, from the tendency which it has to unite itſelf to the ſides of the veſſel, which attraction overcomes that between its own particles. When mercury is ſubmitted to that degree oſ heat at which it is volatilized, and is at the ſ ſame time expoſed to the action of f atmoſphericol air, ĩt is gradually converted into a calx of æa red colour, the hydrargyrus calcinatus of the London Pharmacopeian. A greater heat, however, revives this metallic cælæx, and at the ſame time the vital aſr is again extricated. Mercury is not ſenſbly acted cn by expoſure to alr, but by long continucd æagitation iĩt be comes partly converted into a very fine black bouder. The mercury is not changed in this experiment, unieſs, perhaps, it iould Le. fourd that it abſorbs ſome part of the vital air contained in the veſel in whizh ĩt is confined. By a ſlight heat, or by tilturation in a warm mortar, it may be made to reſume ĩts uſual ſluidity and brilliancy. Mercury Is found in the earth, either in ĩts native metalic ſtate, or coribined with ſulphur, when ĩt is called cinnabar. Running mercury is found n globules, or larger maſts, in friable earths or ſtones, and moſt commonly ; in the cleſts or cavities of ĩts ores. It is more frequently, however, imbedded in calcareous carths or clays of different colours, from which it may be ſeparated either by trituration or lotion, the ſmaller globules coal⸗ſcing by mutual contact into larger; or by diiſillation. More mercury is found in the ſtate of cinnabar than in ĩts metallic form. This ore conſiſts of mercury and ſulphur combined together in different proportions. Cinnabar is ſometimes found in the form oſ a brilliant red powder, and is then called native vermilion, ſometimes in an indurated ſtate, and though generally red, has been ſometimes obſerved of a yelIowiſh or blackiſh caſt. It is moſũly opake, but ſome ſpecimens are as tranſparent as a ruby. Mercury is too volatile to admit of the ſulphur being ſeparated from it by roaſting; theſe ſubſtances are both ſo volatile that they would riſe together. In order to ſeparate mercury from its ore it is neceſſary to add quick lime, or iron filings, unleſs ſome ſubſtances of a ſimilar nature happen to be naturally mixed with it; the maſs is then ſubmitted to diſtillation, æand the calcareous earth, or iron filings, by ſuperior attraction, detain the ſulphur, while the mercury comes over in the ſtate of vapour, and is condenſed in the receiver. Different cinnabars yield from three parts to ſeven parts in eight of their weight of mercury. Mercury has ſometimes been found united with the muriatic and vitriolic acids, and with the ores of ſome other metals. It ĩs thought to be not abundant in nature; but this opinion may be partly owing to its volatility, which may prevent it from being diſcovered in many minerals that may contain it. Moſt of the mercury in commerce is aſforded by the mines of Idria in the Auſtrian dominions, Almaden in Spain, and Guancavelica in Peru. The vitriolic acid does not act on mercury unleſs concentrated and conſiderably heated; it then corrodes it into a white maſs, and the vitriolic acid is rendered partly volatile by the abſtraction of oxygen. The greateſt part of this maſs, which weighs conſiderably more then the mercury made uſe of, is a cal of mercury united to a ſmall portion of vitriolſc acid, but part of jt is a perfect ſalt, formed by the union of the vitriolic acid and mercury. If boiling water. is added to it, it aſſumes a bright lemon colour, which is owing to the abſtraction oſ the vitriolic acid, the preſence of which rendered the maſs white:. The more boiling vater is uſed the yellower is the remaining powder which, aſter repeated effuſions of water, is found to have no cauſtici t, and to be nearly a pure calx of mercury. This is the ſubſtance known under the name of turbith mingral. The water, which has been poured on the vitriolic mercurial maſ, ĩs found to contain a conſiderable quantity of vitriolic acid united to the calx of mercury. The nitrous acid is dccompoſed by mercury with the greateſt rapidity. Strong nitrous acid will take up iĩts own weight of mercury in the cold, and this ſolution will bear to be diluted with water. If the ſolution is made by the aſiiſtance of heat, a much larger quantity is diſſolved; but a. precipitate is produced by the addition of water. If cold water iĩs employed, a white precipitate is aſforded, but if hot water the precipitate is of a yellow colour, and greatly reſembles the turbith mineral produced by the vitriolic acid. If acid is added to the ſolution produced by heat, it is not decompoſed by water. This ſolution is very ponderous and acrid, and ſtains the ſkin of a deep purple, inclining in appearance to black, a portion of the mercury being precipitated by the animal matter, while the- acid acts on it. Cauſtic alkali, added to this ſolution, precipitates a pure calx; mild alkali, a calx combincd with carbonic acid. The volatile alkali- precipitates the mercury in the form of à dark grey powder. When this precipitate is examined, iĩt is found to contain a quantity of uncalcined mercury. For if this matter is dried and rubbed on pure gold, it turns white, by which we may diſcover ſmall quantities of mercury in the metallic ſtate. The near approach to the metallic ſtate, obſerved in the precipitate afforded by the volatile alkali, ſeems to be owing to the preſence of hydrogen, which is one of the conſtituent principles of volatile alkali, and which has a ſtrong attraction for oxygen.. The precipitates of mercury, formed by alkaline intermediums, have a property diſcovered by M. Bayen, which muſt not be paſſed over in ſilence. They detonate like gun- powder, when expoſed in an iron ſpoon to a gradual heat, after having been triturated in the quantity of half a drachm, ith ſix grains of flowers of ſulphur: after the detonation, a violer powder remains, which may be ſublimed into cinnabar. The nitrous acid may be ſeparated from mercury by heat alone. Its firſt eſfect is o evaporate the watery parts; aſter this the acid ſlies off in deep coloured fumes; as the acid evaporates the calx becomes yellow, then of a deep red, but when removed ſome time, orange. This is the red precipitate oſ the ſhops,. The nitrous acid, therefore, as in the caſe oſ other metals, though it acts witH more rapidity, adheres with leſs force to the mercury than the vitriolic acid, which acts ſlowly and with difficulty. This proceeds, as was beſore mentioned, from the eaſe with which the nitrous acid is decompoſed, ſo as to afford to metals the oxygen which i is neceſſary to render them ſoluble. : The muriatic acid has no action on mercury in ĩts metallic ſtate, becauſe that acid cannot part with the oxygen neceſſary to calcine the metal. It has, notwithſtanding, a very ſtrong attraction for mercury, and diſſolves it vith great readineſs when the latter is previouſly reduced to the ſtate oſ a calx. If a ſmall quantity of muriatic acid is poured on a nitrous ſolution of mercury, it ſeizes the metal, and forms a ſalt, which is precipitated in the form of a whitiſh coagulum, which, when dried, is called white precipitate, and is a kind oſ corroſive ſublimate. The marine ſalts, with æ baſis of alkali, or of any ſaline terreſtrigl ſubſtance, ſuch æ: lime, magneſia, &c. produce the ſame effect, except that in this caſe, though the precipitate is the ſame, the nitrous acid, inſtead of being left uncombined, unites with the baſis of the marine ſalt which was employed. If mercury, corroded by the vitriolic or nitrous acids, and dried, is mixed with powdered ſea ſalt, and expoſed to heat, a double attraction takes place; the nitrous or vitriolic acid deſerts the metal to unite with the fixed alkali of the common ſalt, while the muriatic acid ſeizes upon the mercury, and forms a metallic ſalt, which, in the degree of heat neceſſary for the operation, proves volatile, and, riſing in vapour, is condenſed in a ſolid form in the upper and cool part of the veſſel employed. This is the hydrargyrus muriatus, or corroſive ſublimate, which is a very acrid and powerful preparation of mercury. The mild preparation, called calomel, is obtained by rubbing three parts of mercury, in its metallic ſtate, vith four of corroſive ſublimate, till they form a greyiſh powder; the maſ's is then ſublimed æ, and forms a ſubſtance like corroſive ſublimatę;, but more ponderous, æ Made volatile, or raiſed in vapour, by the a;plication of heat. and of à more ſilvẽty appearance. The ingredients, however, are not ſufficiently mixed by the firſt ſublimation; they muſt be rubbed together again and ſublimed; and theſe proceſſes muſt be repeated at leaſt three times. The converſion of the corroſive ſublimate into the milder ſubſtance, calomel, may be explained on the ſolloning principles :In the corroſive ſublimate, the muriatic acid is ſound to be combined with a very large quant®y of oxygen, which renders it extremely activ- By the acdition oſ mercury, a quantity of ai3 ſuperfiuous oxygen is abſtracted, for the calcination oſ the additional metal; and the whole maſs, therefore, contains the acid not only i in a milder ſtate, but the ſame quantity of acid ĩs diffuſed through a larger maſs of the metal. Ponderous carth, magneſia, and lime, decompoſe the corroſive ſublimate, and precipitate a mercurial calx. The phagedenic water, made uſe of as a corroſive by ſurgeons, is made by throwing half a drachm of corroſive ſublimate, in powder, into a pound of lime water; a-yellow precipitate is then formed, which renders the liquor turbid. Acids and neutral alkaline ſalts produce no change on corroſive ſublimate, but it contracts an intimate union with ſal ammoniac without decompoſition. The ſal ammoniac renders corroſive ſublimate very ſoluble. The calx hydrargyri alba of the London Pharmocopeia is obtained from this combination. A quantity of ſal ammoniac is diſſolved in diſtilled water; an equal weight of corroſive ſublimate is then added; when this is diſſolved, fixed vegetable alkali is added, which produces a white precipitate. In this operation the fixed alkali diſengages the volatile alkali oſ the ſal ammoniac, which h precipitates the mercury in the form / of a white calx. This preparation is chiefly uſed in liniments externally. It is ſometimes adulterated with ceruſe, as the red precipitate is with minium. The fraud may be diſcovered by expoſing a ſmall quantity to heat in a ſpoon; if pure they will be entirely diſſipated, but if they contain lead, or other impurities, theſe matters will remain behind. If the ſalt formed by the combination of acetous acid with the fixed vegetable alkali, commonly called regenerated tartar, or kali acetatum, is added to the ſolution of quickſilver in the nitrous acid, a double exchange takes place; the alkali unites with the nitrous acid, while the acetous acid enters into combination with the mercury, and is precipitated. This precipitate (being purified by ſolution in hot diſtilled water and filtration) has nearly the ſame medical properties as calomel, and is Taid to form the baſis of Keyſer's pills. The acetous acid does not act on mercury unleſs the latter is reduced to the ſtate of a calx. As mercury is commonly, in. a ſtate of nature, combined with ſulphur, ſo it may be artificially united to it with great eaſlee When one part oſ this metallic ſluid is triturated with three parts of flowers of ſulphur, the mercury gradually Ioſes its metallic appearance, and is converted, by its union with the ſulphur, into a black powder, called Ethiop's mineral. This combination is more quickly effected by mixing the mercury with melted ſulphur. When this compound is expoſed to a conſiderable degree of heat ĩt takes fire, the greater part of the ſulphur burns, and after the combuſtion a matter remains, vhich when pulverized, is of a violet colour. To convert this powder into cinnabar it is put into matraſſes*, which are heated till * Veſſels uſed in chemical operations, of glaſ or earthenware, generally of the ſhape of an egę, and opea at the to;, the necks are long or ſhort, a: occaſion may require. their bottoms become red, and kept in this ſtate for ſeveral hours, till it appears that the matter is entirely ſublimed. The Dutch prepare, in the large way, the cinnabar employed in the arts When much divided by levigation* it has a brilliant red colour, and is called vermilion. Mercury has the property of uniting itſelf to many of the metals, by penetrating their ſubſtance, and rendering them more or leſs ſoſt, according to the proportion of mereury employed. If the proportion of quickſilver is very great, the mixture is like quickſilver, and is only diſtinguiſhed from it by an appearance of foulneſs. If a ſmaller quantity is uſed, the maſs is ſoſt like butter; if ſtill leſ, it ĩs ſolid but brittle. Theſe mixtures are called amalgams. It readily combines in this way with g~old, ſilver, lead, tin, biſmuth, and Zinc, but nqt eaſily with arſenic and copper, and ſcarcely at all with iron, platina, nickel, or cobalt. Its action on the other metallic bodies has not been aſcertained. A picce of gold, being rubbed with quickſilver, ĩs ſoon penetrated by it, and is rendered ſo fragile that it may be eaſily broken. A gold ring, which has become ſo tight on the finger that it cannot be drawn oſf, may be eaſily removed in this manner. Gold, united with quickſilver in certain proportions, forms a kind of paſte. On this property is founded the proceſs of gilding in or moulu. A ſmall quantity of this paſte is ſpread upon the ſurſace of the copper which is to be gilded in or moulu, and the metal is then expoſed to heat. Quickſũlver evaporates in a far leſs degree of heat than is ſufficient to melt either gold or copper; when, thereſore, the mixture of gold and q; uickſilver ĩs expoſed to heat, the quickſilver is driven f in vapour; but the gold not being ſuſceptible æ Reduced to a fine powder. ' of evaporation, remains attached to the ſurſace of the copper, and undergoing the operations of burniſhing, &c. the latter is gilded, or gil. This method ol gilding copper, by means of gold and quickſilver, was Inown to the Romans. The ſurface of iron cannot be covered in the ſame way with gold; but the iron, by being moiſtened with a ſolution of blue vitriol, as in the proceſs for browning firelocks, and being thus covered vith a lamina of copper, becomes as ſuſcept ible of being gilded as ifits whole ſubſtance was copper. It is this property which quickſilver has of uniting with the precious metals, and diſſolving them, which has rendered it ſo ſerviceable in the extraction of them from the earth with which thev are mixed. The earth or ſtones, in which gold and ſilver are cont:ined, being reduced to powder, are mixed with quickſilver, which diſſolves every particle of the precious metals without contracting the leaſt union with the other matters; the quickſilver is then driven oſf by heat, and, being condenſed in the receiver, ĩs again employed in the ſame proceſs. The gold and ſlver are ſeparated from each other by proceſſes, which will be deſcribed in treating oſ thoſe metals. Since the diſcovery of the American gold mines, the conſumption of quickſilver has been much increaſled Hoſfman concludes, ſrom calculation, that fifty times as much gold as quickſilver iĩs annually extracted from the bowels of the earth. Looking glaſſes are covered on one ſide with an amalgam of tin and mercury. Tin, being beaten into thin leaves, is called tin foll; on tin foil, evenly diſpoſed on a flat ſtone, quickſilver is poured, and ſpread vith a feather until its union has brightened every part of it; a plate of glaſs is then cautiouſly ſlid upon the tin foll, in ſuch a manner as to ſweep off the redundant quickſilver which is not united to the tin; weights are then placed on the glaſt ſo as to preſt out ſtill more of the quickſilver, and in a little time the tin foil, thus united to the quickſilver, adheres ſo firmly to the glaſę that the weights may be removed without any danger of its falling off. About two ounces of quickſilver are uſed in covering three ſquare feet of glaſs. In order to make mercury capable of acting on the animal body, it is neceſſary that it ſhould undergo ſome preparation; for its particles muſt be very minutely divided before they can enter the veſſels. Thus, if we apply quickſilver to a capillary tube, the attraction of ĩts particles for each other is ſo ſtrong that they vill not riſe in it; but minute diviſion is not the only circumſtance neceſſary to its activity, for Ethiops mineral and cinnabar taken into the body have very little if any eſfectl. Oxygenation ſeems to be the moſt eſſential circumſtance; for in whatever way this is eſfected the mercury becomes very active *. Mercury, in paſſing through the body, is reduced to the metallic ſtate, and, exuding through the pores, ſometimes attaches itſelſ to the gold of watches, rings, ſleeve-buttons, or ear-rings, and renders them white.  Does not the effect of ſulphur, in diminihing the activity of mercurial preparations, aepend on ĩts ſuperior attraction for oxygen, by which it has a tenaency to reduce the mercury to the C n a r. XXXIV. SIL VER. Character of the perfect MetalsCGeneral Properties of SilverVegetation of Silver.Natural Hiſtory of SiluerAſaying of Silæer. CutellationLunar Cauſtic. "Fulminating Silver. Luna Cornea. /Dianas Tree. C reen Gold.Standard SilVver CoinVlating avith Silver ; houv performed. Frendh Plate. F the different metallic ſubſtances only three have been dignified by chemiſts and mineralogiſts with the appellation of perfect, viz. ſilver, gold, and platina. Theſe are diſtinguiſhed from the other metals by their weak attraction for oxygen, which enables them to retain their purity and metallic ſplendor in ſituations in which other metals become gradually covered with ruſt or calx. Silver is the whiteſt of all metals, and is poſſeſſed of great brilliancy; it is harder than gold; in weight it is excecded by gold, platina, quickſilver, and lead; its gravity being only about ten times that of water. Its malleability is ſo great, that a grain of it reduced to ordinary ſilver Jeaſ meaſures about fifty-one ſquare inches, in which ſtate it is not more than the hundred and ſixty thouſandth part of an inch thick, which, however, is conſiderably more than one third thicker than gold leaſ. Its tenacity is ſo conſiderable, that it may be drawn into wire about half the thickneſs of a fine human hair, and a wire of one tenth of an inch in diameter will ſupport the weight of two hundred and ſeventy pounds without breaking: It is very ſonorous, but in hardneſs and elaſticity it is not equal to copper. It hardens under the hammer, but very readily loſes that hardneſs by heating. Silver, expoſed to- the heat of the moſt powerſul burning lenſes, is partly vitrified and partly volatilized in fumes, which are found, when received on a plate of gold, to be ſilver in the metallic ſtate. It is likeviſe ſaid to have been partly calcined by twenty ſucceſſive expoſures to the heat of the porcelain furnace at Seves. This, however, may be doubted, as ſilver does not undergo any degree of calcination by expoſure to heat, even with the addition of nitre. Silver melts in the firſt degree of white heat, and appears in the fire like the fineſt quickſilverr. When it is haſtily cooled, it exhibits a curious phenomenon, called vegetation; for we diſcover ſfrom different parts of iĩts ſurface ramiſications and branches like thoſe oſ trees which ſprout out with a ſtem. The reaſon of this appearance ſeems to be the irregular contraction which the ſilver undergoes in paſſing from the fluid to the ſolid ſtate:. The melted ſilver ſuffers the firſt commencement of congelation at ĩts ſurface; by theſe means a cruſt is formed, which by its ſudden contraction compreſſes the fluid ſilver within; thus a protuberance is formed, which, congealing in its turn, contracts and preſſes the intermediate auid through its cruſt into branches. The æir alters ſilver very little, unleſs ĩit contains ſulphureous vapours, which it oſten does, from the putreſaction of animal ſubſtances or the exhalations of drains, or of ſulphureous mineral waters. This metal, therefore, becomes ſomewhat tarniſhed by Iong continued expoſure to the atmoſphere, and in timę becomes covered with athin purple or black coating vhich, aſter a long ſeries of years, has been obſer to ſcale oſf ſrom images of ſilver expoſed in churckes, and was found, on examination, to conſiſt of ſilver united to ſulphur. Silver is often found in its narive ſtate, and may be known by its brilliancy and ductility. It is ſometimes met with in irregular maſſes, ſometimes in the form of capillary threads or fibres, and ſometimes in that of branches, formed by octahedrons inſerted one into the other. It is alſo often diſperſcdd in a quartzoſe gangue ?. Native ſilver is ſometimes ſound alloyed vith gold, copper, iron, or regulus of antimony; but native gold much oftener contains ſilver than native ſilver does gold. Silver is not naturally found in the ſtate of calx. The vitreous ore of ſilver is compoſcd of that metal and ſulphur. It is the richeſt of the ſilver ores, and vields from ſeventy to cighty pounds of the metal in the hundred weight. It is of a blackiſh grey colour, reſembling lead; ſome ſpecimens are brown, greeniſb, yellow, &c.; it may be cut with a Inife, and is ſometimes cryſtallized. If it is expoſed to a heat not ſufficient to melt it, the ſuphur is diſſipated, and the virgin ſilver is obtained in fibres. PThe red ſilver ore contains arſenic as well as ſulphur. It is a heavy ſhining ſubſtance, ſometimes tranſparent, ſometimes opake, but commonly cryſtallized. It is often of a deep red colour on the outſide, but appears paler within. It affords about half its weight of ſilver. If it is expoſed to a fire carefully managed, and capable of igniting it, the ſilver is reduced, and forms capillary fibres, ſimilar to native ſilver. There is a ſilver ore containing arſenic, cobalt, and iron, mineralized by ſulphur. This ore ſometimes æ A quartzoze or ſparry cryſtallization, oſten found incloſing the ores of metals, and therefore called the matrix or rider. yields half its weight of ſilver; it varies in its appearance, being ſometimes of a grey and brilliant aſpect, but often of a dull and tarniſhed colour, with effſoreſcences of cobalt. The gooſe dung ore belongs to this ſpecies. The grey ore of ſilver contains a large quantity of copper. The black ſilver ore, called nigrillo by the Spaniards, ſeems to be a middle ſtate between native ſilver and ſome of its ores, or thoſc ores in a ſtate oſ imperſect decompoſitionn. The corneous ſilver ore is a natural combination of ſilver and muriatic acid vith a ſmall quantity of vitriolic acid. Silver is alſo ſound in conſiderable quantity in the ores of other metals, particularly thoſe of antimony, Zinc, lead, and copper. In the aſſaying of ſilver ores diſferent proceſſes are uſed, according to their nature. When found in its netallic ſtate, nothing more ĩs neceſſary than to ſeparate it from the earthy or ſtony matter in which it is embedded. With this view it is ſirſt expoſed to heat, to rernder the ſtony matter friablee. The maſs is then mixed and ground uith quickſilver. Thus the ſilver is converted into an amalgum, which, from the intimate union of the particles of the metals, is ſpecifically heavier than quickſilver itſelf. The ſtony matters are nov eaſily waſhed off, without loſing any of the metal. The quickſilver is aſterwards partly ſeparated by ſqueezing it through a piece of leather, and the remainder by diſtillation. Sulphureous ſilver ores require to be firſt roaſted, and then mixed with a quantity oſ flux. In order to ſepurate lead, copper, iron, &c. from ſilver, a particular proceſs is employed, which is called cupellation, from the veſſel in which ĩt is performed, called a cupel, and which is chiefly formed of calcined bones, and is very porous. The derable quantity of lead, and then expoſed on the cupel in a ſtate of fuſion. The lead is vitrified and abſorbed into the cupel, carrying with it the imperfect metals, and the ſilver remains behind on the cupel in a pure ſtate. The vitriolic acid acts on ſilver as on the other metals, with the aſſiſtance of heat; it then corrodes ĩt into a white maſs, which is ſoluble in water, and by evaporation affords ſmall cryſtals. The nitrous acid diſſolves ſilver with great rapidity. When the ſtrong nitrous acid is diluted with an equal weight of water, ĩt is capable of diſſolving about half its weight of ſilver. If the ſilver employed is quite pure, the ſolution is limpid like water; but as ſilver commonly contains a little copper, its ſolutions havę uſually a blueiſh tinge. If the ſilver employed contains gold, in this caſe, as the nitrous acid is not capable of diſſolving the gold, it ſeparates from the ſilver in the form of Blackiſ Aocks. From this difference in the action of nitrous acid on ſilver and gold, it is ſucceſsfully uſed to ſeparate theſe metals from each other. The ſolution of ſilver in the nitrous acid is extremely bitter and cauſtic, and has the property of changing the in or hair to a black colour, or, if very much Aliluted, to a brown, and formerly, when the caprice of fahion abhorred light hair as much as it at preſent admires it, was employed for that purpoſec The colour is, however, very faint when the ſolution is firſt applied, and the production of colour ſeems in a great meaſure to depend on the action of light. Dr. Tevis mentions a remarkable phenomenon, which this ſolution preſents when added to chalk or any pure abſorbent carth. The chalk and ſolution are both at firſt quite white, and will continue ſo if kept in a dark 20 Lunar Cauſtic. Book VI. place, but if expoſed to the light they ſoon become black; ſo that if a quantity of this mixture is put into a glaſs phial ſealed up, any maiks or letters may be made to appear on it as if by magic. To effect this, the phial is covered with thick paper, in which the marks or letters are nicely cut, and ĩt ĩs then expoſed to the light, which, acting only through the apertures of the paper, produces the eſfect. When the ſtains are produced, aqua ſortis, by re-diſſolving the ſilver, will make them diſappear again. It thereſore ſeems, that the pioduction of colour is owing to an imperfect reduction of the ſilver, and that the action of light diſengages oxygen from this compound in the ſame manner as ĩt does from the pale nitrous acid, and from vegetables. When this ſolution of ſilver is evaporated with a gentle heat, it may be made to afford cryſtals nearly reſernbling thoſe of nitree Theſe, being melted in a crucible, are freed from water, and being poured into moulds oſ a convenient form, become the ſilver or lunar* cauſtic, or argentum nitratum of the pharmacopœſa. Silver ĩs never given internally, and this ĩs the only preparation of it made uſe of externally. The nitrous acid may be entirely ſeparated ſrom this compound by heat alone. Silver, however, is moſt conveniently ſeparated from its nitrous ſolution by imimerſing plates of copper in it. The copper is then diſſolved, while the ſilver is depoſũted in its metallic ſtate. This metal may be ſeparated from gold by expoſing the mixed metals to  A name derived from the whim of the alchemiſts, who called the metals by the names of the heavenly bodies: gold, Sol; ſilver, Lunæ; copper, Venus; iron, Mars (wherce martial vitriol, &c.); lead, Saturn; tin, Jupiter; quickſlver, Mercury, æc. the action oſ ritrous acid, which diſſolves the ſilver and leaves the gold, and the above method ĩs uſed to obtain the ſilver ſrom the æcid. To make the ſamous fulminating ſilver, which is ſo truly formidable in it; eſiects, a ſmall quantity of ſilver is diſſolved in pale nitrous acid (or aqua fortis) ſrom which it is precipitated by lime water. ſhe calx or precipitate is to be dried by expoſure to the air ſor three days. The inventor, M. Bertholet, ſuppoſes the action of light to have alſo ſore inſiuence in the ſucceſ⸗ of the experiment*?. The dried calx is then agitated in a ſolution of the cauſtic volatile alæeli, when it aſſumes the form of a black powder, which ĩs Ieſt to dry in the open air. The fulminating ſilver then conſiſts of an union of the calx of ſilver with voIatile alkali. The eſfects of this preparation are tremendous, and infinitely exceed thoſe of gunpowder, fulminating povder, or fulminating gold. It explodes with the ſlighteſt agitation or friction. The falling of a few atoms of it ſfrom a moderate height produces a violent detonation, and a drop of warer falling upon it has the ſame effect. When it is once fully prepared, it muſt not be touched or moved into any other veſicl, but muſt remain in that in which it was dried; and to make the experiment with tolerable ſafety, not more than a grai of ſlver ſhould be employed in the proceſs. The cauſe of theſc exploſions has been already intimated in the chapter on ignition, and will be further illuſtrated in treating of fulminating gold. Though the nitrous acid diſiolves ſilver with greater eaſe, it has not ſo ſtrong an attraction for it as the musiatic or vitriolic acids. Either of theſe, dropped * Journal de Phyſique ſor Jure 1789, ꝑ. 474. into the nitrous ſolution, ſeize the ſilver, and forming a compound not equally ſoluble produce a precipitation. The neutral ſalts, containing vitriolic or muriatic acid, have the ſame eſfect. This diſference of aſfinity between the acids and ſilver is the foundation oſ a proceſs for obtuining the nitrous acid in a ſtate of great purity. The ſolition of ſilver in nitrous acid is pourec into the impure nitrous acid till no more precipitate is formed. The muriatic or vitriolic acids contained in the mixture are thus carried to the bottom by their union with the ſilver. The acid is then decanted and diſtilled to free it from the ſmall quantity of ſalt of ſilver which it may ſtill contain. Notwithſtanding the muriatic acid has the ſtrongeſt aſfinity with ſilver of all the acids, it is nevertheleſs incapable of diſſolving it unleſs the metal is in æ calcined ſtate, or itſclf ſuperoxygenatedc The common method of eſfecting this union ĩs to add to the ſolution of ſilver, in the nitrous acid, any ſaline ſubſtance which contains the muriatic acid; it is no matter to what the acid is joined, whether alkali, earth, or metal; it immediately ſeizes the ſilver, and leaves the other matter to unite with the nirrous acidl. Common ſalt is generally uſed, and the white precipitate, which is immediately formed, has the appearance of a coagulum. The compound thus made is ſo inſoluble in water, that there cannot be a nicer teſt of the preſence of the muriatic acid, or common ſalt, in waters, than the nitrous ſolution of ſilver; for if the moſt minute quantity of either are preſent a precipitation is produced. This. compound has many other qualities beſides inſolubility in water. If we collect it, and waſh off the ſaline matter, it appears as a fine powder, and, when heated to a ſuſſicient degree, melts into a ſubſtance of ſome tranſparency From its tranſparency, Pexibility, and ſoſtneſs, it is called luna e cornea, or arventum eorneum, and from this ſeveral other compounds of metals with the muriatic acid have been calied c/-i 1It may be cut into tranſparent veſſels reſembling glaſs.  m regia, or the compound of nitrous and mæriatic acids, acts ſtrongly on ſilver, but forms a precipitation in proportion as it ſeparates it ſrom the maſ. This efect may be readily underſtocd from what has already been obſerved. The nitrous acid diſdlves the ſilver, and the muriatic ſcizes it, and forms bina cornea vhich is inſoluble. This proceſ may be uſed to ſepærate gold ſrom ſilver; the gold is held diũſolved in the aqua regia, but the ſilver is precipitated. After ſilver has been reduced to the calciform ſtate by ſolution in nitrous acid, and precipitation by alkalis, it is capable of ſolution in vinegar, and even ĩn Iemon juice; but theſe compounds have not been applicd to any uſe. To have ſilver perfectly pure we muſt uſe quickſilver, which, if poured into a ſolution of ſilver, is attracted by the acid, and precipitates an amalgam with the ſilver at the bottom of the veſſel. The quicſilver is eaſily ſeparated from the ſilver by heat aelone. A curious phenomenon ariſes from this amalgam; a ind of cryſtallization tækes place, which ĩs formed by the union oſ the ſilver with the running mercury. The amalgam puts forth ſhoots, which aſterwards put forth others, like the branches of a tree. The cry ſtallization varies according to the conduct of the proœeſ, and does not aluays anſwer, particularly if the mix ture is ſhaken. It is called arbor Dianæ, or Dianas tree*,. The method of making it moſt beautiſul  Dianvs tree, from the whim oſ the alchemiſts already noticed, who appropriated Llver tę the Moon or Diana, as ſtated in a ꝑreceding note. . is very tedious, and would require the ſpace of a month. This phenomenon ſeems to admit of xplanation preciſely on the ſame principle as the branching of pure ſilver when paſſing from iæ fluid to ĩts ſolid ſtate. The amalgam of ſilver and mercury is ſpecifically heavier than either of the metals in a ſeparate ſtate, and their union muſt conſequently be attended with contraction. The ſilver, therefore, being precipitated on the ſurface of the mercury, in proportion as the latter metal ĩs diſſolved by iĩts ſuperior attraction for the acid, the mercury becomes ſurrounded with a cruſt, the contraction of which forces out its uid contents; the excreſcences thus produced being in their turn covered with a cruſt of amalgam, are ægain compreſſed, and produce ſmaller protuberances, and if the experiment is properly conducted, the brittle amalgam of the metals aſſumes a cryſtallized appearance, and the form of a thick buh. In this experiment it is neceſſary that there ſould be not only as much mercury as is ſufficient to precipitate the ſilver, but beſides this a quantity remaining in its fluid ſtate, to unite vith the precipitated ſilver into an amalgam. Sulphur has a remarkably ſtrong affinity with ſilver, and forms with it a compound which has the appearance and ſoſineſs of lead. This metal ſeems alſo capable of attracting ſulphur from antimony. But though ſilver has ſo ſtrong an attraction for ſulphur, gold as none, and this furniſes a method of ſeparating theſe metals by fuſion. i ith goldq, ſilver forms a pale alloy, the green gold of the jewellers and gold beaters. This mixture, however, is not made without ſome difficulty, on account of the diſferent ſpeciſic gravities of the two metals. It does not unite well with platina, It forms an ut vith iron, but the properties of it have not been vell examined intoo. With lead it forms an alloy, which is much more fuſible than pure ſilver, and ſeems in all reſpects to be of an intermediate nature between theſe metals. Copper increaſes the hardneſs of ſilver, and renders it more ſonorous, without impairing its ductility or colour, when the copper does not exceed the twelſth part of the weight of ſilver employedl. The ſtandard of ſilver coin is eleven ounces two pennyweights, troy, of ſilver, and eighteen pennyweights of copper. The purit? of ſilver cannot be  accurately aſcertained without ſubmitting it to cupellation with lead, and its purity is calculated according to the weight ĩt loſes in that proceſs. Silver is divided into twelve imaginary parts, called pennyweights. If it only Ioſes one twelſth part of its weight by cupellation, it contains eleven twelſths of pure ſilver, and is ſaid to be eleven pennyweights fine; if it loſes two twelfths, it is ten pennyweights fine, and ſo of other proportions. For greater accuracy, each pennyweight is ſuppoſed to be divided into twenty-four grains. The covering of the ſurface of copper with ſlver, or plating, is perſormed in the following manner:  Upon ſmall ingots of copper, plates of ſilver are bound with iron wire, generally allowing one ounce of ſilver to twelve ounces of copper. The ſurface of the plate of ſilver is not quite ſo large as that of the copper ingot. Upon the edges of the copper, which are not covered by the ſilver, a little borax is put, and by expoſing the whole to a ſtrong heat, the borax melts, and in melting contributes to melt that part of the ſilver to which it is contiguous, and to attach it in that melted ſtate to the copper. The ingot, with its ſilver plate, is then rolled under ſteel rollers, moved by a water wheel, till it is of a certain thickneſs; it is aſterwards rolled by hand rollers to a greater or leſs extent, according to the uſe for which it is intended; the thinneſt is applied to the lining of drinking horns. An ounce of ſilver is oſten rolled out intc a ſurface of about three ſquare feet, and its thickneſs is about the three thouſandth part of an inch; and hence we need not wonder at the ſilver being ſoon worn off from the ſharp angles of plated copper, when ĩt is rolled to ſo great an extent.  What is commonly called French plate is not to be confounded with the plated copper. In making French plate, copper, or, more commonly, braſs, is heated to a certain degrec, and ſilver leaf is applied upon the heated metal, to which it adheres, by being rubbed with a proper burniſher ?. C u A P. XXXV. G OL D. General Properties of Gold.Gold calcined by Electricity Extrem: Ductillity of this MetalNatural Hiſtory of Gold.Proceſſes for separating Gold from other Subſtances QuartationThe Touchstone.Aqua RegiaReaſins why ihe diferent Acids act on metallic BodiesFulminating Gold.—Purple Pouvder of Caſſius/Golden Calf, how deſtroyed by Moſes Union of Geld ith other Metali Standard Gold Coin of diffcreut Countries. O LD is the heavieſt of all the metals except platina, being between nineteen and twenty times the weight of water. When perſectly pure it is almoſt as ſoſt as lead, and is neither elaſtic nor ſonorcus. For its fuſion it requires rather more heat than ſilver, and when in fuſion has a blueiſh green colour, and its ſurface is always perfectly bright. The moſt intenſe heat cannot calcine ĩt, and only contributes to render it more pure if it had any foulneſs. The powerful burning mirrors are ſaid to have volatilized it, and ĩt has been driven up in fumes, in the metallic ſtate, by flame urged upon it by a ſtream of vital air. The electric fluid, however, vhen made to pæſs in conſiderable quantities through gold leaf, incloſed between two plates of glaſs, converts it into a calx, which tinges the glaſs of a purple colour. The tenacity ofſgold is ſo great, that a wire one-tenth of an inch in diameter is capable of ſupporting five hundred pounds. Its malleability and ductility exceed thoſe of ſilver, and are ſo remarkable, that their limits could never be aſcertained with any conſiderable exactneſs. On gold lace the thickneſs of the gold has been computed to be leis than the one hundred and thirty-four thouſandth part of an inch, and the degree of extenſibility has been carried Itill farther. In ordinary gold- Ieaf, which is made by haminering plates of gold between ſkins, or animal membranes, a grain ĩs made to cover fiſty-ſix ſquare inches and a quarter. In this ſtate its ſurface is ſo great that it may be made to float in the air with the ſlighteſt agitation, and its thickneſs is not more than the two hundred and eight7two thouſandth part of an inch. Gæld is produced by nature very plentifully. There is much oſ it in Brazil, in the Spaniſh Eæſt and Weſt Indies, on the coaſt of Africæ, and in Uppcr Hungary, where the mines have remained unexhauſted for ten centuries. Peru and Mexico abound with gold in a variety of forms. It is met with in the ſands of rivers and mountains. Some rivers in France, as well as in this country, contain gold in their ſand. It is alſo found in the fiſſures of rocks, imbedded in hard ſtones. Pieces of gold of ſeveral ounces, and even pounds weight, are ſometimes found, but in general it is diffuſed in ſo ſmall portions, and through ſo large a quantity of ſanc, that the trouble of extracting it is ſcarce.y repaid by the gains. In all parts of the world, perticularly in Europe, gold is moſt frequently found in ſtrata of ſand, in which it ſeems to have been depoſited by water. Gold mines were once wrought in Scotland, and it appears upon record that forty-eight thouſand pounds ſteriing of this gold was coined in the Scotch mint. It is now a general opinion among mineralogiſts, that there are ſcarcely any ſands entirely ſree from gold, and which, by accurate examination, cannot be made to afford more or leſs of that ſubſtance. Corſidering that gold has no attraction for ſulphur, and very little for arſcnic, which are the uſual mineralizer of netallic bodies, it is not ſurpriZzing that it ſhould be uſu.ily ſound in a ſepàrate and nearly pure ſtate. The metuili- budies, with which it is alloyed in a ſtate of nature, ieldom conſtitute any conſiderable part of its weight; they are generally eſther ſilver, copper, or iron. Gold, however, is ſometimes mixed with martial pyrites, and is ſometimes contained in an ore, which is a mixture of lead, ſilver, and iron, mineralized by ſulphur. In theſe caſes the preſence of gold is not known by the appearance of the mineral, and can only be diſcovered by roaſting, and ſubſequent fuſion with ſuch matters as are capable of vitrifying the carthy and mai tial ſubſtances. The addition of icad is alſo uſeful, vhich unites with the gold, and carries it to the bottum of the maſt. The gold is eæſily obtained free from the lead by the proceſL of cupellation. : In order to ſeparate gold, when in its native ſtate, from the earthy and ſtony matters in which it is contained, the following proceſs is employed: When it is contained in ſand, the lighter particles of the latter are waſhed away by water, and th e remaining matter, which may prove ſo heavy as not to be ſeparated from the gold without danger of loſing ſome of the precious metal, are amalgamizeq, by being ground with mercury, in the ſame monner as has been mentioned in the extraction of ſilver. If the gold is mixed with ſtones of conſiderable bulk, it is neceſſary that they ſhould be reduced to powder in order to render them ſufficiently light to be wahed away. The mercury is alſo ſeparated from gold in the ſame way as from ſilver; as much as poſſible is ſeparated from it by preſſure in bags of leather, and the remainder by heat. All the imperſect metals may be abſtracted ſrom gold by cupellation; but in order to ſeparate ſilver from it, other proceſſes muſt be employed. The beſt of theſe is called quartation, becauſe the gold muſt not exceed the fourth part of the weight of the maſs ſubmitted to trial. The gold, thereſore, muſt be firſt mixed with three times its weight of ſilver, the effect of which is, that the particles of gold are removed to ſuch a diſtance that they cannot protect the ſilver from being acted on. The maſs of gold and ſilver being then beaten out into thin plates to increaſe the ſurface, are expoſed to the action of aqua fortis, which diſſolves the ſilver, and leaves the gold in a ſpongy maſs; this is waſhed two or three times with aqua ſortis, and then expoſed to heat in a muſe æ, to recover its metallic brightnes. When ſilver is thus ſeparated by aqua fortis, a minute portion of the ſilver is apt to adhere to the gold, and, therefore, when it is an object to have the gold perfectly pure, it is proper to ſubmit it to the action of aqua regia, which diſſolves the gold, and converts the ſilver into luna cornea, which is precipitated to the bottom of the veſſcl. When it is intended to ſeparate ſilver by aqua regia, the proportions of the metals muſt be reverſcd, and as the gold is to be diſſolved, it muſt be three times the weight of the ſilver. In this way gold may be obtained quite pure; but the goldſmiths find a diſficulty in obtaining it perfectly ductile. To have it ſoft and tough it muſt be melted with a ſtrong heat, and aſterwards cooled vtry ſoly. In applying ſaline ſubſtances to gold, it is found that no one of the acids, in its ordinary ſtate, produces the * A ſmall earthern oven made and ſold by the crucible manufacturers. leaſt effect on it in its metallic ſtate. Upon this depends the trial of gold by the lapis lydius, or touchſtone, hich is of a dark colour and pretty fine grain, but when poliſhed has ſuſficient roughneſs, ſo that when the metal is rubbed over it a mark is left, which mark will be affected by any of the common acids, aqua fortis for inſtance, in proportion to the impurities the metal contains, but not at all if the gold is perfectly pure. Goldſmiths uſe likewiſe two ſets of needles, one for ſilver and the other for gold, when they want to examine the fineneſs of different parcels. The ſets of needles for gold are alloyed with different proportions of copper; one is made with twenty-three parts of gold to one of copper, another with twenty-two parts of gold to one of copper, and ſo in proportion. When they have a piece of gold to be tried, they firſt examine its colour to determine what quantity of alloy it contains. To know this the better, they mark the touchſtone with it, and then make another mark with the needle, which they think to be of nearly ſimilar purity. Thus they compare them; and aſter this, to be certain that the metal ĩs gold; they apply to the mark on the ſtone a drop of agua fortis. If it is copper tinged with Zinc, or any other imitation of gold, the aqua fortis immediately diſſolves it. If ĩt contains gold and ſome other metal, it diſolves the other metal and leaves the gold. The only ſaline fluid which diſſolves gold in its metallic ſtate is aqua regia, or a mixture of the nitrous and muriatic acids. It is prepared in various ways: 1ſt, By mixing the two acids in their pure ſtate. 2dly, By adding common ſalt, or ſal ammoniac, to aqua fortis, and then diſtiling the mixturee A part of the nitrous acid decoinpoſes the muriatic ſalt, and detaches the muriatic acid, which riſes with the remainder of the nitrous acid, and thus an aqua regia is produced. 3dly, By mixing a ſolution of alum vith nitre and common ſalt, in which caſe the vitriolic acid of the alum diſengages the nitrous and muriatic acids by its ſuperior attraction for their baſis. It is uſual to make aqua regia by diſſolving ſal ammoniac in about four times its weight oſ ſtrong nitrous acid: but the reſults of experiments or operations vary conſiderably according to the proportion of the ingredients made uſe of. The theory of the operation of this compound æcid does not ſeem diſicult. In the courſe of this work it has been more than once remarked, that the eaſy ſolution of metallic matters in acids does not depend merely on. the degree of attraction which exiſts between the metal and the acid, but alſo on the eaſe with which the acid parts. with oxygen to calcine the metal. From this cauſe it happens, that the nitrous acid, which has much leſs affinity with metallic matters than the vitriolic or muriatic, diſſolves them more readily than either of theſe. Aqua regia, however, conſiſts of the acid which has the ſtrongeſt attraction for metallic bodies, and alſo of that which moſt eaſily parts with oxygen, and the union of theſe powers produces the eſfect of ſolution. That this is the true explanation of the ſolution of gold in aqua regia appears from ſeveral cireumſtances; for gold, previouſly reduced to the ſtate of calx, that is, furniſhed already with a quantity of oxygen, is eaſily diſſfolved by muriatic acid, and gold in its metallic ſtate, is diſſolved by the oxygenated or aerated muriatic acid, and forms with it the ſame ſalt which is uſually obtained by the mixed acid, or aqua regia. The muriatic acid, thereſore, is the true ſolvent of gold, and the addition of nitrous acid has no other effect than that oſ furniſhing bxygen, ſince the ſame effect follows when the neceſſary quantity of oxygen is previouſly added either to the gold or the muriatic acidl. Gold, precipitated from aqua regia by alkalis, and thus reduced to the calciform ſtate, is ſoluble even in the vitriolic and nitrous acids. The addition of water to the vitriolic acid, enables it to diſiolve iron exactly on the ſame principle that the addition oſ nitrous acid to the muriatic, enables the lIatter to diſſolve gold. The concentrated vitriolie acid has no action on iron without the aſſiſtance of heat; but by a proper addition of water the proceſs goes on, in the ordinary temperature of the atmoſphere, vith conſiderable rapidity. The water furniſhes oxygen to the iron, and its other component part, hydrogen, is ſet at liberty; and that the nitrous acid, in the aqua regia, anſwers the purpoſe of furniſhing oxygen to the gold, is proved by the diſengagement of nitrous gas. The ſolution of gold in aqua regia, when firſt made, is always yvellow, conſiderably cauſtie, corrodes animal matters, and tinges them of a deep purple colour. When applied to the ſurface of marble, it tinges it oſf a violet colour. This colour is produced b by a precipitation of the gold, in conſequence of the ſuperior attraction of the calcareous earth for the æcũ]. The ſolution of gold may be made, by cautious evaporation, to aford cryſtals of a beautiful tonaz or vellow colour. Gold may be in ſome meaſure volatilized by repeatedly diſtilling it with aqua regia; ſome oſ the gold riſes with the acid into the neck of the retort in the form of long ſlender brown cryſtals. Gold is  precipitated from its ſolution by a great varĩety of ſubſtances, but its appearances are very various, according to the nature of the matter employed. ĩ ime and magneſia precipitate gold in the form of a yellowiſh powder, and the fixed alkalies have the ſame eſfect. Volatile allali produces a more quick and copious precipitation, and forms the remarkable compound, known by the nume of aurum fulminans, the nature of which hus been already intimated in a rote under the head of ignition. I ſhall in this place, however, add a few obſervations, which may tend ſtill further to illuſtrate its nature. In the firſt place, it appears that the fulminating gold is a compound of about three parts of that metal with one oſ volaetile alkali. Secondly, Fulminating gold, expoſed to ſuch a heat as is ſuſficient to ſeperate the volatile alkali; without ſetting fire to the compound, loſes its fulminating property. The ſame effect is produced by ſubmitting it to the action of concentrated vitriolic acid, melted ſulphur, æther, or any ſubſtance capable oſ abſtracting the volatile alkali by ſuperior aſfinity. Thirdly, When a few grains of fulminating gold are detonated in copper tubes, the extremity of which is Plmged beneath the mercury of the preumato- chemial apperatus, azote is diſengaged, a ſew drops of water are produced, and the gold is reſtored to its metallic æppearance. M. Berthollet, the inventor of this experiment, concludes, that the volatile alkali is decompoſed, and that while one of its component parts, hydrogen, unites with the oxygen of the calx of gold; and forms water, its other component part, azote, eſcapes in the ſorm of gas. The readineſs with which fulminating gold explodes ſeems to depend on the tendency Vhich the hydrogen of the alali has to unite vith the oxygen of the metallic calx, which tendency the weak attraction of the gold for the oxygen on the one hand, and the azote for hydrogen on the other, are ſcarcely ſuſficient to counteract. Whenever the balance of power among theſe ingredients is diſturbed, which happens from a moderate increaſe of heat, or violent friction, the hydrogen and oxygen unite and form water, the gold is reduced, and the æzote eſcapes in the form of gas, occaſioning æ violent exploſion. When gold is newly precipitated, Margraſf informs us, that it may be re-ciſſolved by the volatile alkali, or, much more readily, by the Pruſſian alkali. Alkeline ſalts precipitate gold in the form of a calx, but inflammable ſubſtances precipitate it in the metallic form. The moſt ſingular effect of inflammable ſubitances upon the ſolution of gold is that of the vitriolic ether, though it does not entirely ſeparate the gold ſrom the acid. If into a phial of diſtilled water a ſingle drop of the ſolution of gold is introduced, the water will become oſ a fine yellow coour; add to this a quantity of vitriolic ether, which ill foat uppermoſt, and remain colourleſs, no ſenſible change being produced; by ſhaking the mixture, however, for fome time, and then allowing it to reſt, the yellow colour in the Joweit part of the phial will leave the water, ænd riſe up into the ether. By repeated agitation, in a little time the ether will draw up into ĩt the whole of the gold, ſo as to leave the liquor at bortom perſectly colous leſs. It would be erroneous to conclude from this experiment, that ether is a ſolvent of geld; it does not diſſolve it, but attracts the ſolution merely by its affinity for acids. Though. the ether acts primarily on the acid, it at length ſeparates the oxygen from the calcined gold, and precipitates it in its metallic ſtate. All the ſubrile aromatic olls have a ſimilar eſẽct, but do not act ſo readily as ether. As theſe inflammable ſuids have no action on the ſolutions of other metals, ihis proceſs may be uſed as a means of refining ę gold; for the acid containing gold is imbibed by the inflammable ſluid, while that part of it which is combined with any other metal remains behind. Almoſt all metallic ſubſtances precipitate gold from its ſolution in aqua regia. Mercury and copper ſeparate it in its ſhining metallic form; lead, iron, and ſilver, precipitate it of a deep and dull purple colour. A plate of tin, plunged in a ſolution of gold, ſepurates the perſect metal in the form of a deep violet powder, called purple powder of Caſius, which is uſed in painting, in enamel, and in porcelain. This powder conſiſts of the calces of gold and tin in combination, and is capable of communicating a fine purple colour to glaſs. The ſolution of green vitriol precipitates no other metal but gold, and the gold proves of uncommon purity, and of a very deep colour. Gold in its metallic ſtate is incapable of uniting with ſulphur alone, but if a piece of gold is dropped into a ſolution of hepar ſulphuris, eſpecially if the latter is prepared with equal parts of ſulphur and alkali, the gold diſſolves vith ſome ebullition, and forms a maſę, which diſſolves in water like the combination of alkali and crude antimony. Stahl ſuppoſes thet this proceſs was uſed by Moſes to render the golden calf, adored by the Iſraelites, 1oluble in water. But though gold will not unite with ſulphur, it may be purified by means oſ it, the ſulphur uniting with the metals with which iĩt is alloyed. With this view it ĩs uſual to heat the gold with crude æntimony, in which ſtate the ſulphur is more fixed than when applied in a ſeparate ſtate. In this proceſs, however, the gold combines with a portion of antimony, which muſt be afterwards driven oſſ by heat. There are ſcarcely any metals with which gold will not unite. When boiled a ſhort time with mercury, it forms an amalgam which is gritty and rigid at the ſirſt, but which becomes by grinding more ſoft and tender; this is often made uſe of for gilding the ſurface of ſilver and copper, as was more particularl; mentioned when treating of the latter metal. E Gold readily unites vith zinc, and produces a mixed metal, whiter than might be expected from the quantity of Zinc which is employed; this alloy, made with equal parts of the two metals, is remarkably ſplendid, is of a fine grain, and is not liable to tarniſh: on account of theſe properties it has been recommended for conſtructing the mirrors of teleſcopes. All the metals, except ſilver and copper, take avay the ductility of gold, but none more remarkably than tin, a grain of Which added to a thouſand of gold is ſaid to deprive it entirely of ductility. Copper is commonly uſed to alloy gold, as ſilver renders it very pale. Copper rather heightens the colour of g0ld, but inclines it to red. Goldſmiths denote the fineneſs of gold by the word carrat. It is ſuppoſed to be divided into twenty- four parts, called carrats; and gold, which is quite free from alloy, is ſaid to be twenty- four carrats fine; that vhich contains one twenty-fourth of alloy is called gold of twenty-three carrats; that which contains two twenty- fourths, of twenty-two carrats, and ſo on. In England, the ſtandard of gold coin is twenty-two carrats fine gold and two carrats of alloy, which latter is haelf ſilver and half copper. The French, Spaniſh, and C  A P. XXXViJ. P LATINA. &ãrural Hiſiory of this curious MetalIts PropertiesThe moſt porderous Body in Nature1Its Hardueſs and Irijibiliy. Soluble cnly in dqua Regia and oxygenated muriatic Acid. Its Union avith other MetalsCrucibles formed &f it MMight be appliss to vorious i Uſis avhich no other Metal can anfuer. 7 N the beginning of the year 1749, the firſt ſpecimen of this metal was brought into England from Jumaica. It was ſaid to have been originally brought from the Spaniſh Weſt Indies, and it is ſtill almoſt excluſively found in the gold mines of Spaniſh America. It is brought over in the form of ſmall ſmooth grains, irregularly figured, with round edges, and is oſten mixed with ferrugineous ſand and grains of quartz or cryſtal. The grains of platina are whiter than iron, but leſs ſo than ſilver, and their ſlat form is probably owing to the preſſure they undergo in the mills in which the gold is amalgamated. In confirmation of this opinion, ſmall particles of gold and mercury are uſually found mixed with the grains of platina. In the ſtate in which they are brought over, they fall ſort of the weight oſ gold, but by purification, which is performed by waſhing vith the muriatic acid, and by expoſing them for a long time to the heat oſ the moſt violent ſurnaces, which, houever, are ſaid to be inſufãcient to melt them*, æ This Is the opinion of the generality of mineralogiſts; but my friend and chemical preceptor, Dr. Ilię™ ggins, aſlured me, he had meltèd platina in his furnace. they exceed it. The ſpecific gravity of gold is about nineteen times that of water, whereas platina, which ſtill contains ſo much iron as to render ĩt magnetical, is upwards of twenty-one times the weight of that fluid. It is extremely diſficult to ſree platina from the laſt portions oſ iron, but ſome minutæ particles, which have bern fuſed by the focus of a burning glaſs, ænd ſo far purified as not to be attracted by the magnet, appear to exceed twenty- to times the weight of ater. Platina is, perhaps, the moſt perfect of all the metals. As ĩt ſo conſiderably exceeds even gold in weight, it is thereſore to be conſdered as the moſt ponderous bocy in nature. It has ſeveral properties in common with the moſ uſeſul of metals, iron. In hardneſs it approaches to that metal in the ſtate of ſteel; and in infuſibility I it exceeds it even In the ſtate of ſoft iron; it alſo conſiderably reſembles iron in æppearance, and it is thæ only metal, beſides iron, which has the property of welding. Platina reſembles gold in being ſoluble only in aqua regia, and it even requires a larger quantity of that compound acid for its ſolution than gold. The ſolution is of a deep yellow or reddiſh colour. The proportions of acids beſt adapted to the ſolution of platina, are equal parts of the nitrous and muriatic acids; but the ſolution does not then take Place vith rapidity. This compound' is very corroſive, and tinges animal ſubſtances of a blackiſ brown colour. The vegetable alkali added to this ſolution, only occaſions the precipitation of a part of the metal in the form of a ſparkling powder, which is ſoluble in a large quantity of water. A very remarkable circumſtance 30 Asion vf Saline Mattrs on  Platina. [Book VI. tation, unleſs addedin very conſiderable quantity, Common ſal ammoni ac, applied tõ the ſolution oſ platina, produces a precipitation like tho fixed vegetable and volatile alkalies. It ſeparates a part oft the metal in a ſparkling red powder, and a part remains diſſolved, which it cannot ſeparate; but if vegetable alkali is added aſter the ſal ammoniac, it precipitates the reſt of the platina; and on the contrary, ſal ammoniac, added to the ſolution containing the remainder,; which the fixed alkali could not ſeparate, precipitates it, ſo that by adding both the vegetable alkali and ſal ammoiac, the whole of the platina i is ſeparated. Platina, like gold, is alſo ſoluble by the oxygenated muriatic acid. The ſubtile inflammable ſubſtances, as ſpirits of vine and aromatic oils, do not produce any ſeparation from the ſolution of platinain aqua regia, as they do ſiom that of gold.. Tin precipitates it, but the precipitation is not purple like that of gold. Moſt of the metals precipitate platina, but it does not in general fall down in the metallic ſtate. The precipitation of platina, from its ſolution by fal ammoniac, affords a method of ſeparating this metal from the gold which is mixed with it, às the gold is not ſeparated by the addition of that ſalt; if, on the contrary, we viſh to precipitate the gold, and leave the platina in ſolution, this may be - by ſal martis. The precipitates of platina may be reduced to a metãllic button, by heating them vith the common fluxes; but theſe cannot be rendered malleable unleſs they are corpletely fuſed, which can ſcarcely be effected, unleſs with the heat of the moſt powerful burning glaſes. lE lli A mixture of copper w ith platina forms a metallic. body of intermediate colour and great der nſity, ſo that it it receives a very fine poliſh. A mixture of three or four parts of copper to one of platina poſeſſed all the above properties in great perfection, and was not tarniſhed in the air in the ſpace of ten years. With iron it alſo produces a compound of great denſity, which is hard, ſtrong, and tough, and admits of a good poliſa. Moſt metals increaſe the fuſibility of platina ſo much, that the mixture may be melted in ordinary furnaces. Gold is greatly injured in appearance by a mixture of platina, and becomes of the colour of bell metal by the addition of no more than one twenty-fourth part, though half that quantity produces little change. Platina with biſmuth and tin forms alloys, which are brittle, but eaſily fuſed. Platina and lead unite very well by fuſion, but the ductility of the lead is deſtroyed, and the compound quickly tarniſhes on expoſure to air. Platina pertly deſtroys the ductility of ſilver, augments its hardneſs, and impairs ĩts colour. Platina completely reſiſts the action of mercury, with which ĩit ſnews no diſpoſition to unite. On this account ĩt does not mix itſelf with the gold,. which is extracted ſrom the ſubſtances with which it is mixed by amalgamation. From the extreme inſuſibility of platina, it is excellently fitted to contain other matters, which it is intended to ſubmit to a violent heat. M. Achard ſucceeded in making crucibles of platina, by fuſing equal parts of platina, white arſenic, and vegetable alkali. This matter, vhen cooled, was reduced to a powder, and rammed into a mould. A ſtrong heat, quickly raiſed, and continued for ſome time, fuſed the maſs, and after diſſipating the arſenic and alkali, left the pletina in the deſired form. Platina, whæn thoroughly puriſied, by coction in the muriatic acid and precipitation from aqua regia, may be fuſed into a maſs nearly as malleable as ſoſt iron. TThis property, united to thoſe of reſiſting acids, ĩts great inſuſibility, and welding, ſeem to render platina applicable to purpoſes which no other metal is capable C HH A P. XXXVII. OF INFLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES IN GE NE R AL. Ignition and Combuſtion definedAcids formed b the Coribuſticn of Inflammable Subſlances. Flame, honv produced 7he Object of ihe preſent Inquiry limitedIhat Subſtances are commonly termed inflammable. HE diſference between ignition and combuſtion was brieſly mentioned in the early part of this work; but after what has been advanced concerning the elaſtic fluids, and the nature of acids, the reader vill be prepared for a more philoſophical view of the ſubject:. All bodies which can ſupport a certain degree oſ heat, without the deſtruction of their texture, emit light, and this is called ignition; but combuſtion or inflammation is a property which belongs to ſuch bodies only as are capable, when placed in proper circumſtances, of augmenting their own temperature. Simple ignition produces no permanent change in bodies, but combuſtion entirely alters the properties of ſuch as have undergone that proceſs. From being mild and nearly inſoluble in water, they become acrid, pungent, and extremely ſoluble, and are converted into acids, which differ according to the ſubſtance, by the inſlammation of which they were ſformed. The terms combuſtible ſubſtance and acidifiable baſis are, therefore, in the French nomenclature, ſynonymous. It has already been remarked, that inflammation is the diſengagement of the matter of heat or caloric contained in vital air or oxygenous gas, in conli ſequence of the baſis of this gas becoming combined with other bodies. All bodies, therefore, vhich are capable of decompoſing vital air, change a quantity of latent heat into ſenſible heat, and are ſaid to be inflammable from the light and heat which ſeem to proceed ſrom them, but which, in fact, are derived from the oxygenous gas, which is one-oſ the component parts of the atmoſphere. The neceſſity of the preſence of air to combuſtion is ſtrongly maintained by M. Lavoiſier, and an experiment related by him (to the latter part of which I feel ſome reluctance to give an unqualiſied aſſent) ſeems, indeed, to prove it to be eſſential in all caſes. He ſucceſſively placed a quantity of phoſphorus, of ſulphur, and of gunpowder, under the receiver of an air-pump, making as perfect a vacuum as the machine would admit. He then threw the focus of a lens of eight inches diameter on the different ſubſtances, which were not at all ignited, only bubbled up, and at length ſublimed. The gunpowder was decompoſed, the ſulphur of it only ſubliming, and it neither took fire nor exploded. j In ordinary language, no bodies are ſald to be inſlammable but ſuch as burn eaſily, or which, in other words, are capable of decompoſing vital air in the diluted ſtate in which it exiſts in the atmoſphere. In a more ſtrict ſenſe, however, the property of inflammability belongs to other bodies, though they poſſeſs it in a leſs eminent degree; as to zinc, which, when made extremely hot, burns with a dazzling white light, and to iron, which when heated to a proper degree, burns in pure oxygenous gas. The oxygenation which all metals, except the perſect, undergo from the conjoined operation of heat and air, muſt alſo be conſidered as a ſlow combuſtion. In ſhort, all ſubſtances may be ſaid to be inflammable which are capable, in any circumſtances, of decompoſing vital air, or which have a ſtronger attraction for the baſis of that air than that baſis has for caloric or fire. In all inſtances of inflammation a certain degree of heat is neceſſary to begin the proceſs. Different inflammable ſubſtances require different degrees of heat for this purpoſec Phoſphorus is fully inflamęd at the heat of 86 degrees of Fahrenheit, but undergoes a more gradual combuſtion at a much Iower temperature. Sulphur requires much more heat than phoſphorus, and charcoal ſtill more than ſulphur. There are ſome ſubſtances in nature which are ſo combuſtible, or have ſo ſtrong an attraction for oxygen, as never to have been folnd uncombined with that principle; of this kind are the unknown baſes oſ the boracic, fluoric, and muriatic acids. Though æn acid is always formed by the combuſtinn of every inſlammable ſubſtance, this fact was ncver attended to, or at leaſt never properly apprehended, till within theſe few years. In ordinary caſes, indeed, this circumſtance was likely to paſs unobſerved; for the acid produced by the inflammation of charcoal, which is the principal ingredient in all kinds of ſuel, is the carbonic acid gas, or fixed air, which eſcapes without leaving any traces. In the combuſtion of ſulphur alſo, the acid flies off in fumes, unleſ collected by a particular proceſs, which was deſcribed in treating of the ſulphuric or vitriolic acid. The phoſphoric acid, however, is a concrete body, and therefore cannot eaſily be overlooked. When inſlammable bodies are united with oxygen they become acids, and having no longer ſuſficient attraction ſor oxygen to decompoſe vital air, they loſe their inflammability. According to the old chemical doctrine, the heat and light afforded by inflammable ſubſtances were ſuppoſed to derive their origin from the diſengagement of phlogiſton; but, according to the doctrine of M. Lavoiſier, the vital air of the atmoſphere is the repoſitory of light and heat, from which all artificial ſupplies are derived, by means of inſlammable ſubſtances. There is one ſtriking diſference among inſ=lammable ſubſtances, which is, that ſome burn with and ſome without flame. Of the former kind are oils, ſpirit of wine, and moſt others; to the latter kind belong the diſferent ſpecies of charcoa. The cauſe of this difference is, that ſome inflammable bodies afford an inflammable vaæpour, the burning of which produces flame; others are entirely fixed, and produce no ſuch vapour. The vapour, however, as it riſes is not wholly conſumed; the reaſon of which is, that the air does not find acceſs to the center of the column of vapour as was formerly explained, In large ſlames, the ſurface on which the air acts is leſs in proportion to the quantity of vapour than in ſmall flames; hence the quantity of ſmoke and ſoot produced by ſmall flames is proportionably leſs than that produced by large; ſor ſmoke and ſoot are only that part of the vapour which Is unconſumed. In treating of inflammable ſubſtances it will be neceſſary to confine the inquiry to thoſe which poſſeũę that property in a more remarkable degree. I ſhall, thereſore, firſt treat of the ſimple inflammable ſubſtances, phoſphorus, ſulphur, and coal, or the carbon of the French philoſophers. Hydrogen, or inflammable air, has already been dæſcribed under the head of elaſtic or acriform fluidss. With reſpect to the compound inflammable ſubſtances, ſuch as oils, fat, &c. it will be found that they conſiſt of di proportions and ſtates of combination, of carbe drogen, and oxygen. The inflammable mat charcoal and coke conſiſts of carbon only; pitco wood, in their crude ſtate, contain alſo ſome hyd which is driven off, together with water and oil, proceſs of charring. C  A P. XXXVIII. PHOSP HORUS. Phoſphorus of Kuntel Light from putreſcent Substances Curicus Fas.Light firom the Sea Water, &e.Lights about the Beds of Sich Perſons. Phoſphorus exhaled with the Sweat. Phoſphorated Hydrogen Gas. ꝑH-S PHORUS * is a ſimple combuſtible ſubd ſtance, which was unknown to chemiſts till 1667, when it was diſcovered by Brandt, a German chemiſt, who kept the proceſs a ſecret; ſoon after Kunkel found out Brandts method of preparation, and made it public. t has ever ſince been known by the name of Kunkel's phoſphorus. The appearance of phoſphorus is that of a tranſparent ſubſtance, of a colour inclining to yellow, like clear horn; it is ſpecifically heavier than water, is tough, and cuts like bees wax, and like it melts with a gentle heat into a tranſparent ſluid. With this heat it may be melted in water; but if the ſame degree of heat is applied in the open air, it melts, takes fire, and burns, producing a bright white flame with intenſe heat. Phoſphorus ſiould be handled with great caution, as ſhould any of it adhere to the ſkin, or get under the nails, the heat of the human body is ſuſficient to inflame it. The proceſs for obtaining phoſphorus from bones was deſcribed in treating of the phoſphoric acid. When a quantity of phoſphorus is burnt in ſmall pieces under a bell, the phoſphoric acid attaches itſclf to the internal ſurface of the bell, in the form of æ æ Derived ſrom the Greele A ſubſtance atording light.” Chap. 38. Combuſlion of Phoſphorus. 49 downy maſs. This concrete acid has ſo ſtrong an attraction for water as to imbibe it from the atmoſphere with aſtoniſhing rapidity, till it is converted into a liquid conſiderably more denſe, and of greater ſpecific gravity than water. From the experiments detailed in M. Lavoiſiers elementary work on chemiſtry, t appears that one pound of phoſphorus requires one pound eight ounces of oxygen gas for its combuſtion, and that two pounds eight ounces of concrete phoſphoric acid are produced. The phoſphoric acid may he obtained by three other proceſſes beſides this. If phoſphorus is melted in hot water, and a ſtream of vital air paſſed through it, it becomes oxygenated. The ſame thing happens by plunging it in nitrous acid, from which it abſtracts the oxygen. It may be alſo acidified by ſimple expoſure to the atmoſphere, which ought not at the time to exceed the temperature of ſixty degrees, from the danger of inſlammaetion; in this ſituation, by a gradual corubuſtion, it attracts the oxygen of the atmoſphere, and becomes converted into an acid. The cauſtic fixed alkalies diſſolve phoſphorus by the aſiſtance of heat. During this combination a fetid gas is diſengaged, which has the ſingular property of exploding as ſoon as it comes in contact with atmoſpherical air, and ſtill more rapidly by contact with vital air. The phoſphorĩc acid forms peculiar ſelts with the alkalies and ſome of the earths, and has the property of corroding glaſs. With the mineral alkali it forms a ſalt, the taſte of which is leſs unpleaſant than that of other neutral ſalts, and which is well calculated to anſwer the purpoſes for which neutral ſalts are uſed in medicine. The phoſphoric acid acts only on a ſmall number of metallic ſubſtances, but readily diſſolves, in its fluid ſtate, iron, Zinc, and copper, with which it ſorms ſalts not cryſtallizable. Phoſphorus ſeems to be almoſt univerſal in the animal kingdom, and ĩs alſo found in ſome minerals, and in a very minute proportion in moſt vegetables. The bones of animals are a true phoſphat of lime, or an earthy ſalt compoſed of phoſphoric acid and calcareous earth. The urine alſo contains a conſiderable quantity oſ phoſphoric acid, chieſly combined with volatile alkali, but partly alſo with calcareous earth. This compound ſalt, afforded by the evaporation of urine, was formerly known by the names of eſſential ſalt of urine, or microcoſmic ſalt. Brandt, Kunkel, and Margraff, and all chemiſts, till Iately, prepared their phoſphorus from that ſubſtance, but it is now almoſt entirely obtained from bones, which afford it more plentifully and with leſs troublee. Phoſphorus does not yet ſeem to have been applied to any important uſes. VFrom the remarkable eaſe with which phoſphorus is inflamed, ſeveral experiments may be exhibited by means of it, which appear like the effects of magic to perſons unacquainted with the nature of this ſubſtance. Thus, for example, if the outſide of a bottle is rubbed with phoſphorus, and then ſurrounded with tow, and hot water pourtd into iĩt, the phoſphorus takes fire, and communicates the inflammation to the tow. If æ ſtick of phoſphorus is uſed to write on a piece of paper, or cn a wall, a quantity of phoſphorus is abraded, ænd, undergoing a ſlow combuſtion, renders the ſtrokes viſible in the dark, while in the light they can only be perceived to exhale a whitiſh vapour. A fluid called liquid phoſphorus is prepered by digeſting ſome phoſphorus in the heat afibred by horſe-dung ſor two days, in òil of cloves, oll of turpentine, or any ſimilar ſubſtance. Aſter diſſolution, the oil will be ſo impregnated with it, that when the phial is opened, it will appear luminous. Any thing moiſtened with this ſiuid will in the dark ſeem to be on fire. Many natural phenomena, which in the ages oſ ſuperſtition ſerved to aſtoniſh and affright mankind, have received a ſatisfactory ſolution from the diſcovery of the phoſphorus of Kunkel. We learn from Fabricius ab aquapendente, that three young men at Padua, having bought a lamb, and eaten part of it on Eaſter Day, 1592, ſeveral pieces of the remainder, which vere kept till the day following, ſhone like ſo many candles when caſually viewed in the dark. It appears by his account, that the aſtoniſhment of the whole city was excited by this phenomenon, and a part of the fleſh was ſent to him, who was profeſſor of anatomy, to be examined by him. He obſerved, that thoſe parts which were ſoſt to the touch and tranſparent in candle light were the moſũ reſplendent. A phtloſopher of not Ieſs note, has furniſhed us with a very pompous account of a ſimilar phenomenon, which occurred at Montpelier in 1621. A poor old woman had bought a picce of fleſh in the market, intending to make uſe oſ it the day following; but happening not tò ſleep well that night, and her pantry being adjoining to her bed, ſhe obſerved that a quantity of light proceeded ſrom the meat, ſo as to illuminate almoſt the whole place where it hung. We may eaſily judge of the terror and aſtoniſhment of the poor woman herſclf, ſince we ſind that a part of the fieſh was carried, as a very extraordinaty curioſity, to Henry Duke of Conde, who vizwed it with the utmoſt ſurpriæ for ſeveral hours. The light was as if gems were ſcattered over the ſurface, and continued till the ſleh began to putrify, when it vaniſhed, which it was believed to do in the form of a croſ. The attention of a more philoſophic age was directed to experiments to aſcertain the cauſe of this light. Mr. Boyle found, that the light of rotten wood was extinguiſhed in vacuo, and revived again by the admiſſion of air, even aſter a long continance in vacuo. The extinction of the light was not ſo complete immediately on exhauſting the receiver, as ſome little time aſterwards. The wood was not much aſfected by condenſed air; but the light of a ſhining fiſh, when put into the condenſing engine, was rendered more vivid by that means. As air is therefore neceſſary to combuſtion, theſe experiments clearly indicate, that this light is the eſfect of a ſlow combuſtion, or ſomething ænalogous to it; and, indeed, the experiments upon the phoſphorus of Kunkel have ſince placed this matter beyond a doubt,. The combuſtion, however, in theſe caſes, is ſo very ſlow, that no change of air appeared neceſſary for the maintenance of this light, for it continued for a long time, even though the wood was confined within a glaſs hermetically ſealed. To explain the cauſe of this combuſtion it ĩs only neceſſary to repeat what has been Juſt ſtated, that there exiſts in every animal body, and in moſt vegetables, ⸗ certain quantity of phoſphorus. This principle, ve have ſeen, is extremely active, and has the ſtrongeſt tendency to unite with the pure part of our common air. During that ſeparation, thereſore, of the parts of bodies, which takes place in an incipient putreſaction, theſe phoſphorie particles are detached from thoſe with which they are combined, and by the action of the ar, a degree of combuſtion takes place, but ſo extremely faint, that light only is produced, without the leaſt appearance of ſenſible heat. This ſort explanation of the cauſe will, I ſlatter myſelf, correſpond with moſt of the phenomena of this kind noticed by philoſophers. Mr. Boyle found that the light of rotten wood was in moſt reſpects analogous to that of putreſcent ſubſtances. The light oſ the former, however, diſfered in ſome reſpects; it was preſently quenched with water, ſpirit of wine, and ſeveral other fluids; but the light of ſome ſhining veal was not entirely quenched by water, though its virtue was inſtantly deſtroyed by ſpirit of wine ?. The ſame philoſopher vas ſometimes diſappointed in his experiments on ſhining fiſhes; particularly he obſerved, that they failed to become Iuminous in cold and froſty weather, which is perſectly agreeable to the nature of phoſphorus, ſince its combuſtion is exactly in proportion to the heat which is applied to it. He remarks alſo in another place, that the light of ſhining wood was completely extinguiſhed by extreme cold. Some bodies have a much greater tendency to produce this light than others. A foreign philoſpher remarked, that on opening a ſca polypus it was ſo luminous as to ſtartle moſt of the perſons who ſaw it; the nails and the fingers of thoſe who touched it became Iuminous alſo. The light of the glow worm, and other luminous inſects, muſt depend upon ſome ſlimy or fluid matter which they emit, and which is probably a combination of phoſphorus with oil. There is a remarkable ſhell-fiſh, called pholes, which forms for itſelf holes in different kinds of ſtone. This fiſh illuminates the mouth of  Prieſt. O8. 565. the perſon who eats it; and it is remarked, that contrary to the nature ofother fiſh, which give light when they tend to putreſcence, this is more luminous the treſner ĩt ĩe, and when dried its light will revive on being moiſtened either with ſalt water or freſh; brandy, however, immediately extinguiſhes it*#. The lumincus appearance of the ſea in the night time cannot have eſcaped the obſervation of any perſon in the leaſt converſant with that element. The Iight occaſioned by the daſhing of oars, or by the motion of the waves by night, ĩs extremely beautiful. Father Bouræes, in his voyage to the Indſes in 1704, remarked particularly the Iuminous appearance of the ſea. The light was ſometimes Io great, that he could eaſily read the title of a book by it, though nine or ten feet from the ſurface of the water. Sometimes he could eaſily diſtinguiſh, in the wake of the ſhip, the particles which were not luminous from thoſe that were. The luminous particies alſo appeared of different forms; ſome appeared like points of light, others Iike ſtars; ſome of them reſembled globes of a line or two diameter, and ſome appeared as hrge even as a man's head; they aſſumed ſquare and triangular as vell as globular forms, and not only the wake of the ſhip, but fiſhes in ſWimming, produced theſe luminous appearances. All theſe phenomena he attributes, and rightly, to the ſat or putreſcent ſtate of the water, and obſerved, that when the wake of the ſiip was brighteſt, the water was moſt clammy and glutinous. In ſome parts of the ſea, he ſaw a ſubſtance like yellow and red duſt, and the ſailors told him it was the ſpawn of whales which produced all theſe appearances tl. Later experiments have proveq, that the luminous appearance of * Prigſt. Op. 567. 1 Ibid. 572. the ſea entirely proceeds from the putreſcent parts of marine animals*. Human bodies, as vell as thoſe of other animals, emit light juſt when they begin to putrify; and the walls and roofs of places in which dead bodies have oſten been expoſed have been obſerved to have a ſlimy matter depoſited on them, which was lumincus in the dark. The lights which are ſometimes ſeen in buriãl grounds undoubtedly proceed from this cauſe alone 7. Similar appearances have been obſerved about the beds of ſick perſons, probably in putrid diſeaſes: one of theſe was obſerved about the body and the bed of a ſick woman at Milan, which fled from the hand that approached it, but was at length diſperſcd by a ſtream of air. It is well known that the ſweat often contains a conſiderable quantity of phoſphoric matter; and the fact, which has now been ſtated, is ſtrongly confirmed by a circumſtance related by Henckel, in his Pyritologia. One of hi- friends, who vas oſ a ſangũine temperament, had indulged himſelf in the exerciſe of dancing to ſuch exceſs, and his perſpiration was ſo profuſe, that he imagined his life in danger. While he undreſſed, traces of phoſphoric light were ſeen on his ſhirt, and in thoſe parts were a number of reddiſh yellow ſpots, exactly reſembling the concrete phoſphoric acid. In all thoſe animal exhalations, which exhibit phoſphoric appearances, the phoſphorus in the ſtate ofa gas is mixed with hydrogen, and the compound is called phoſphorated hydrogen gas. Of this nature, probably, are many of thoſe phenomena, which are claſſed under the general name of ignes fatui, and of thoſe which were deſcribed in a former volume as igneous or luminous moteors. . Cn A P. XXXIX. S U L P H UR. General Properties of Sulphur.Natural Hiſiory of Sulphur avith Lerths. Viih Alhaelies. Liver of Sulpbur.4ærii fcial ſulthurccus WatersUſis cf Salphur. ULPHUR is another ſimple inflammable ſubJ ſtance, which agrees in ſome properties with phoſphorus. Like that it melts with a gentle heãt, and is capable of a gradual as well as of a rapid combuſtion, in proportion to the degree of heat applied to it. Heated to 179 of Fahrenheit ĩt generally evaporates; it melts at 185° and then appears red; it inflames at 3090. Its flame is blue, and accompanied with a hor ſuffocating ſmell, which is the ſulphureous or volatile vitriolic acid. In treating of other bodies, particularly the metallic, ſeveral have been mentioned with which ſulphur is found united in the bowels of the earth: few ſubſtances are indeed more abundant in nature than ſulphur; it alſo enters into the compoſition of animal matters, and, in a very ſmall proportion, into that of vegetables. The ſulphur of commerce is extracteq, by diſtillation, from the ſubſtance which has been ſo oſten mentioned under the name of pyrites, in which ſtate ĩt is combined with iron, and is ſo hard as to ſtrike fire with ſteel. Pyrites in colour and appearance reſemble braſs; ſome pieces are cubical, but in general this mineral has no determinate form. The ſulphur obtained by the ſirſt diſtillation is ſeldom pure, from the ſteams of other volatile ſubſtanees which riſe and are condenſed with it. It is purified by being melted in a ladle, and kept in that ſtate till the impurities ſettle at the bottom. Ifit is an object to obtain ſulphur of the greateſt purity, this muſt be eſfected by ſublimation; and in this ſtate it is commonly ſold under the name of ſliowers of brimſtone. Even theſe, however, are ſometimes rendered impure by the ſulphur taking fire, which produces a mixture of vitriolic acid. This is eſſectually removed by boiling the flowers in water, which diſſolves the acid, and leaves the ſulphur i in a pure and mild ſtate. Sulphur i is ſometimes found, more or leſs pure, in the neighbourhood of volcanos, in which caſe it ſeems to have been ſeparated, by ſubterraneous heat, from ſome ſubſtance with which it was previouſly combined. The method of burning ſulphur for the preparation of the vitriolic acid has Aready been deſcribed when treating of that acid. Sulphur has no action on ſiliceous earths, but very readily unites with the calcareous. It is alſo capable of combination with magneſia, ponderous earth, and volatile alkali. It unites, however, with much more violence with the fixed alkalies. All theſe combinations are of a liver colour, and are therefore called Jivers of ſulphur. BYy M. Lavoiſier they are much more properly denominated ſulphurets of theſe ſeveral ſubſtances, as ſulphuret of lime, ſulphuret of magneſia, &c. Theſe ſubſtances are ſoluble in vater, and have conſiderable action on ſeveral other bodies. The combinations of ſulphur with earths and alkalies may be all decompoſed by means of acids, and the earthy ſulphurets by means of the ſixed alkalies. Theſe ſubſtances, when diſſolved in water, diſengage a peculiar Vou. II. S gus gas called hepatic gas. This gas is preciſely the ſame, from whatever kind of ſulphuret it proceeds; but none of them afford iĩt unleſs mixed with water. This gas, thereſore, proceeds from a decompoſition of water, and ĩs found to conſiſt of ſulphur diſſolved in inflammable air. When this gas comes in contact with vital air it is decompoſed, the vital air and hydrogen uniting to form water, while the ſulphur is precipitated in ſmall flakes. This gas is capable of ſolution in water, and by theſe means natual ſulphureous waters may be imitated. The chief uſes to which ſulphur is applied are, the making of gunpowder and vitriolic acid. It is alſo uſed in bleaching, and is an article of ſome importance C u A P. XL. THE CAREONACEOUS PRINCIPLE. Naiure of the Carbonaceous Principle.—In what Subſtantes princitally found.CharcoalLamp black. Strong Attraction of ihe Carbonaceous Principle for Oxygen.Its Uſe in the Reduction of MetalspPlumbago, or Black Lead.Its various Uſes in the Aris. H E word carbon is adopted ſrom the nomenclature of the French chemiſts, to expreſs an inflammable matter which conſtitutes the chief part of the weight of charcoal, pit coal, &c. and which, with certain proportions of hydrogen, or the baſis of inſlammable gas, forms the different kinds of oil. By the combuſtion of carbon a peculiar acid is formed, which is ſoluble in water, unites with alkalinę baſes, and poſſeſſes all the properties of acids in general, though in a weak degree. This acid has already been treated oſ under the name of carbonic acid gas, or fixed air. Carbon exiſts in great quantities, in foſſils, as the greater number of calcareous ſtones and earths are found united with it; it is alſo one of the conſtituent parts of the atmoſphere, in both which ſtates it is combined with oxygen. It is found united with earthy matter and cil in the extenſive ſtrata of pit- coal, and with iron in the matter which is called plumbago, or black lead. Carbon alſo exiſts in all vegetable and animal ſubſtances, and conſtitutes a conſiderable part of their weight, particularly of thoſe vegetable matters which are the moſt firm. The ſtate of greateſt purity to which carbon can be reduced is, by burning wood in ſuch a manner as to reduce ĩt to charcoal, which, when vell made, contains carbon united with i a very ſmall proportion of ſuch matter contained] vegetable ſubſtances as cannot be driven off by heat, ſuch as earthy and ſaline matter, with a very minute portion of iron. In order to convert wood into charcoal, the only circumſtances neceſſary are the application oſ heat while the æir ĩs nearly excluded. The only elementary ſubſtances which ſeem. to be univerſal in the vegetable kingdom are, carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. The former of theſe ſubſtances has very little aettraction for caloric, or the matter of heat, and therefore cannot be driven off in vapour, at leaſt by the heat oſ ordinary fires; the two latter, however, have a ſtrong attraction for that principle, and therefore eaſily aſume a gaſeous ſtate. In the ordinary temperature of the atmoſphere the carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, which conſtitute the woody fibre, ſeem to exiſt in a ſtate of triple combination; but this is not the caſe when the temperature is alteredlc According to M. Lavoiſier, if a heat, not exceeding that of boiling water, is applied, one pert of the hydrogen combines with oxygen, and forms water, the reſt of the hydrogen combines with a part of the carbon, and forms volatile oĩl, while the remainder of the carbon remains fixed at the bottom of the veſſel. Ifa red heat, however, is applied, no water comes over, carbon having a ſtronger attraction at that temperature for oxygen than hydrogen has, and therefore carbonic acid is produced; and the hydrogen being leſt free from other combinations, unites with caloric, and comes over ir the form of hydrogen gas. In this high temperature no cll is produced. The ſolidity of charcoal depends on that of the wood -rom which it is procured, and the care with which the proceſs is conducted. In general ĩt preſerves the form of the vegetable, unleſs that was very ſucculent. Pure oils, vhen decompoſed by heat, afford a conl in very fine particles, called lamp black. In whatever manner the volatile matters can be diſpelled ſrom vegetable or animal ſubſtances without the admiſion of vital air, which would conſume the carbon, charcoal is produced, which contains no ingredient capable of inſlammation except carbon, ard thereſore, with reſpect to that proceſs, may be conſidered as carbon itſelf. Charcoal, expoſed to the greateſt heat without the preſence of vital air, remains unconſumed and unchanged. This ſact has been denied by the advocates for the phlogiſtic hypotheſis, vho maintain that the purcſt charcoal, treated in this way, aſfords a quantity of inflammable gas. It is now, however, I believe, commonly admitted, that if the charcoal is firſt accurately dried, no inflammable gas is produced, and therefore that which has been obſerved by other chemiſts, is to be attribured to the preſence of a ſmall quantity of water, which, in a high temperature, is decomboſed by charcoal r. Prieſtley has obſerved, that charcoal has a ſtrong diſpoſition to attract humidity from the atmoſphere. He found that charcoal prepared in the evening, and kept till the morning, became ſenſibly moiũt, and unſit for nice experiments. This remarkable attraction for water is, perhaps, to be attributed to the alkaline ſalts uſually contained in charcoal From the very ſtrong attraction which the carbonaceous principle has for oxygen, there is no ſubſtuncc that can be applied to ſepurate it from that matter. Carbon, on the contrary, is capable of decompoſing all the acids except the boracic, the fluoric, ænd te muriatic, the unknowh baſes of which have a ſtronger attraction for oxygen than it has. Charcoal readily decompoſes the phoſphoric and ſulphuric acids, the baſes of which burn at a lower temperature; and this fact evinces, that the degree of heat at which the combuſtion of a body begins does not accurately mark its degree of attraction for oxygen. From the ſtrong affinity of the carbonaceous principle for oxygen, charcoal is the moſt powerſul ſubſtance which can be uſed in the reduction of metals. Charcoal has alſo another advantage over other inflammable ſubſtances in theſe operations, which is, that it bears a great degree of heat without volatilization. According to the experiments of Lavoiſier, in the combuſtion of one pound of charcoal, two pounds nine ounces one drachm ten grains of oxygen gas are abſorbed, and three pounds nine ounces one drachm ten grains of carbonic acid gas are formed. The carbonaceous principle, or carbon, is one of the moſt important ſubſtances in nature. It is one of the neceſſary conſtituent parts of animal ſubſtances, and enters into the compoſition of all alimentary matters, flour, ſugar, mucilage, oil, &c. It is alſo the chieſ ingredient in all kinds of ſuel. PLUMBAGO, or black lead, is found to conſiſt of carbon combined with about one tenth of ĩts weight of iron. It appears to be ſcarcely inflammable, but may, however, be almoſt entirely conſumed with the production of carbonic acid gas, by keeping it heated to a great degree, and agitated ſo as to expoſe it thoroughly to the air. It may be alſo deflagrated with a large proportion of nitre in a red heat. It is found in a ſeparate ſtate in a variety of places; but the ſpecies beſt adapted for making pencils comes chieſly from Burrowdale, in Cumberland. For this purpoſe it iin plate, the edge of which, being fitted in a ſemi-cylinder of wood, is then ſawed leave the cavity entirely filledl. The retained in ĩts place by the other half r, which is glued on. The makers of liſh and blacken ĩts ſurface by agitating 1a caſk with powder of plumbago. This eviſe uſcd in the manuſacture of razorS C u a r. XLI. PIT COAL Diferent Species of Coal —Neucaſile CoalCulm—3tlatæ Coal Cannel Coal. Kilkenny Coal. Bovey CoalPeat. Coke. Coal TarNatural Hiſlory of CoalObſervaticns relative to ile Deluge. V IT COAL is a ſubſtance of which there are ITU many varieties, the cauſes of which have not been aſcertained, as all the kinds aſford very nearly the ſame reſults by chemical analyſis. But before the different ſpecies of this mineral are mentioned, ĩt is neceſſary to notice a ſubſtance which agrees in all its chemical properties with charcoal, poſſeſſing at the ſame time moſt of the external characters of pit coal, and which Mr. Xirwan conſiders as the natural carbonic principle. Its colour is black or greyiſh black, with a Iuſtre approaching to the metallic. Tt is without tranſparency, and its fracture is foliated or ſlaty. It ſtains the fingers. This deſcription is taken from the pureſt ſpecimens which have yet been procured; namely, thoſe found near Strido in the territory of Florence. This ſubſtance is inſoluble in acids. In a ſtrong heat it reddens, but does not ſlame. Expoſed to a porcelain heat for ſeveral hours in covered crucibles, it entirely, or almoſt entirely, evaporates like the diamond *. Diſtilled it yields a ſmall quantity of water, but no air, oll, acid, or alkali. Xilkenny coal is nearly allied  The reader wiĩll find that the diamond itſelf is probably a ſubſtance of this nature, by conſulting Chap. 44, where the diamond is treated of as an inflammable ſubſtance. to this ſubſtance, and may perhaps be conſidered as of the ſame ſpecies. The moſt remarkable varieties of pit coal are, 1. NEWCAsTLE: coal, which is of a black colour and ſhining appearance, where it hàs been lately broken. This ſubſtance undergoes an imperfect fuſion when heatcd, ſo as to cohere or cake. It burns with a lively flame, and is nearly conſumed in the ſiree. It does not break equally in all directions, and is compoſed of laminæ. 2. CuLM coal. This contains a large proportion of argillaceous earth, ſo that after being burned its bulk is ſcarcely diminiſhed. It burns with a lively flame, but its appearance is more dull and earthy than that of the former. This kind of coal is found in Sweden, and in ſome parts of England. 3. SLATE coal, This has very much the appearance of ſome of the common kinds of ſlate, but it burns very eaſily, with a copious and bright flame. It conſiſts chieſly of argillaceous earth, and ſeems to have only been penetrated with bituminous or coaly matter. 4. CANNEL coal is oſ a dull black colour, breaks eaſily in any direction, and in its fracture preſents a ſmooth chonchoĩdal ſurface, if broken tranſverſely. It is nearly conſumed in the fire, burns with a lively Hame, but if ſuddenly heated flies in pieces with conſiderable violence. This inconvenience is ſaid to be removed by previouſly immerſing it in water for ſome hours ?. Cannel coal does not ſoll the fingers,  It is cuſtomary in Lancahire to ſprinkle ſalt upon carnel coal, to prevent its ſlying; but I cannot ſpeak deciſively as to ĩts eſſcct;, huving never ſeen the experiment accurately made. Poſſibly the water contained in the ſult may have ſome infiuence in prerenting the eracking of the coal. llll and admits of being turned into ſnuſf boxes, inkſtands, trinkets, &c. The word lithonthrax, uſed by ſome mineralogiſts, properly denotes ſtone coal, and ſeems moſt applicable to cannel coal, as this, from its dull and uniform fracture, has moſt reſemblance to a ſtony ſubſtance. 5. KiLRENNY coal. This is perhaps the moſt ſree ſrom earthy matter of all the diſferent ſpecies of coal; the earth contained in it not exceeding the twentieth part of its weight. This coal burns with leſs fame and ſmoke ®, and more ſlowly and intenſely than the cannel coal, 6. SuLPHUREOUS coal. All thoſe kinds of coal are called by this name, which are mixed with particles of a yellow and metallic appearance, and which are in fact a ſpecies of pyrites. In conſequence of this admixture they emit, when burned, a ſulphureous ſmell, and fall to pieces when expoſed to the action of air and moiſture 7. BovEY coal, xylanthrax, is of a brown or browniſn black colour, and of a laminar texture. The laminæ are frequently flexible when freſh dug, though they generally harden on expoſure to air. Mr. Fabroni diſcovers its organic ſtructure by boiling it in dilute nitrous acid, by which its fibres are laid bare. It ſeems to conſiſt of wood penetrated by petroleum or bitumen, and frequently contains pyrites, alum, and vitriol. 8. PEAT or turf, geanthrax. It may admit of doubt * Eilkenny, the town in Ireland where this coal is produced, is pleaſantly ſituated; ĩt is watered by a clear and beautiſul river, and produces alſo a black maerble variegated with white ſpots. The place has therefore been proverbially characteriſedt Fire  without ſmoke, air without fog, water without mud, and the  ſureets paved with marble. how far it is proper to conſider peat among the ſpe. cies of coal; but as ſome philoſophers of great authority have attrib. /d every kind of coal to a vegetable origin, and as ſome kinds are deciſively ſo, the reaſon of this arrangement will be obvious. What is properly called peat is ſormed by the growth of a particular vegetable matter, peat moſs, which increaſes to ſuch a degree in mooriſh grounds as to form ſtrata of many ſeet in thickneſ. When peat is freſh dug ſrom below the ſurface, it is oſ a viſcid conſiſtence, but hardens by expoſure to the air. ĩt is often mixed with pyrites and ſtony matters, vhich are ſeparated from it while ſoſt, in which ſtate it is formed into oblong maſſes for fue. When diſtilled, it affords water, oil, and volatile alkali, which are preciſely the products afforded by the diſtillation of pit-coal. A kind of peat is found near Newbury, in Berkſhire, which contains but little earth, and conſiſts of wood, branches, twigs, roots, with leaves, graſs, ſtraw, and weeds. What is dug on moors, under the name of turf, frequently contains a mixture of peat. Coal, when heated and inſlamed to ſuch a degree as to expel the more voluatile parts, forms a kind of mineral charcoal, called coxꝶ, which is highly uſeful in the property of affording a ſtrong, clear, and laſting fire, without forming a coheſive maſs, which would prove very prejudicial in the ſmelting of metals. It is alſo uſed in drying thoſe ſubſtances which would be injured by the thick ſmoke oſ common coal. Lord Dundonald was the firſt perſon who improved this proceſs, by collecting the tar and volatile alkali, which are driven off ſrom the coal, while it is converted into coke. Tlis method has been ædopted with much ddvantage in ſeveral parts oſ Biltain. The coal is put into ovens, Which ære heated by fires lighted beneath, and the liquid matter is ſforced through an iron pipe inſerted into the top of the oven, and which communicates with proper condenſing veſſcls. BY this proceſs a corroſive watery liquor and two ſorts of cil are obtained. Six barrels of the mixed oĩlly matter produce about five barrels oſ oĩl of a thicker conſiſtence; of the cil thus thickened, one part is lighter than the other, which is drawn off, and is not at preſent applied to any uſe*. The thicker part ĩs uſed a5 an inferior kind of tar. Coal, like moſt other conſiderable maſſes of matter found near the ſurface of the earth, is diſpoſed in beds or ſtrata, which are ſometimes parallel with the horizon, but generally form diſferent ængles with reſpect to it; the ſame ſtratum uniformly preſerves the ſame direction. The ſtrata of coal are diſpoſed between ſtrata of other matters. The following ſtrata are uſually found in thoſe diſtricts of courtry, both in England and Scotlend, where coal abounds: whinſtone, freeſtone, ſandſtone or freeſtone of a coarſer texture, metalſtone, which is.a hard argillaceous ſubſtance containing balls oſ iron ore, and ſtiver, which is the moſt cormmon of them all, and is an indurated bole, uſually of a blackiſh colour. Theſe ſtrata do not bear on each other in the ſame order in dſfferent collieries, nor ære they of any uniform thickneſs. The ſtrata of coal themſelves are divided by other partings, called backs and cutters, into innumerable cubic, primaetie, and rhomboidal figures. In all places where the ſtrata lie regularly, they are divided and ſubdivided in the manner above mentioned, and ſometimes extend uninterruptedly through * Seę Diſhop Watſons Eſſays. a conſiderable diſtrict. This regularity, however, is frequently broken by gaps ſilled by other matter, which has evidently fallen in, in conſequence of the ſtrata having been ſeparated from each other by ſome violent convulſion. The largeſt gaps are called dykes, and deſcend from the ſurface of the earth, ſometimes perpendiculerly, ſometimes obliquely, to the greateſt depths ever tried. On each ſice of theſe gaps the ſtrata correſpond, but they are often ſunk ſeveral feet or fathoms lower on ore ſide than the other, and this is called a dip. : With reſpect to the origin of pit coal, it is the opinion of Dr. Black, Bihop Watſon, and other philoſophers of high reputation, that the ſtrata of coal were forme:ly large collections of vegetable matter at the ſurſace of the earth. In diſtant ages, Britain was probably almoſt entirely covered with immenſe foreſts and collections of peat moſs, which (according to the opinion oſ theſe naturaliſts) being covered with quantities of ſand or earth brought by floods, or by mere gradual cauſes, as the falling of the ſubſtance of the neighbouring hills, has been preſſed and conſolidated, in courſe of time, into the ſubſtance called pit coa. The ſurface of the earth has alſo been probably rendered unequal in various places by the action of earthquaæles; this would give riſe to the formation of lakes in thoſe places which were depreſſed. In this manner, a quantity of vegetable matter would become covered by depoſition from water. Volcanic eruptions muſt often alſo have overwhelmed large collections of vegetable matters:. We even find vegetable matter in an intermediate ſtate between organized vegetæble ſubſtances and coal; for peat has ſtill ſome ſmall remains of organic texture, but ſeems chieſly to conſiſt of olly and inflammable matter, vhich only requires time and thæ preſſure of ſuperincumbent ſtrata to convert it into the firm and compact texture oſ coal. In ſome places, the remains of foreſts have been obſerved converted into an imperfect pit coal, in which the trunks, branches, bark, and roots of trees, are diſcernible. In moſt of the varieties of coal, impreſſions of vegetable matters, and perticularly of fern, are uſually obſervable. Now it is remarkable, that both peat moſs and fern are produced on wild and uncultivated lands, and this renders it ſtill more probable, that coal in general owes its origin to peat moſs. Coal is found in thin and broad ſtrata, ſuch as might be expected on the ſuppoſition oſ its being derived from the decay of peat moſũ, or collections of other vegetables on the ſurface of the earth. Coual is often covered with matter which cannot be ſuppœſed to have been created in ĩts preſent ſtate, as ſandſtone, the particles of which are evidently owing to the motion and friction occaſioned by water. It has been already mentioned, that the products afforded by the diſtillation of peat moſs and pit coal are preciſely the ſame. We know of no ſubſtance purely and unqueſtionably mineral, which affords products at all ſimilar, ard it therefore n the whole ſeems probable, that the ſtrata of coal fourd in different countries, however extenſive, owe their origin to vegetable matter. The bituminous natters ſcem alſo to be exudations from vegetable ſubſtances buried in the earth. In confirmation oſ the ſame opinion, I add the following extract from the late ingenious Mr. Whitehurt's Inquiry into the original State of the Earth.  All the ſtrata incumbent on coal, whether argillaceous ſtone or clay, contain figured ſtones, repreſentig a vaſt variety of vegetables, or the impreſions of them, as reeds oſ various kinds, ſtriated and jointed at difſerent diſtances, the euphorbia of the Eaſt Indies, the American ferns, corn, graſs, and many other ſpecies of the vegetable kingdom. They are incloſed in the ſolid ſubſtance of the ſtone, &c. Theſe vegetable forms, and the ſtrata containing them, are the certain indication of coal, not only in Derbyſhire, but in every part of the Kingdom which I have viſited; and I am informed, that the ſame phenomenon holds equally true in every other part of the world yet explored In general, the ſtone which holds ſoſſil plants is either very hard and cloſe, or bituminous, ſo as to afford no acceſs to water. The great diſiculty in this hypotheſis reſults from the immenſe quantities oſf theſe matters which are found in the earth, and this diſficulty can only be removed by referring to a fact, which ĩs ſupported by the traditions of every nation upon earth, the univerſal deluge. Among many other curious obſervations, relating to the deluge and its remains, made by Dr. Scheuchzer æand his brother, the Doctor informs us of the trunk of a tree, nine Paris feet in length, with ſome part of its branches ſtill leſt upon it, which is lodged upon the ſummit of mount Stella, the chief of all the Alps of Switzerland, which, according to the barometer, is more than two Engliſh ſtatutemiles perpendicular in height, and four thouſand feet higher than any trees or vegetables are obſerved to grow; he conclude:, therefore, that it was leſt there by the ſubſiderce of the waters of the deluge. Another rnodern writer alſo very properly remarks,  When we find on any ſtones an exact reſemblance of a nlant, a leaſ, or ſorme fruit, that we are acquainted vith, if theſe leaves are bent or folded, if they croſs each other, or lie ore upon another, they are certain indications that the plant or fruĩt ſo repreſented is an impreſſion made by a natural body ? Specimens of this deſcription are frequently found. Not only vegetables, however, but parts oſ animals alſo, are met with, deeply plunged in the ſtrata cf the earth, ſor the preſence of which, in ſuch ſituations, we cannot account, except by ſuppoſing, that they were depoſited during the deluge, when not only the windows of heaven were opened, but the fountains of the great deep were broken up; expreſſions which denote, in the ſtrong ſtyle of oriental imagery, the extenſiveneſs of that vaſt diſturbance or convulſion which happened to this globe. A foſſil ſkeleton of an alligator, twelve or ſourteen feet in length, was diſcovered i in the cliſf of an alum rock, near Whitby, in Yorkſhire. In à gravel pit of Suſfolk, abounding vith foſil ſhells, the entire ſkeleton of a vhale was diſcovered, the bones of which, when they became friable by expoſure to the air, were employed by a farmer for the manuring of his Iand. Frugments of an elephants tooth were dug from a gravel pit at the end of Grays Inn Lane, at the depth of twelve feet. From theſe and other ſost it ſeems probable at leaſt, that this part of the world, before the ſlood, contained animals as well as - "hich now are very rarely found, or ere totally incapable of exiſting in ſuch a climate. This conſideration will lead us to conclude, that the deluge not only deſtroyed the greater part of the animals then exiſing, but produced a conũderable alteration in the conſtitution of the globe, and a permanent revolution in ſome of the laws of nature, of which the change that too place in the length of human life is one ſtriking inſtance. The earth, and almoſt every part oſ it, is ſtored with the remains of trees, plants, æ Le Pluche Spect. de la Nature, Dial. 25. and and fruits; of fiſh, teſtoceous, cruſtaceous, and ſquamous, and of other occœſięnal inhabitants of the waters. The ſpoils of land animals æ alſo met with, but in much ſmaller quantities, which it is rot diſcult to account for, when we conſider, that the w⸗oters of the ſea occupy more than twice as much of the globe as the land, and thet the waters are much more copiouſly fupplied vith arimals of conſiderable magnitude, thaen the land. Add to this, that the claſſes o corallines, lithophuta, and many of the teſtaceous kinds, are of a ſubſtance as hard as ſtone, and of a much more durable texture; whence it is not to be accounted a matter of ſurprize that they abound ſo much in the earth in the form of petrifactions. We are to recollect alſo, that the cataſtrophe of a deluge would ſoon corrupt, deſtroy, and diſperſe the parts of ſuch living creatures as die in the waters; while the natives of the ſea would ſtruggle with the difficulties oſ an inundation, and be at laſt depoſited, perhaps alive, in the earth, when the ſettlement of the ſtrata took place, and the waters retreated, as jt is evident that many of them actually were, from the poſtures and circumſtances in which they have been diſcovered⸗, ? See Joness Phyſological Diſquiſitions. C H A P. XLII. NAPHTA, PETROLEUM, BARBADOES TAR, Xc. Nature and Properties of Naphta.Burning Fountains.Petroleum Mineral Pitch, or Barbades Tar.Late AſphaltesAſphaltum; how collected Eluſtic Bitumen—Component Principles of theſe Subſances. LL theſe ſubſtances are of the bituminous kind, and are, indeed, all of the ſame nature, but differ in conſiſtence. NAPHTA is an olly fluid, which, in its greateſt degree of purity, is nearly colourleſs, ĩs extremely volatile and ſubtile, and ſo light as to float even on ſpirits of wine. It has a ſtrong oppreſſive ſmell, and evaporates ſpontaneouſly. Like other oils, it burns with ſmoke. It does not congeal at o of Fahrenheit. It is ſaid to be gathered at the ſurface of certain wells in Perſia, and is rarely found in Evurope. The vapour of naphta, which iſſues through the crevices of the earth, is generally ſuppoſed to be the cauſe of the flame which is ſometimes obſerved on waters, fountains, &c. At Chittagon, in the Eaſt Indies, there is a fountain which burſts into flame of its own accord, whenever it has been extinguiſhed by accident; this fountain has its deity and its prieſts; and ſome Europeans, ſuſpecting the whole to be a pious fraud, pulled down the wall, &c. but found that the vapour actually kindled ſpontaneouſly when put out. It is poſſible, however, that this flame may be fed by inflammable air inſtead of naphta. PETROLEUM, Which is of a thicker conſiſtence, and more weighty than naphta, is much more common. It is of a yellow or brown colour, and is found in Svitzerland, Sicily, Italy, and France. It iſſtes from thæ crevices of rocks, or is found floating on the ſurface of ſprings. The diffcrent kinds of petrolea, on diſtillation, yield naphta, while a coaly reſiduum remains in the retort. BAREADOES TAR is of a thicker conſiſtence than petroleum, and is alſo called mineral pitch; it was formerly found near Babylon, and conſtituted, according to Vitruvius, when mixed with lime, the cement which was uſed in building the walls of that city. It is at preſent found in ſeveral parts of Europe and in America, where it drops, or diſtils, gradually from rocks. AsPHALTUM is a ſubſtance much reſembling Barbadoes tar; it ĩs alſo called Jews pitch, and is thrown up in a liquid form from the bottom of the lake where Sodom and Gomorrah antiently ſtoodl. From the production of this ſubſtance this was called the Lake Aſphaltes, from a Greek word denoting bitumen. The bitumen floating on the ſurface of the water is hardened by the heat of the ſun, and is in that ſtate collected by the Arabs on the ſhore, where it is throvn. The caſtern aſphaltum is ſeldom brought to Europe, but is uſed by the inhabitants as pitch. All theſe thicker bitumens may be rendered thinner by diſtillation, and may be converted into an oily fluid, the tenuity of which is increaſed by the repetition of the proceſs; at every diſtillation a quuntity of charcoal, earthy matter, and carbonic acid gas, being ſeparated from them. In Obſervations sſur la Phyſique, for Januæry, 1788, vol. xxxii. M. de la Metherie makes mention of a mineral elaſtic bitumen analogous to the caoutchouc, o: elaſtic gum, and which is found near Caſtletown in Derbyſire. Its colour is brown, partly ſoſt, flexible and eleſtic, and this when cut appears internally of a greeniſh yellow colour; partly brittle, with a conchoidal fracturee. Both varieties are frequently united in the ſame ſpecimen. Both are inſoluble in ſpirit of vine, ether, and oĩl of turpentine, but yield to that of olives. The production of all theſe bitumens i is attributed to the action of ſubterraneous fire on ſtrata of pit- coal, by which the oily parts are ſeparated and ſublimed in the ſame manner as by artiſicial heat.. A curious experiment is m nentioręd by Biſhop Watſon, which illuſtræmes the relation oſ theſe four bitumens to each other. The meſ tranſperent cil oſ turpentine, reſembling naghta, may be ehiang el iræò en oll reſembling petroleum, by imixing it with a ſmall portion of vitriolic ac - vith a larger p ion of the æcid thę mixture becomes b ſ ch and tenacions like Dabedor tar, i he ji oportions of the ingredients may be ſo adjuſted, that the mizture will even æc uie a ſolid conſiſtence like aũh dum All theſz: ſubſtances bæcome more tenacious, and acquire a darker colour by expoſure to air. This ſeems to be owing to the æbſorption oſ oxygen, w hich, like oils, they oſi eſo the property of attracting from the atmoſphe: It appears that on ciſtillation bitumens leave ſcarcely any reſiduum, the earthy part being merely accidental, and that the carbonic ſubſtance is by much the ſmalleſt in their compoſition, as their concretion ſeems wholly owing to the abſorption of air, and not to the preva/ lence of the carbonaceous Diineipt, ſince no coal appears, [] Chap. 43.]  æ C n A ?P. XLIII. J ET, AMBER, AMBERGRIS, AND MINERAL TALL OVW. Lã General Properties cf Jet.It: Nature and Origindnterdiid of AmberNatural Hiſory of AriberDigſerent Opinicns f iti OriginAmbergris ts atural Histor;lIineral Talox. ET is a very compact bitumen, harder than æſphaltum, always black, and ſurcptible of a good poliſh. It is ſo light as to ſuim on water, becomes electrical when rubbed, and is called black amber. When burned it emits a bituminous ſmell. Jet ſeems nearly allied to coal, and pardicularly to that ſpecies which is called cannel coal; it is diſtinguiſned chiefly by its ſtructure, being compoſed of fbres parallel to each other like thoſe of.wood. It ſcems in fact to be wood, which has been long buried in the earth, and penetrated by mineral ſteam, ſo as to aſſume the appearance and ſolidity of coal. AxEBER is the ſubſtance known to the ancients under the name of electrum and ſuccinum. In this ſubſtance the property, which certain bodies have, of attracting light ſubſtances, when rubbed, was ſirſt obſerved, and was therefore called electricity. The moſt valuable amber is perfectly tranſparent, of a pale yellow, and is much more eſteemed when it happens to contain any extraneous ſubſtance, ſuch as leaves, inſects, &c. When broken it preſents æ poliſhed ſurface at the place of the fracture. Amber does not readily diſſolve- in any fluid we. are vet acquainted with. Spirit of wine has ſomę ſmall effect upon it and from this combination a tincture is produced, 278 Amber, Book VI, but the quantity it diſſolves is very ſmall. When applied to the flame of a candle it readily takes fire, and burns with a bright white flame and thick ſmoke, and leaves a conſiderable quantity of charcoa. Amber expoſed to heat, without the action of ſlame, ſoſtens and ſwells very conſiderably. Diſtilled in a retort by a heat gradually raiſed, it affords a watery fluid of a red colour, manifeſtly acid; this acid ſpirit retains the ſtrong ſmell of amber; an acid volatile ſalt afterwards paſſes over, which cryſtallies in ſmall vhite or yellowiſh needles in the neck of the retort. THis ſalt is ſucceeded by a white and light oĩl much reſembſing naphta; by continuance of the proceſs, and in proportion as the heat is increaſed, the oily matter which comes over is coloured and more viſcid, like petroleum. What remains at the bottom of the retort is a black maſs reſembling aſphaltum. It appears, therefore, from diſtillation, that the analogy of amber with the other bitumens is very ſtrong. A gentle heat ĩs ſuſficient to raiſe the concrete volatile ſalt of amber, and care muſt be taken to regulate it ſo as not to ſorce up the oil, when it is required to have the ſalt in a ſeparate ſtate. This ſaline matter was for ſome time ſuppoſed to be an alkaline ſalt, but has been ſince found to be an acid of peculiar properties, and capable of combination with alkalies, earths, and metallic calces. Amber is uſually dug out of the earth, and abounds particularly in the Pruſan dominions. Wood is generally found near it, and it is therefore believed to be of vegetable origin. Its analyſis ſeems to ſhev, that it conſiſts of an oil rendered concrete by combination with an acid. The moſt tranſparent ſpecimens are uſuælly found on the ſea- ſhore, particularly on the ſiores of the Baltic, in Ducal Pruſia. Amber is not always of a yellow colour; it is ſometimes brown, ſometimes quite opake, and ſometimes black. Some have ſuppoſed thet it is entirely oſ mineral origin, but this is diſproved by ics diſtillation, and by the foreign bodies which are frequently contained in it, and which ſeem to demonſtrate that it was once in a ſluid ſtate. Hoſſinan and Newman ſay, that it is ſometimes found upon the ſea-ſhore, or upon the ſurface ofwaters, particularly after great ſtorms, when it is collected by means of nets; but that the greater part of it is dug out of pits. The firſt ſtratum is ſand, then clay, then a layer of branches and trunks of trees, then a conſiderable quantity of pyrites, whence vitriol is prepared, and laſtly, a bed of ſand, through which the amber is diſperſed in ſmall pieces, or collected together in heaps. This account greatly favours the idea of the vegetable origin of amber; but Wallerius aſſerts, that the black and dark coloured amber is often found in the bowels of cetaceous fiſhes. M. Girtanner has a peculiar opinion on this ſubject; he thinks that amber is a vegetable oĩl rendered concrete by the acid of ants; it is that kind of ants called formica rufa by Linnæus, which prepares it, according to this author. Theſe inſects dwell in old foreſts of fir trees, where the foſil amber is found, which, when firſt dug, is ductile like wax, and becomes hard on expoſure to air. No inſect is ſo commonly found in amber as the ant. AMBERGRIS is of much the ſame nature as amber, but differs from it by its particular conſiſtence, which ncarly approaches to that of bees wax. Its ſtructure is ſometimes like bees wax, but ſometimes it is granulated, and appears opake, or of a dark grey. Experiments prove that it reſembles amber in its nature. When analyzed it is found to conſiſt of phlegm, a volatile acid partly fluid, oil, and a little coaly matT ter. It diſſolves more readily in ſpirit of ine e than amber. It is moſt common in the Indian ſeas, on the eaſtern coaſt of Africa, Madagaſcar, &c. and is found either floating on the ſea, or caſt on the ſeà-ſhore. In this ſubſtance animal and vegetable remains are ſometimes fourd, as for inſtance, parts of birds, &c. The origin of this ſubſtance is probably the ſame with that of amber. According to M. Aublet (in his Hiſtoire de la Guiane) i it ĩs nòthing more than thej juice of a tree inſpiſfated by evaporationm; and if this is true, it is a ſubſtãnce which belongs properly to the vegetable kingdom. . The tree vhich ] is ſaid to produce it grows in Gui⸗ na, ⸗ and is called cuma, but has not been examined by other botaniſt. When a branch is broken by high winds, a large quantity of the] Juice exudes; and iv it chances to have time to dry, various maſſes ome of which have been ſo large as to weigh one thouſand two hundred pounds and more) are carried into the rivers by heavy rains, and through them into the ſea; aſterwards they are cither thrown on the ſhore, or eaten by ſome fiſh, chieſiy the ſpermaceti vlale, nown. by the name of phyſiter- macrocephalus among ĩchthyologiſis This kind of whale is xtremely voracious of this gum-reſin, and ſwallows ſuch large quantities when it meets with it, that ĩt generall becomes Ael; ſo that thoſe employed in the filhery of theſe whales always expect to find ſome amber mixed with the excrements and remains of other food in the bowels of thoſe whales which are lean. Various authors, among whom is Father Santes, in his Etbiopia Orientclis, ho travelled to various places on the Aſrican coaſt, and Bomare, ſay, that ſome ſpecies of birds are alſo fond of è eating this ſubſtance, as well as whales and giu fihes. Tris accounts very well for the E ll claws, Nilſi Chap. 43] Mineral T alloò. . ua31 claws, beaks, bones, and feathers of birds, parts of vegetables, ſhells, and bones of ſiſh, and particularly for the beals of the cuttle-fiſh, ſęꝑia octopedia, which are ſometimes found in the maſs of this ſubſtance. M. Aublet brought ſpecimens of this gumeſin, which he collected on the ſpot, from the cuma tree at Guiana. It is of a whitiſh brown colour, with a ſhade of yellow, and melts and burns like wax in the firee M. Rouelle examined very careſully this ſubſtance, brought over by M. Aublet, and found that it pręduced exactly the ſame reſults as good amber. Theſe obſervations ſeem to place it beyond a doubt, that both amber and ambergris are vegetable products, and that thoſe vho, from having found theſe ſubſtances in the inteſtines oſ whale 5, concluded that it was a facal matter of thoſe animals, were miſtaken. MixeraL TALLOV is a very peculiar ſubſtance. Itwas found on the co⸗ſts of Finland, in the year 1736. Its ſpeciſic gravity is o. 770, whereas that of tallow is 0.969. Its colour is white; its conſiſtence i is that of tallow, and like it it is brittle; it feels greaſy, and ſtains paper juſt as tallow does, and the traces thus left on paper melt on the approach of flame. It burns ith a blue flame and a ſmell of greaſe, leaving a black viſcid matter, which is more difficultly conſumed. It is found in ſome rotky parts of Perſia, but ſeems mixed with petroleum. Dr. Herman, of Straſburgh, mentions a ſpring, in the neighbourhood of that city, vhich contains a ſubſtance of that- naturè diffuſed through it, which ſeparates on ebullition, and may then C H 4a P. XLIV. OF THE DIAMOND, CONSIDERED AS AN INFLAMMAELE SUBST ANCE. Natural Hiſtory of DiamondsVarietios.Internal Structure. Experiments proving the inflanmable Nature of ibe DiamendExperiments of M. Cadet—OQF D ArcetVital Air neceſary to ihe Comtuſtion of the Diamond.Exteriments of LavoiſierFurther Experiments.Experimenis of Mr. Tennant. —The Diamond promeã to be eryſiallizæàd Charcoal. H E diamond, though ſightly mentioned when T treating of gems, belongs properly to the claſs oſ inflammables. It is the hardeſt and moſt brilliant oſf all ſubſtances. Its ſpecific gravity is 3,445, hence it reſracts the rays of light very powerfully; but it poſſeſſes this power even in a much greater degree than might be ſuppoſed from its denſity, and hence proceeds its ſingular brilliancy. The diamond, properly ſo called, is colourleſs; but it alſo retains this name when it is ſlightly tinged either with red or yellow. It is thereſore not the colour of the ſtone, but its hardneſs and Iuſtre, which obtain for it the denomination of a diamond. Diamonds are found in the Eaſt Indies, particularly in the kingdoms of Golconda and Viſapour: they likeviſe come from the Braſils; but theſe laſt appear to be of an inferior quality, and are known in commerce by the name of Portugueſe diamonds. Diamonds are uſually found in an ochreous yellow carth, under rocks of grit-ſtone and quartz; they are likewiſe found detached, in torrents which have carried them ſrom their bedss They are ſeldom found above a certain ſize. The ſovereſgns of India reſerve the largeſt, in order that the price of this article may not fal. Diamonds have no brilliancy when dug out of the earth, but are covered with an earthy creſt, which incloſes a ſecond cruſ, of the nature of calcareous ſpar, according to M. Romẽ de Liſle. Bright diamonds are occaſionally found in waters. Theſe gems very often have no regular ſorm, but are flat; or worn round. Sometimes they are regularly cryſtallized in octahedrons, formed by two quadrangular pyramids, united at their baſe; they are likewiſe found with twelve, twenty-ſour, and forty-eight faces. Diamonds appear to be compoſed of laminæ, laid upon each other; and they are eaſily divided, by ſtriking them in the direction of theſe laminæ with a good ſteel inſtrument. There are, however, ſome diamonds which do not appear to be formed of diſtinct laminæ, but of twiſted fibres, like thoſe of knots in wood. Theſe laſt are exceedingly hard, and cannot be wrought; lapidaries call them diamonds of nature. Diamonds are ſhaped by firſt cleaving them in the direction of their lamellæ, and then rubbing them with other diamonds. They are then poliſhed by an horizontal ſteel wheel, duſted with their ovn powder mixed with olive oil. Sir Iſaac Newton having obſerved that inflammable ſubſtances had a ſtronger power of refracting the rays of light, in proportion to their denſities, than other bodies, and obſerving alſo the ſtrong refractive pover of the diamond, conjectured, upon theſe principles, that it muſt belong to this claſs of minerals. The reaſonings of Newton were ſo correct, that many of his conjectures, though made only on theory, have been ſince confirmed by actual experiment.Thus it has ſince been diſcovered that diamonds, expoſed to a high a high degreæ of heat, entirely diſappear at the inſtant that an appearance of combuſtion is obſ ſerve a. M. Cadet expeſed diamonds in covered and luted erucibles to the violent heat of a ſorge during two hours, by which the diamonds only loſt one ſixteenth pait of their weight, he was thereſore of opinion, that the conſumption of diamonds in open veſſels is not a true volatiliZation, but merely an exfollation occaſioned by the expanſion of the air contained between the laminæ of the diamond, by Which it is broken into portions ſo minute as to eſcape obſervation. M. DArcet oppoſed 0 the above explanation, the eſcape of the ſubſtance of the diamonds through the moſt ſolid porcelain crucibles, and the iu- appearance noticed by Macquer, and which vas aſterwards obſerved by M. Roux to be an actual flame. It as, indeed, even found, that diamonds incloſed in a ball of porcelain earth, a and expoſed to heat, were totally conſumed; the ſpace which the diamond occupied was found empty; no traces of it could be diſcovered, and yet the ball of porcelain, which was hardened by the heat, was apparently entire:. This experiment, according to Fourcroy, was frequently repeated with the ſamo extraordinary reſult. It was found, however, that if the diamond was embedded in charcoal, and carefully incloſed in ſeverãl crucibles placed within each other, and the whole covered with cement, ĩt did not diſappear from expoſure to a very violent heat; it was only rendered black at its ſurface, and when this cruſt was taken of, it appeared in its original ſplendor. It was tHereſore very juſtly concluded, that perfect excluſion from vital air is ſuficient to prevent the confumption of the diamond, æ as well as of all other i inE Luting is a ind of carthy cement uſed by chemiſts, and ſormed i in n ciſeren ways. Chap. 44] l Enperi nents on Dimens. 2285 Rammable ſubſtances; and it wa s therefore neceſſary to ſuppoſe, that the porcelain earth, in which the orher diamonds were incloſed, ſuffered ſome ſmall ſepa ration from expoſure to heat, which, though ſo minute as to eſcape obſervation aſter the ball was cold, was yet ſuſicient to admit th]e air. This opinion vas fully confirmed by the experiments of. M. Lavoiſier, ho found, that diamonds are only conſumeq i in proportion to the quantity of vital air to which they are expoſed. He alſo found, that the combuſtion of the diamond' as attended with the formation of carbonic acid gas; but at the time he made his experiments, the nature of that ſiuid does not ſeem to have been ſuiciently underſtood, to enable this great philoſopher to draw: a corret concluſion rẽltive to the compoſ_ition of the diamond. t The experiments o Lavoiſier ere purucd by Mr: T ennant, and their reſult may be ſound in the firſt part of. the Philoſophical Tranſactions for the year 1797. He obſerved that, from the extreme herdneſs. of the diamond, a ſtronger heat was required to inflame it, vhen expoſed merely tò air, than could eaſily be ſupplied in cloſe veſſels, except by means of a ſtrong' burning glaſs; but that with nitFe* its combuſtion could be eſfected in a modera ate heat. To expoſe it to this proceſs, without any danger ſrom the intruſion of extraneous matters, Mr. Tennænt incloſed the nitre and the diamond in a tube of gold, and took every neceſſary precaution to prove that no carbonic acid gas, or fixed air, could be includeò, except what the diamond itſelf afforded. When the diamond was entirely deſtroyed in the gold veſſel by the infia nmation of the nitre, the ſubſtance which remained precipitated lime from lime llt The uſe of the nitre is obviouſly to ſupply a quant y of  pure air to eſfſeſt the comhuſtion. : vater, r water, and with acids aſforded nitrous and fixed air; and appeared, in ſact, to conſiſt of nitre partly decompoſed, and of alkali united with fixed air. In order to eſtimate the quantity of carbonic gas which might be obtained from a given weight oſfdiamond, two grains and an half were incloſed in a tube with a quarter of an ounce oſ nitre. After the proceſs, the alkaline matter contained in the tube was diſſolved in water, and the whole of the diamords was found to be conſumed. Into the alkaline ſolution a quantity oſ ſaturated ſolution of marble in marine acid was poured, and after the fixed air had united with the calcareous earth, the alkæli remained in ſolution with the marine acidc. The clear liquor was then poured off from the calcareous precipitate, and was found to contain no ſixed air. The carbonic acid gas being then expelled from the calcareous matter by the addition of an acid, occupied a ſpace equal to about 10 ounces of water, which, according to the calculations of Lavoiſier, is exactly the quantity that would be produced by the converſion of 2 ; grains of pure and ſolid charcoal into an aerial form. That the fixed air, thus produced, conſiſted of the ſame matter as that of charcoal, Mr. Tennant proved by combining it with lime, and expoſing it to heat with phoſphorus, when he found that it afforded charcoal in the ſame manner as any other calcareous ſubſtance. Mr. Tennant repeated the experiment with 1ã grains of diamond, and the reſult was the ſame. Upon theſe evidences therefore he concludes, and apparently with reaſon, that this peculiar and beautiful ſubſtance, ſo valued by the higheſt claſſes of mankind, the decoration of royalty, and the emblem of all that is pure and excellent in nature, is no other than that de. ſpiſcd matter, charcoal, in a ſtate of cryſtallization. C u A P. XLV. THE STRUCTURE OF THE EART IL he Curioſity of Man on this Topic limited by the Weatncſs of his Povers7The Body of the Earth diſpoſed in Strata —Declivities of MountainsDifpoſition and Order of the StrataCaldy Iſland. Wihere Metals are uſually fou-d. Probable State of the Earih at its CreationLaws by which Alterations avould l troduced. Foſſil Shells, &. accounted for.Formation of Iſlands, &eOther Irregularities of the Earihs Surface explained. i FTE R the preceding ſurvey of the natural contents of this globe of earth, and of their component principles, the next object of attention is the earth itſelf, and the general arrangement of thoſe ſubſtances of which ĩt is compoſed. Theſe are neither diſpoſed in a regular ſeries, according to their ſpecific gravities, nor yet thrown together in total diſorder, as if by accident or chance. Human Induſtry has hitherto been able to penetrate but a very little way into the bowels oſ the earth, and we can but know little of its interior parts. The depth of the earth, from the ſurface to the center, is more than four thouſand miles, and yet the deepeſt mine in Europe, that at Cotteberg, in Hungary, is not more than one thouſand yards deep;  the greateſt depth, therefore, ſays an excellent vriter,  to which avarice has ever yet penetrated, may be compared to the puncture made i in the body of an elephant by the proboſcis of a gnat.” From what has heen diſcovered, however, of thoſe parts which lic moſt contiguous to our obſervation, naturaliſts have compared the ſtructure of the earth to /1 v 288- Earib conſiſts of. Siroia. ſBool Vi. cept, indeed, in ſome ofthoſe immenſe mountaits, whicli have exiſted from the creation, or at leaſt from the deluge, where the matter, from vhatever cauſe, is more homogeneous, the eãtthi is found to conſiſt of various ſtrata; or layers, which differ according to the circumſtances of climate and ſituation. The ſorface, in general, evidently conſiſts of a confuſed mixture of decayed animal and vegetable ſubſtances and earths rudely united together; but when we have penetrated below the ſurface, ve find the materials of the globe arranged in a more regular manner. Sometimes, indeed, we find heaps of ſtone, which do not conſiſt of layers, but are conſuſed maſſes of unequal thickneſs, and are called rocks. The ſtratà are, in general, extended through a whole country, ànd, perhaps, with ſome interruptions and varieties, through the globe itſelf. Theſe extenſive bodies are fõund moſt regular when the country is flat, being, in that caſe, nearly parallel to the horizon, though frequently dipping downwards in a certain angſe; in many places the beds have à7 wave, as where the country conſiſts of gently waving hills and vales; here too they generally ip. In travelling a mile ve, perhaps, paſs through ground compoſed moſly of ſand, in another mile we find it, perhaps, compoſed of clay; and this is occaſioned by the edges of the different ſtrata lying with an obliquity to the horizon. By the ſame kind of projection, mountains, or ridges of mountains, arè produced, which, in general, have vhat ĩs. called a back and a face, the former ſmoother and the latter more rugged. WVe generally find too, on one ſide of a mountain, a more graduãl aſcent than on the other, vhich is octaſioned by the ſtrata, which have riſen above the general level of the eountry, being abruptly hioken oſ, Movuntains are in general more abrupt Chep. 45.] Inequalities of Eartl's Surſace. as™ towards the weſt, and have a more gentle declivity towards the eaſt; hence the weſtern coaſt of courtries is almoſt always ſteeper than the eaſtern. The back of a mountiin ſiews the obliquity with which the ſtrata ſink into the ground; the abrupt edge oſ the ſtrata becomes more ſloping, as time, producing a gradual deca;, draws the rubbiſh from above. Where the face of a country is ſo irregular, ĩts appearance depends on the different hardneſs or ſoftneſs of the ſtrata. The abrunt rocks, which we obſerve in many parts, ſeem to have been compoſed of an adventitious mixture of diſferent ſtrata, which have reſiſted the injuries of time with unequal force. Between the ſtrata, layers of diſferert clays are interpoſcd, vhich are called by the miners way-boards; they are ſeldom nore than four or five, and in ſome inſtances not more than one foot thick; they ſerve to maerk and diſtinguiũ the different ſtrata, for in fact the ſtrata are themſclves compoſed of different laminæ*. Every part oſa ſtratum may be corſidered as equally thick when covered with an incumbent bed; buwhen expoſed t0 the action of the air, and other æxternal agents, æ greæt part oſ it, whether grit, lime-ſtone, or toad- ſtone, is decompoſed and converted into earth or mould. Immediately under the õll the ſrogments of ſtone are ſmall, und -radually increaſe to the depth of fifteen or twerty feet, where it commonly appears ſolid, and ſi: for the maſon. Strate are uſually interrupted by clefts or ſiſſures at diſferent diſtances, which ſeem to have been the cffccts of violence. In theſe fiſſures only the cres of metals are to be found. It has been remarked, that we cannot, by digging into the earth, obtain a view of the poſition and nature  Whitehurſt, Chap. XVI. of the ſtrata ſor more than ſome few hundreds of yards. There is, however, one curious inſtance of an iſland, near the coaſt of Pembrokeſhire, called Caldy Inand, vwhere the earth ſuffered the action of ſo unuſual a diſruption, that the ſtrata, of which the whole iſland is compoſed, are placed in a vertical poſition, ſo that their edges are all expoſed to view, and they may be obſerved in ſucceſſion from one end of the iſland to the other. Here then we have the ſingular opportunity of obſerving in what order they were originally placed, to the depth of two miles. At one end of the iſland they are not more than a foot thick, but increaſe, as we proceed, till they terminate in a ſtratum of red ſtone, more than a mile in thickneſs, which, with good reaſon, is ſuppoſed to have been the loweſt of them all before they were elevated and thrown upon their edges. The thinner ſtrata, vhich were originally uppermoſt, have foſſil ſhells and corallines in them; but I have not heard that any thing like the traces of lava are to be found to countenance the ſuppoſition, that this ſingular accident was occaſioned by the exploſive force of a volcano. The order oſ the ſtrata in Derbyſhire is as follows: I. Millſtone-grit, a coarſe ſand-ſtone compoſed of granulated quartz and quartz pebbles. 2. Shale or ſhiver, or black Iaminated clay, much indurated. 3. Lime-ſtone, in various laminæ. 4. Toad-ſtone, a black porous ſubſtance, hard, reſembling ſcoriæ, and apparently a volcanic production. 5. Lime-ſtone. 6. Toad-ſtone. 7. Lime. ſtone. 8. Toad-ſtone. 5. Lime-ſtone again. Such (the toad-ſtone excepted) appears to be the general order in which the ſtrata appear through the diſferent regions of the earth, or at leaſt wherever the lime-ſtone predominates, which is in a conſiderable proportion, though it muſt be remarked that the largeſt mountains are chieſly granite. Wherever, thereſore, the firſt of theſe ſtrata appears on the ſurface, the ſecond lies certainly under it, the third under the ſecond, &c. ſtill excepting the toadſtone, which, being a volcanic production, may be ſuppoſed to be in ſome meaſure caſually interpoſed. The toad-ſtone interſects all the mineral veins, and cuts off all communication between the upper and lower parts of the fiſſures, being continued horizontally in one uninterrupted maſs. Toad- ſtone is of an extremely hard and cloſe texture, ſo much ſo as even to prevent water from filtering through it, at leaſt in any quantity. It is perfectly ſimilar to Iceland lava in appearance, and in being unaſſailable by acids. It has no fiſſures, and frequently fills up the fiſſures of the other ſtrata; in fine, it being not univerſal, but only an occaſional appearance, there ĩs the utmoſt probability that it is a ſpecies of lava. It being inſerted between the other ſtrata ſeems alſo to afford a proof, that ĩt originally flowed from a volcano, the funnel or ſhaft of which did not approach the open air, but diſcharged its fiery contents between the ſtrata in all directions. When the toad-ſtone is dug through, however, and the vein or fiſſure purſued, the miner is never diſappointed in meeting it again, a5 ſoon as he arrives at the ſtratum of lime-ſtone *. The ſtrata of coal, argillaceous ſtones, clay, &c. are always incumbent on the ſtrata oſ grit, ſhale, and lime- ſtone. The former are ſeldom in ſtrata of above twenty feet thick, and generally not more than four or five; the latter are in ſtrata of from fifty to one hundred and fifty feet in thickneſs or depth.  Whitehut, Chap. XVI. 4 Ib. All beds of gravel are ſuppoſed to have heen depoſited either by rivers or by the action of the ſea, and the ſtones that compoſe them to have been rounded by attrition. It is no inconſiderable proof in fayour of ſuch a conetur that ſea- ſhells, &c. are ſo frequently found with gravel. lli The argillaceous ſtrata are only productive of Iron and coal. The ores of copper, lead, zinc, &c. are confined entirely to the lime-ſtone ſtrata, a few inſtances excepted, where they are found in ſhale. The diſpoſition of the ſuperficial ſtrata, however, differs in mountainous and champaign countries. In a well hich was dug at Amſterdam, to the depth of two hundred and thirty feet, the following ſubſtances vere ſound in ſucceſſion*: ſeven feet of vegetable earth, nine oſ turf, nine of ſoft clay, eight of ſand, four of earth, ten of clay, four of earth, ten of ſand, two of clay, four of white ſand, one of ſoſt earth, fourteen of ſand, eight of clay mixed with ſand, four of ſea- ſand mixed with ſhells, then an hundred and two feet of ſoſt clay, and then thirty-one feet of ſand, In a well dug at Marly, to the depth of an hundred feet, M. Bufon gives us a ſtill more exact enumeration of its Iayers of earth. Thirteen feet of a reddiſh gravel, two of gravel mingled with a vitrifiable ſand, three of mud or ſſime, two of marle, four of marly ſtone, five of marle in duſt mixed with vitrifiable ſand, ſix of very ſine vitrifiable ſand, three of earthy marle, three of hard marle, one oſ gravel, one of eglantine, a ſtone of the hardneſs and grain of marble, one of gravelly murle, one of ſtony marle, one of a conrſer Eind of ſtony marle, two of a coarſer kind ſtill, one of vitrifiable ſand mixed with foſſil ſnells, two of fine gravel, three oſ ſtony marle, one of coarſe powdered marle, one of ſtone, calcinable like marble, three of grey ſand, two of white ſand, one of red ſand ſtreaed with white, eight of grey ſand with ſhells, three of very fine ſand; three of a hard grey ſtone, four of red ſand ſtreaked with white, three of white ſand, and fiſteen of reddiſh vitrifiable ſand. The direction too in which the ſrata are found is alſo exceedingly diſferent in diſferent ſituations.  When the continuity, ſays Mr. Jones,  of the ſtrata is interrupted by a fracture, the ſtrata are thrown out of that horizontal poſition which is natural to them, and make an angle with the horizon; which may be called the angle of their elevation or depreſſion; the miners call it their dip. In this caſ, if the ſucceſũion of ſtrata is accurately noted on one ſide of the fracture, where a vein of coal or metal is found amongſt them, it may thence be learned where the ſame vein will occur again on the other ſide of the fracture; becauſe it will be found adjacent to the ſame ſtrata as beſore. When the edges of the ſtrata, on each ſide ofa fiſſure, are thus parted and miſmatched, they are ſaid to ſrap; and the ſpace between them is filled up with rubble, or ſtones, or minerals, &c. Sometimes theſe ſiſſures are the richeſt parts of the ſoil, containing ſuch matrers as are not to be found elſewhere ?. In fig. I. plate I. llll F. repre-  Some of the fiſſures in Cornwall ære near twenty feet over, and commonly full, or near ĩt, of metallic and miineral matter. The fiſſures at the greateſt depth are generælly largeſt; as we aſcend they bccome gradually leſs, but more ſrequent and numerous: inſomuch that if the globe was divided in two, and the ſtrata viewed upon the ſace of the ſection, the ſigures would appear after the manner of a tree: at the botiom a large trunk, which higher up is divided into branches, which breal into leſſer, F. repreſents the fiſſure, by which the ſtrata are parted, and which is filled up with extraneous rubbiſh, carried in aſter the ſtrata were parted. The black vein of coal on the leſt ſide is found with five other ſtrata above it; but being interrupted by the fiſſure F. where ĩt comes out to the day, the ſtratum of ſand, No. 4, on the right ſide, on account of the trapping, is found oppoſite to ĩt; thence it is to be collected, that the fourth ſtratum below that ſand wiil be coal; and when the angle of the dip is obſerved, it may be known where to ſink a pit, and where the coal will again appear to the day; provided the figure of the ſurface of the ground will permit it to ſhew itſel. When I was once at the bottom of a lead mine in Derbyſhire, a miner informed me, that the veins of the metal always make a greater angle with the horizon than the ſides of the mountain do, in which they are found and come out to the day; which was probably occaſioned by the deſcent of the waters of the flood, tearing away much of the matter from the ſummit, and lodging it upon the ſides and in the vallies beneath, aſter the ſtrata had received their inclination. With reſpect to the more internal parts of the earth, for the reaſons aſigned in the beginning of this chapter, nothing can be advanced with certainty, and hypotheſes cannot be relied on. By ſome it has been ſuppoſed, that the center of the earth conſiſts of fire. Mr. Kirwan, however, has ſatisfactorily proveq, that the notion of a central fire or heat is void of foundation. Since no authentic obſerand at the top into tvig- But the branches are not continued in a ſtrait line: they ſtart afreſh, at ſome little diſtance on one ſide, as in fig. 2. that by an intervening boundary the metallic matter might be detained in ĩts deſcent, and prevented from ſinking avay to the bottom of the earth. See Mr. Hutchinſons Obſervations in the year 1706, ꝑ. 316, 317. vation aſſures us, that this heat increaſes in proportion as we penetrate below the ſurface of the earth; on the contrary, many experiments ſerve to evince, that it rather decreaſes, (though never to leſs than thirtyſix degrees) and that ĩts variation at the ſame diſtance below the ſurface conſtantly bears a proportion with the variation of the ſolar heat at the ſurface. The more general opinion is, that the ſtrata originally lay horizontally, and were formed by a depoſition from water. The arguments for this opinion are forciblee The relics of a variety oſ ſubſtances, which we now find only in the ſea, are found in rocks and mountains, at a very great diſtance from it. In ſtrata of lime-ſtone, every where diſtant from the ſea, we find the remains of ſhells, &c. the productions of the ocean. Other circumſtances prove, that the ſea has covered parts of the earth, which are now at a great diſtance from it, and that the various directions which the ſtrata now have were not their direction at their firſt formation. That the frame of this earth has undergone ſome violent concuſſion is evident, as was already ſtated, from the traces which ſtill remain. The ſtrata we have ſeen are often broken in different directions, in general perpendicularly; ſo that the parts of the ſtrata are ſeparated from each other, The width of theſe rents is different, ſometimes a few inches, ſometimes many yards. They are very commonly filled up with ſubſtances different from the compoſition of the ſtrata. In mountains there is ſometimes obſerved the appearance oſ a white ſtone, which paſſes through it like a vein. This has been a rent filled up with a particular kind of ſtone. Theſe are very common in the ſtrata of coal, They are geuerally of conſiderable hardneſs, and in them metallic ſubſtances arę uſually found. When any of But the arguments and obſervations of Mr. Whitehurſt are more deſerving attention, ſince he is almoſt I the of thoſe earthy particles with which it once was intimately blended, it ſoon began to defecate, and to depoſe theſe particles upon the cily ſurface already mentioned, which ſoon uniting, the earth and oll formed thæt cruſt, which ſoon became an habitable ſurface, giving life to vegetation, and dwelling to animals.  This imæginary antideluvian abode was very diſſerent from what we ſee it at preſent. The earth was light and rich; and formed of a ſubſiance entirely adapted to the feeble ſtate of incipient vegetation: it was an uniform plain, every where covered with verdure; vithout mountæins, without ſeas, or the ſmallcſũ inequalities. It had no diference of ſeaſons, for its equator was in the plain of ihe ecliptic, or, in other words, ĩt turned directly oppoſite ro the ſun, ſo that it enjoyed one perpetual and luxuriant ſpring. However, this delightful face of nature did not long continue in the ſame ſate, ſor, aſtera time, it began to crack and open in fiſures: a cireumſtanze which always ſucceeds when the ſun exhales the moĩſure from rich or marſ©y ſituations. The crimes of mankind had been for ſome time preparing to drav down the wræath of Heaven; and they, at length, induced thæ Deity to deſer repairing theſe breaches in nature. Thus the chaſms of the eærth every day became wider, and, at length, they penetrated to the great abyſs of waters; and the whole earth, in a maænner, fell in. Thea erſuæd a total diſorder in the uniform beauty of the firit creation, the terrene ſurface of he globe being broken down: as it ſurk the vaters guſied out in its place; the deluge became urhverſal; all mankind, except eight perſons, vere deitroyed, and their poſterity condemed to toil upon the ruins of deſoluted nature.  It only remains to mention the manner in which he relieves the earth from this uaiverſal wreck, which would ſeem to be as difficult as even its ſirſt formation.  Theſe great maſſes of earth failing into the abyſs, drew down with them vaſt quantities allo of uir; and by dn ag agoinſt cach other, and breaking into ſmall parts by the repented violence of the ſhock, they, at length, leſt bætveen them large cavities filld with ncthing but air. ITheſę cuvities nãturally oſercd æa bed to receive the influent vaters; ænd in proportion as they ãlled, the ſace of the earth became orce more viſible. The higher paſts of its broken ſorſacè è, nov become the tops of mountains, were' the firſt that appeared; the the only writer on this ſubject, who has united obſervation with theory. With plains ſoon after came forward, and, at length, the whole globe was delivered from the waters, except the places in the Iowent ſituations; ſo that the ocean and the ſeas are ſtill a part of the ancient abyſs that have not had a place to return to. Iſlands and rocks are fragments of the earth's former cruſt; kingdoms and continents are larger maſſes of ĩts broken ſubſtance; and all the inequalities that are to be found on the ſurface of the preſent earth, are owing to the accidental confuſion into which both earth and waters were then thrown.”  The next theoriſt was Woodward, who, in his Eſſay towards a Natural Hiſtory of the Earth, which was only deſigned to precede a greater work, has endeavoured to give a more rational account of its appearances; and was, in fact, much better furniſhed ſor ſuch an undertaking than any of his predeceſſors, being one of the moſt aſiduous naturaliſts of his time. His little book, therefore, contains many important facts, relative to natural hiſtory, although his ſyſtem may be weak and roundleſs. : He begins by aſſerting that all terrene ſubſtances are diſpoſed in beds of various natures, lying horizontally one over the other, fomewhat like the coats of an onion; that they are replete with fhells, and other productions of the ſea: theſe ſhells being found In the deepeſt cavities, and on the tops of the higheſt mountains. From theſe obſervations, which are varranted by experience, he proceeds to obſerve, that theſe ſhells and extraneous foſſils are not productions of the earth, but are all actual remains of thoſe animals which they are known to reſemble; that all the beds oſ the earth lie under each other, in the order of their ſpeciſic gravity; and that they are diſpoſed as if they had been leſt there by fubſding waters. All theſe aſſertions he affirms with much rarne ſtneſs, although daily experience contradicts him in ſome of them; particularly we find layers oſ ſtone ofien over the Iighteſt ſolls, and the ſoſtet earth under the hardeſt bodies. However, having taken it for granted, that all the layers of the earth are found in the order of their ſpeeific gravity, the lighteſt at the top, and the heavieſt next the center, he conſequently aſſerts, and it will not improbably follow, that all the ſubſtances of which the earth is compoſed were once in an actual ſtate of diſſolution. This univerſal diſſolution he takes to have happened at the time of the flood. He ſuppoſes that at that time a body Vith reſpect to the form of the earth, it is ſcarcely neceſſary to mention, that ĩt ĩs nearly round; a circumſtance, of water, which was then in the center of the earth, uniting with that which was found on the ſurface, ſo far ſeparated the terrene parts as to mix all together in one fluid maſs; the contents of vhich aſterwards ſinking according to their reſpective gravities, produced the preſent appearances of the earth. Being aware, however, of an objection that ſoſil ſubſtances are not found diſſolved, he exempts them from this univerſal diſſolution, and for that purpoſe, endeavòurs to ſhew that the parts of animals have a ſtronger coheſion than thoſe of minerals; and that, while even the hardet rocks may be diſſolved, bones and ſells may ſtill continue entire. ⸗ So much for Woodward; but of all the ſyſtems which were publiſhed reſpecting tbe earth's formation that of Whiſton was moſt applauded, and moſt oppoſedl. Nor need we wonder; for beiug ſupported with all the parade of deep calculation, it awed the ignorant, and produced the approbation of ſuch as would be thought otherwiſe, as it implied a knowledge of abſtruſe learning, to be even thought capable of comprehending what the writer aimed at. In fact, it is not eaſy to diveſt this theory of its mathematical garb; but thoſe who have had leiſure, have found the reſult of our philoſopher's reaſoning to be thus. He ſuppoſes the earth to have been originally a comet; and he conſiders the hiſtory of the creation, as given us in ſcripture, to have its commencement juſt when it was, by the hand of the Creator, more regulariy placed as a planet in our ſolar ſyſtem. Before that time, he ſuppoſes it to have been a globe without beauty or proportion; a world in diſorder; ſubject to all the viciſſitudes which comets endure; ſome of which have been found, at different times, a thouſand times hotter than melted iron; at others, a thouſand times colder than ice. Theſe alternations of heat and cold, continually melting and freezing the ſurface of the earth, he ſuppoſes to have produced, to a certain depth, a chaos entirely reſembling that deſcribed by the poets, ſurrounding the ſolid contents of the earth, which ſtill continued unchanged in the midſt, making a great burning globe of more than two thouſand leagues in diameter. This ſurrounding chaos, however, was far from being ſolid: he reſembles ĩt to a denſe though fluid atmoſphere, compoſed of ſubſtances mingled, agitated, and ſiocked againſt each other; and in this diſorder he dæſcribes the earth to have been juſt at the eve of creation. cumſtance, however, which, though now ſo univerſally known, remained undiſcovered for many thouſard : But upon ĩts orbits being then changed, when it was more regularly wheelcd round the ſun, every thing took its pro oper place; ; every part of the ſurrounding ſluid then fell into a ſituation, in proportion as it was light or heavy. The middle, or central part, which always remained unchanged, ſtill continued ſo, retaining a part of that heat which it received in its primæval approaches towards the ſun; which heat, he calculates, may continue for about ſix thouſand years. Next to this ſell the heavier parts of the chaotic amoſphere, which ſerve to ſuſtain the lighter: but à4 in deſcendig they could not entirely be ſeparated from many watery parts, with which they were intimately mixed, they drew down a part of theſe allo with them, and theſe could not mcunt again aſter the ſurſace of the earth was conſolidated: they, therefore, ſurrounded the heavy ſirſt deſcending parts; in the ſame manner as theſe ſurround the central globe. Thus the entire body of the earth ĩs compoſed internally of a great burning globe: next which is placed an heavy terrene ſubſtance, that encompaſſes it; round which alſo is circumfuſed a body of water. Upon this body of water, the cruſt of earth on which we inhabit is placed: ſo that, according to him, the globe is compòſed of a number of coats, or ſells, one within the other, all of different denſitie. The body of the earth being thus formed, the air, which ĩs the lighteſt ſubſance of all, ſurrounded its ſurface; and the beams of the ſun darting through, produced that light vhich, we are told, firſt obeyed he Creators command.  The whole œconomy of the creation being thus adjuſted, it enly remained to account ſor the riſings and depreſions on the ſurface of the e arth, with the other ſeeming ĩIrregularities of its preſent appearance. The hills ard vællies are conſdered by him as formed by their preſſing upon the internal fluid, which ſuſtains the cutward ſell of carth, with greater or leſs weight: thoſe parts of the earth which are heavieſ, ſink ĩnto the ſubjæcert fluid more decply, and become vallies: thoſe that are lighteſt riſe higher vZon the earths ſurſace, and ure called inountains.  Such was the face of nature before the deluge; the earth was then more fertile and populous than it ĩs at preſent; ; the life of man and animals were extended to ten times ĩts preſent duration; and all theſe advantages aroſe from the ſuperior heat of the central globe, which ever ſince has been codling: As its heat was then in ſand years. That its ſorm is ſpherical, was firſt conjectured ſrom the curved line vhich. bounds the 55H r li earths full power, the genial principle was alſo much greater than at preſent; vęgetation and ænimal increaſe were carricd on with more vigour; and all nature ſeemed teeming whh the ſeeds of life. But theſe phyſical advantages were only productive of moral evil; thæ warmth which invigorated the body encreaſed the paſiions and appetites of the mind; and, as man became more poverful, he grew leſs innocent. It, was found neceſſary to- puniſh this qepravity; and all living creatures were overwhelmed by th? deluge in univerſal deſtruction. BEE ua hi/ t This deluge, which mple believers ate wiling t t0 aſcribe to a miracle, philoſophers have been long deſirous tq; accõunt for by natural cauſes: they have proved that the earth could never ſupply from any reſervolr towards its center,. nor, the atmoſphere by any diſcharge from above, ſuch a quantity of water as would cover the ſurface of the globe to a certain. depth over the tops of our higheſt mountains. Where, therefore, was all this water. to be found? WEiſton has found enough, and. more than a ſuficiency, in the tall of a comet; for he ſeems to allot comets a very active part in the great operations of nàature. cHe calculates with great ſeeming, preciſion, the year, the month, ana the day of the week on which this comet (which has paid the earth ſome viſits fince, though at a kinder diſtance) inyvolved our globe in ĩts tail. The tail he ſuppoſed to be a vapourous fluid ſubſtance, extaled from the body of the comet, by the extreme heat of the ſun, and increaſing in proportion as it approached thai great luminary. It was in this that our globe was involved at the time of the deluge; and, as the earth ſtill a2cted by its natural attraction, it drew to ĩtſelf all the watery vapours which were in the comets tall; and the internal waters beirg alſo at the ſame time let looſe, in à very ſtort. ſpace the tops of the higheſt mountains were Iald under the deep. The puniſument oſ the deluge being thus complete d, and al the guilty deſtroyed, the earth, Vhich nad been broken by the eruption of the internal waters, was alſo enlarged by it; ſo that upon the comets receſs, there was found room ſuſ©icient in the internal abyſs for the receſs of the ſuperãuous vaters; whither they all retired, and leſt the earth uncovered, but in ſome reſpects changed, particularly i in its figure, which, from being round, was now become oblatt. In this univerſal wreck of nature  No- h ſurvived, by earth's ſhadow in Iunar eclipſes. We have a ſtill plainer proof of its rotundity, from the appearance oſ objects æ2 variety of happy cauſes, to re-people the earth, anẽ to give birth to a race of men ſlov in believing ill-imagined theories of the earth. After ſo many theories of the earth, which had been publiſhed, 2pplauded, anſwered, and forgotten, M. Buffon ventured to add one more to the number. This philoſopher was in every reſpect better qualified than any of his predeceſſors for ſuch an attempt, being furniſed with more materials, having a brighter imagination to find new prooſs, and a better ſtyle to cloath them in. However, if one ſo ill qualified as I am may judge, this ſeems the weakeſt part of his admirable work; and I could wiſh that he had been content with giving us facts inſtead of ſyſtems; that, inſtead of being a reaſoner, he had contented himſelf with being merely an hiſtorian. He begins his ſyſtem by making a diſtinction between the firſt part of it and the lat; the one being founded only on conjecture, the other depending entirely upon actual obſervation. The latter part of his theory may, therefore, be true, though the former ſnould be found erroneous. The planets, ſays he, and the earth among the number, might have been formerly (he only offers this as conjecture) a part of the body of the ſun, and adherent to its ſubſtance. In this ſituation, a comet falling in upon that great body might have given it ſuch a ſhock; and ſo ſhaken its whole frame, that ſome of its particles might have been driven off like ſtreaming ſparkles from red hot iron; and each of theſe ſtreams of fire, ſmall as they were in compariſon of the ſun, might have been large enough to have made an earth as great, nay many times greater than ours. So that in this manner the planets, together with the globe which we inhabit, might have been driven off from the body of the ſun by an impulſive force: in this manner alſo they would continue to recede from it for ever, were they not drawn back by its ſuperior power of attraction; and thus, by the combination of the two motions, they are wheeled round in circles. Being in this manner detached at a diſtance from the body of the ſun, the planets, from having been at firſt globes of liquid fire, gradually became cool. The earth alſo having been impelled obliquely forward, received a rotatory motion upon its axis at the objects on the ſurface of the earth, but ſtill more remarkably on that of the ſea. As we depart from objects very inſtant of its formation; and this motion being greateſt at the equator, the parts there acting againſt the force of gravity, they muſt have ſwollen out, and given the earth an oblate or flatted figure. As to iĩts internal ſubſtance, our globe having once belonged to the ſun, it continues to be an uniform maſs of melted matter, very probably vitrified in its primæval fuſion. But its ſurface is very differently compoſed. Having been in the beginning heated to æ degree equal to, if not greater, than what comets are found to ſuſtain, like them it had an atmoſphere of vapours floating round it, and which, cooling by degrees, condenſed and ſubſided upon its ſurface. Theſe vapours formed, according to their different denſities, the earth, the water, and the air; the heavier parts falling firſt, and the lighter remaining ſtill ſuſpended. Thus far our philoſopher ĩs, at leaſt, as much a ſyſtem-maker a3 Whiſton or Burnet; and, indeed, he fights his way with great perſeverance and ingenuity through a thouſand objections that naturally ariſe Having, at laſt, got upon the earth, he ſuppoſes himſelf on firmer ground, and goes forvard with greater ſecurity. Tuming his attention to the preſent appearance of things upon this globe, he pronounces from the view that the whole earth was at firſt under water. This water he ſuppoſes to have been the lighter parts of its former evaporation, which, while the earthy particles ſunk downwards by their natural gravity, floated on the ſurface, and covered it for a conſiderable ſpace of time.  The ſurface of the earth,” ſays he æ,  muſt have been in the beginning much leſs ſolid than it is at preſent; and, conſequently, the ſame cauſes, which at this day produce but very ſlight changes, muſt then, upon ſo complying a ſubſtance, have had very conſiderable effectss We have no reaſon to doubt but that it was then covered with the waters of the ſea; and that thoſe waters were above the tops of our higheſt mountains, ſince, even in ſuch elevated ſituations, we find ſiells and æther marine productions in very great abundance. It appears alſo that the ſea continued for a conſiderable time upon the face of the earth: for as theſe Iayers of ſhells are found ſo very frequent at ſuch great depths, and in ſuch prodigious  Theorie de la Terre, vol. L. . 11I. objects on the ocean, . they ſeem to Tubſide gradually below the viſible horizon. Ships. at a diſtance on the vater are not viſible in their hulls; at a greater diſtance, their mainſails diſappear; and at a greater ſtill, their topſails; which could not be, if they ſailed on a plain. But. that the earth ĩs really globular was at length practically demonſtrated by the adventurous pro|: of ſalling round it, which has ſeveral times been accomplimed. i ſThis fact being premiſeq, Iet us conſideri in what quantities, it ſeems impoſſible for ſuch numbers to have been ſupported all alive at one time; ſo that they muſt have been brought there by fuceeſive de3oſition,. Theſe ſells allo are found in the bodies of the hardeſ rocks, where they could not have been depoſited æll at once, at the time of the deluge, or at any ſuch irſtant revolution; ſince that would be to ſuppoſe, that all the rocks in which they are found were, at that inſtant, in a ſtate of diſſolution, which would be abſurd to aſſert. The ſea, therefore, depoſited them where ever they arè now to be fcurd, and that by ſlow and ſucceſſive degrees. e It vill appear, alſo, that the ſea covered the w noſe earth, from the appearance of its layers, which lying regularly one above the other, ſeem allto reſemble the ſediment formed at diferent times by the ocean. Hence, by the irregular force of its wæves, and its currents driving the bott om into ſand- banks, mountæins muſt have been gradually  ſorme- vithin this univerſal covering of waters; and theſe ſucceſively raiſing their heads above its ſurface, muſt, in time, have formed the higheũt ridges of mountains upon land, together with continents, idands, and Iow grounds, all in their turns. This opinion will receive additional weight by conſidering, that in thoſe parts of the earth where the power of the ocean ĩs greateſt, the inequalities on the ſurface of the earth are higheſt: the ocean's pover is greateſt at the equator, where its winds and tides are moſt conſtant; and, in fact, the mountains at the equator are found to he higher than in any other part of the world. The ſea, thereſore, has produced the principal changes i in our earth: rivers, volcanoes, earthquaes, ſtorms, and rain, having made but ſlight alterations, and only ſuch æ as have aſfected the globe to very Inconſiderable depths.? OGounsuiTus Hiſory of the Earth and anmated Nature, Vol. I. p: 22, &c. manner the known laws of nature were likely to act upon a maſs of materials ſuch as enter into the compoſition of this globe. The firſt principle of the law of gravitation is, that the conſtituent particles of all bodies attract each other mutually, whence ariſe their common centers of gravity. Hence all fluids aſſume a ſpherical form, from the particles mutually attracting each other; and no bodies but fluids being capable of obeying the laws of gravitation, ſo as to become ſpherical, ĩt is preſumed that the earth was originally in a fluid ſtate. The carth revolves round its center, and the centrifugal force increaſes in proportion to the diſtance from the axis of motion; all bodies, therefore, revolving round their axis in a ſtate oſ fluidity, will neceſſarily depart from the ſpherical form, and aſſume that of an oblate ſpheroid. Such, by actual menſuration, is found to be the form of the earth; and this is alſo demonſtrated, by aſtronomical obſervations, to be the caſe with all the other planets. It is therefore highly probable, that all theſe bodies were originally fluid, and only departed in ſome meaſure from the ſpherical form, in conſequence of a revolution on their axis. It is not natural or eaſy to ſuppoſe, that the earth and planets have, ſince their exiſtence, been reduced, by any ſolvent principle, from a ſolid to a ſluid ſtate. It is much more obvious to believe, that ſuch was their ſtate at their firſt creation. It follows of conſequence, that they had a beginning, and have not exiſted from eternity, as ſome fantaſtical writers have been Inclined to imagine. If ſuch was the original ſtate of the earth, it follows, that it was at ſirſt abſolutely unfit for animal and vegetable life; and, therefore, theſe muſt have been aſter- creations. This account, ĩt is obſervable, agrees admirably with the Moſaic account of the creation, as vell as with the opinions of the moſt ancient phileſophers, hiſtorians, poets, &c. that is, with the traditions of the firſt ages. It ĩs the opinion of Mr. Whitehurſt, that the component parts of the earth, at its firſt formation, exiſted in a ſtate of actual ſolution, and thet they ſubſided partly into ſolid bodies, and partly into ſuids, by the mutual action of theſe particles upon each other. We have ſeen that there exiſts between different particles of matter what is called elective or chemical attraction, by which ſubſtances having certain properties in common are diſpoſe? t unite; and by the combinations thus formed (whether by an immediatę act of omnipotence, or whether by ſome more gradual proceſs) the ſuſpenſion oſ the component parts of the chaotic maſs would be effectually deſtroyed, and bodies would apprcach towards their center of gravity in proportion to their reſpective denſities. That the laws of elective attraction have prevailed in the formation of the earth is evident from the ſameneſs of quality which is obſerved in diſſerent ſtrata of minerals. It has been, I think, demonſtrated, that the preſence of heat, caloric, or fire is the eſficient cauſe of fluidity. When the permanently elaſtic ſluids, thereſore, which conſtitute the atmoſphere, aſſumed their aeriform ſtate, and roſe from the chaotic maſs, a great quantity of heat muſt have become latent, while the remaining ſubſtances, from which the caloric was abſtracted, muſt have been conſiderably cooled, and it might, therefore, be expected, that thoſe kinds of matter, which had leaſt attraction for caloric, would aæſſume a ſolid ſorm; while others, wheſe attraction ſor that ſubſtance was intermediate, would remain in the ſtate of common fluids. It is thereſore, perfectly agreeable to ſound philoſophy to ſuppoſe, that the abſtraction of a conſiderable quantity of caloric, or the mætter of fire, from the chaotic maſs, would eſfectually deſtroy its fluidity, and would almoſt inſtantly produce all the diſferent mineral ſubſtances, which are obſerved in the bowels of the earth. Not that we are uncer any neceſſity of believing, that the whole internal ſubſtance of the earth exiſts at this hour as ĩt exiſted when creation was completed. There are a variety of proceſſes going on continually in the interior parts of the globe, beſide thoſe more ſudden and violent changes, which have been produced by earthquakes, ſloods, and volcanocs. By the ſubſiding of the denſer and more ſolid bodies, a conſiderable portion of the fluid matter would be left in a ſeparate ſtate, and would form large maſſes, or oceans of water. With reſpect to the formation of iſlands, nothing more vas neceſſary than the unequal and irregular ſubſiding of the diſferent parts of matter, which may have happened from a variety of cauſes; from the effects of elective attraction and cryſtallization; from the motion of the earth, and the ſlux and reſlux of the tides. The latter cauſe would neceſſerily remove the ſolid maſſes, as they were formed, from place to place, till theſe ſolid maſſes, meeting with others, or increaſing their bull by their action upon congenial particles, would, from their increaſed gravity and denſity, at length become ſtationary. Thus the ſurface of the earth is all irregular, and an iſland is no other than a hill or mountain, the adjacent vallies of which are flled with water. Some iſlands, however, we now, are of more recent origin. Some have been thrown up by volcanic eruptions; and ſome have apparently been formed by that extraordinary inſect which produces rocks of cora. The iſlands Delos and Rhodes are ſaid to have grown out of the ſea. Pliny mentions a number of other iſlands, which vere produced by ſubterraneous fires. In 1628, one of the iſlands of the Azores roſe up out of the bottom of the ſea, which in that place was one hundred and ſixty ſathoms deep; and this iſland, which is three leagues long, one league and an half broad, and three hundred and ſixty feet above the level of the water, roſe in fifteen days*. On the 20th of November, 1720, a ſubterraneous fire burſt out of the ſea near Tercera, one of the Azores, which threw up ſuch a quantity of ſtones, in the ſpace of thirty days, as formed an iſland two leagues in diameter, and nearly circular }. The Iſle of Sheppey contains a great variety of foſſil bodies, as well animal as vegetable, which evidently prove it to be an aſſemblage of adventitious matter. lIn every inſtance upon record, the ſragments of ſea ſhells are infinitely more numerous than the bones and teeth of filn. The latter too are but ſeldom depoſited in any other matter than in beds of ſand and gravel, and not in the ſolid beds of lime- ſtone, as the ſhells of fiſh generally are, even to the depth of many hundred yards, and diſpoſed throughout the whole extent of the ſtrata ĩ. There is no occaſion to ſuppoſe, that the whole  Sir William Hamilton's Obſervations on Vefuvius and Ztna. + Philoſophical Tranſactions, quoted by Whitehurſt. 1 Whitehurſt, p. 44, Chap. 435.] The whole Earth not habitable at mr. 305 ſurface of the earth was at once rendered habitable. From the ſcripture account we have reaſon to believe, that only a very ſmall part of it was inhabited for a long ſeries of time, viæ. the regions about the Euphrates, ſuppoſed to conſtitute the Garden of Eden. Here the terreſtrial animals were chiefly aſſembled, while the marine animals were diſperſed through the great abyſs of waters; and, ſfrom the extreme fecundity oſ thoſe animals, they would, in a very ſhort ſpace of time repleniſn the waters from pole to pole. If, therefore, we ſuppoſe (as is moſt probable) that the greater part of the earth was graduaily forming ĩtſelf according to the Iaws of nature and creation, in other words, according to the uſual proceſſes of attraction and combination, it is eaſy to conceive, that a part of theſe animals, eſpecially thoſe which are leaſt active, would be gradually intombed in the increaſing maſs, and this, as well as the deluge, will account for the great quantities of the exuviæ and bones of marine animals, eſpecially ſell fiſn, which are found in beds of lime-ſtone, gravel, &c. even on the tops of mounrains. We ſhall ceaſe to be aſtonithed at the immenſe quantities of ſhells, which are thus found imbedded in the earth, if we only conſider the amazingly prolific nature of theſe animals. It is not uncommon to take away a bed of theſe ſhell fiſh ſeveral fathoms in thickneſs; and, though the places whence they are removed appear entirely exhauſted, yet in the enſuing ſeaſon there ſhall be as many found in all theſe places as there vere before *. The bones or teeth oſ fiſh, Mr. Whitehurſt airms, as far as his knowledge extends, have never bæen found mixed with ſhells in the ſolid ſubſtance of limeItone. * Whitehurſt, p. 47. That at different periods the earth muſt have ſuffered very violent convulſions and diſcerptations of the ſolid parts, ve may reaſonably conclude ſrom the rugged and uncouth appearance of many of the mountainous parts of the world. We ſee rocks in ſome places torn aſunder, or, in appearance cut with a ſaw. Mr. Whitehurſt remar©s, that at Stafford and Newport, in Shropſhire, there are detached blocks oſ Corniſn mcor-ſtene, or granite, of conſiderable magnitude, though no ſuch ſtratum is known to exiſt nęarer than Cornvall. It is fair, thereſore, to conclude, that they have been thrown there by ſome viclent commotion or ſubterraneous convulſion. To the general deluge, that fact recorded with ſo much preciſion in the writings oſf Moſes, and confirnied by the traditions of every nation, ve muſt attribute much of the irregularities of the earths ſurface. It vould in ſome inſtances have the effect of reducing great maſſes of matter to æ ſecond ſtate of ſolution. Manry eminences would be levelled, and ſome of the allies would be ſilled up. Some parts, which before vere ſea, might receive ſuch an acceſſion of foreign matter as to fill up their beds, and on the ſubſiding of the waters to preſent to the eye a vaſt Ievel plain. Thoſe elevations, on the contrary, which conſiſted of ſolid maſſes of the harder ſtones, would have the lighter portions of earth waſhed away from their baſcs, and their height would receive a proportional increaſe. If pit coal, indeed, is of vegetable origin, it is difficult to account for the depoſtion of ſuch a quantity of vegetable matter beneath the ſurface oſ the earth, on any other hypotheſis than that of a deluge; and though much of the exuviæ of ſell-fiſh might be involved ĩn the fiiſt ages ſucceeding the creation, in the manner Mr. Whitehurſt ſuppoſes, much greater quantities vould be inhumed at the deluge. The other animal matters found in a foſſil ſtate, particularly the horns, ſkeletons, and bones of animals, which are much larger than any now found upon the earth, can only be accounted for upon this hypotheſis. Such are thoſe mentioned by Buffon, which were dug up in America, near the river Ohio, a ſingle tooth of which, belonging to a large row, weighed upwards of eleven pounds, and a ſingle thigh bone was upwards of four feet in length. In the year 1783, a ſkeleton of an immenſe animal oſ the deer kind was found on an eſtate belonging to Dr. Percy, Biſhop of Dromore. It was dug out of a marle pit, under a peat moſ, and was found ſurrounded by ſhells æard other marine productions. The horns were ſeven feet and one inch in height, the length of the ſcull nearly two feet, the breadth of the forehead nearly a foot, and the bones of an enormous ſize. In Siberia, in America, and even in England, the bones and teeth of the elephaent, hippopotamus, and other animals, which never have exiſted in thoſe climates, have been found, and even theſe were lurger than thoſe of any ſuch animals now exiſting. To the deluge, therefore, much of the preſent inequalities of the carth may be rationally attributed. But there are other cauſes which may have operated both before and ſince. Jt ĩs a fact, which will ſcarcely admit of diſpute, that volcanic eruptions were much more frequent in the early ages oſ the worid than at preſent; the veſtiges of volcanoes, ænd, even the exhauſted craters, are oſten found, where there is now not the leaſt appearance of ſubterrancous fire. This fact ĩs alſo eaſily accounted for on philoſophical principles. The imperfect, and, if I may ſo ſpeali, accidental mixture of diſcrent bodies, would in many caſes produce ſpontaneous inflammation in the early ages of the world, whereas, as the earth grows older, theſe materials muſt be exhauſted, or rather formed into other combinationss Many mountains, we knov, are of volcanic origin, and thereſore many of them of a date long poſterior to the æra of creation. Such appears to be the moſt rational account of the ſtructure of the earth, as far as we are warranted by actual experiment, or well authenticated obſervation. The ſucceeding chapters of this book will ſerve to explain more ſatisfactorily the different appearances of various portions of the globe. I ſhall therefore proceed, without further digreſſion, to treat more particularly of mountains, volcanoes, and the other phenomena more immediately connected with this C n1 A P. XLVI. MOUNTAINS. Diſtinction. betaveen Hills and MountainsMountains primæval or scondary ranite Mountains only ſuppoſed in general primæval S&ome Li ſtue Mountains primæval.Alluvial Mountains. Eatire and stratiſied Mountains Mountains homogeneous and heterogencis.—Coæfuſed MountainsVolcanic Mountains Height of Mouniaoiu, how meaſured Computed Heights of the moſi re-martable MountainsLine of Congelation in different Parts of the Verla. LEVATIONS, conſiſting chieſly of clay, ſand, 24 or gravel, are called hills. Thoſe which conſiſt chiefly of ſtone are called mountains. Mountains are divided into primæval, that is, of equal date with the formation of the globe, and ſecondary or alluvial. Among primæval, thoſe of granite hold the firſt place. The higheſt mountains and moſt extenſive ridges throughout the globe are of that kind; as the Alps and Pyrenees, in Europe; the Altuiſchan, Uralian, and Caucaſus, in Aſia; and the Andes, in America. The higheſt of them never contain metallic ores; but ſome of the lower contain ores of copper and tin. The granite next the ore always abounds in mica. Petrifactions are never found in theſ⸗ primæval mountains. That the formation of theſe mountains preceded that of vegetables and animals, is juſtly inferred ſfrom their containing no organic remains, either in the ſorm of petrifaction or impreſſion. Naturaliſts are agreed, that granites were formed by cryſtallization. This operation probably took place aſter the formation of the armoſphęre, and the gradual excavation of the bed of the ccean, when the dry land appeared. For, as was remarked in the preceding chapter, by means of the ſeparation of the acriform fluids, which conſtitute the atmoſphere, the evaporation oſ part of the water into the atmoſphere, and the gradual retreat of the remainder, the various ſpecies of earths, beſore diſiolved or diffuſed through this mighty maſs, were diſpoſed to coaleſce, and among theſe the ſiliceous muſt huve been the ſirſi, as it is the leaſt ſoluble; but as the ſiliceous earth has an æſſinity to the other earths with which it was mixed, ſome of theſe muſt have united in various proportions, and thus have formed, in diſtinct maſſes, the felt ſpar, ſhoerl, and mica, which compoſe the granite. Calcareous earth enters very ſparingly into the compeſition of this ſtone; but æ5 it is found in ſhcerl, which is frequently a comTOnCent part of granite, it follows that it muſt be one of the primitive earths, and not entirely derived from murine exuviæ, as ſome have ſuppoſcd. Quartæ can rever be ſuppoſed to be a product of fire; ſor in a very low heat it burſts, cracks, and loſes ĩts tranſparency, and in the higheſt degree of heat that we can produce, is infuſible, ſo that in everyeſſential point qt is diſferent from glaſs, to which ſome have compared it. As granite contains earths of every genus, we may conclude, that all the ſimple earths are origina. This, however, is no proof that they are in reality ſimple and uncompounded of other principles; but they muſt be conſidered as ſuch in the preſent ſate of our knowledge. Though water undoubtedly dates ſrom creation, yet late experiments have ſhewn it to be a compound, as was formerly ſtated. Mountaine, which conſiſt of Iime ſtone or marbles oſ a granular or ſcaly texture, and not diſpoſed in Ttrata, ſcem alſo to have preceded the creation of animals, for no organic traces are found in them. Some of thoſe, which conſiſt of argillaceous ſtones, and ſome of the ſiliceous, contain alſo no organic remains. Theſe oſcen conſiſt of parallel ſtrata of nequal thickneſs, and the lower are harder and leſs thick than the upper, and therefore ſeem to have been formed earlier than the upper. Alluvial mountains are evidently oſ poſterior formation, as they contain petriſactions and other veſtiges oſ organic ſubſtances, and theſe are always ſtratified. Mountains, as to ſtructure are entire, ſtratified, and confuſed Entire mountains are formed oſ huge maſſes of ſlone, without any regular fiſſures, and are moſtly homogeneous. They conſiſt chiefly of granite, ſometimes gneiſſ, ſchiſtus, flag? ſtone, ſaud ſtore, limeſtone, gypſom, porphyry or trapp. Some in Sweden and Norway conſiſt of iron ore. The ſtratified mountains are thoſe whoſe maſs ĩs regularly divided by joints or fiſſures; theſe are called horizontal, riſing, or dipping. Homogenous ſtratified mountains conſiſt chieſly of ſtones f the argillaceous genus, or of the fiſſile compound ſpecies of the ſiliceous genus, as metallic rock; ſornetimes of limeſtone of a granular or ſcaly txture, in which no animal veſtiges appear. This lime-ſtone repoſes on the argicou or ſiliccous ſtrata: ſometimes the argillaceous are covered with maſies of granite, ſometimes of lava. Theſe mountains, particularly thoſe of gneiſs, nietullic rock, and horn-ſtone, are the chieſ ſeat of metællic oress. When covered with lime-ſtone, the ore ĩs gencrally between the lime-ſtone and the argillaccous ſtones. Theſe ores run in veins, not in ſtrata. '  A rock conãſling oſ mica, lapũ ollaris, and quartzæ. Petrifactions are found upon, but not in, theſe mountains. Heterogeneous, or compound ſtratified mountains, conſiſt of alternate ſtrata of varicus ſpecies of ſtones, earths, ſands, &c. The lime-ſtone here is always of the laminar, and not of the granular or ſcaly ind, and when ĩt contains any ore, it is placed between its Iaminæ. Stones of the ſiliceous genus ſeldom form ſtrata in theſe mountains, except lavas; but the ſtrata are frequently interrupted by ſiliceous maſſes, as jaſper, porphyry, & c. Coul, bitumen, petrifactions, and organic impreſſions, are found in theſe mountains, alſo falts and calamine. There are other mountains, which cannot properly be called ſtratified, as they conſiſt only of three immenſe maſſes, the loweſt granite, the middle argillaceous, and the upper lime-ſtone. Metallic ores are found in the argillaceous part, or between ĩt and the lIime. ſtone. Confuſed mountains conſiſt of ſlones heaped together without order, their interſtices filled with clay, ſand, and mica. They ſcarcely ever contain any ore. Beſides theſe, there are mæny mountains in different parts of the world, which derive their origin from volcanoes;. but of theſe it will be neceſſary to treat in the ucceeding chapter. The height of mountains is uſually calculated by means of the barometer, upon the principles already explained. For this purpoſe two columns of mercury, or barometers, are provided, and one is kept at the foot of the mountain while the other is carried to its ſummit. The degree of heat, iſ not equal, ĩs reduced by calculation to an equality, and for this purpoſe a thermometer is attached to each of the barometers. The degree of heat, to which both are reduced, is commonly 51°, if, however, eſther of the barometers ſtands at 30 inches, and the annexed thermometer at 55°, no reduction is to be mede in the degrees indicated by that barometer; but if either oſ them is at 30, and the thermometer below 550, we muſt add the expanſion the mercury in the barometer would have experienced at the heat of 55. If the heat ſould, on the contrary, be above 55°, we muſt ſubſtract the degree of expanſion which it gains by that heat. Every degree of Fahrenheit's ſcale produces an expanſion of oo. 304 of the barometrical inch, when the barometer is at 30; when, thereſore, the thermometer is at 11° below or above 55°, we mũſt add in the former, or ſubſtract in the latter cale, eleven times that number from the barometrical height. In the ſame manner it may be calculated, whatever is the height of the barometer. When this matter is aſcertained, the height is eaſily found by comparing the two barometers and cælculating the denſity of the air in the higher regions according to the principles of geometrical progreſſion. The higheſt mountains are thoſe which are ſituated at or near the equator; and the Andes are generally allowed to be the higheſt cf theſe. Catopaxi, one of the Andes, which was meaſured by Ulloa and thæ French academicians, vas found to be rather more than three miles above the level of the ſea; whereas the higheſt point of the Alps is not above a mile and a half. Mount Caucaſus approaches neareſt to the height of the Andes of any of the Aſiatic mountains. The Pike of Teneriſf, which has been ſo much celebrated, is about a mile and a half in height. It is an extræaordinary circumſtance, that the moon, which is a body ſo much ſmaller than our earth, ſhould ſo greatly exceed it in the irregularities of its ſurface; the mountains in that planet being calculated d nine miles in height. ine of congelation, or perpetual froſt, on mouncalculated at 15,400 feet, at or near the equahe entrance of the temperate zone, at 13,428; riff, at 1,000; in Auvergne (lat. 45.) 6,740; lat. 52.) 5,740. On the Andes, vegetation t 14,697 feet; and on the Alps, at ꝗ,585. is ſo dry in theſe elevated ſituations, that M. obſerved, that on the Pic de Midi, one oſ the 5, ſalt of tartar remained dry for an hour and a ugh it immediately moiſtened in the ſame temat C nu a r. XIVvII. VOLCANOES. Gereral Obſorvations on Velcanes. Their Counsction avith the Sea Immenſe Force of ſubterraneus Fires exemplified in vorious Inſtances. hcory of Velcances.Great Depth.Traces of Volcanoes ia digerent Paris of the Herld —Deſcrittion of ILtna.Eruption of Veſuvius, in 1794. O LCANOES are peculiar to no climate, and bnhave no neceſſery or regular connection with any other mountains, but ſeem to have ſome with the ſea, for they are generally in its neighbourhood. It has been remarked by thoſe who have obſerved them, that volcanoes often throw out mutters which belong to the ſea, as the relics of ſiſh, ſea-weed, and often immenſe quantities of ſea-water itſelf. Sir Wiliiam Hamilton obſerves, in the Philoſophical Trænſactions for the year 1776,  that the operations of Veſuvius are very capricious and uncertain, except that the ſimoke increaſes conſiderably and conſtantly when the ſea is agitated, and the wind blows from that quarter. There are ancient extinguiſhed volcanoes, it is true, which are inland; but this is only one of many proof: that the ſea covered thoſe countries at ſome remete period. Volcanic mountains are of all heights; ſorne ſo low as four hundred and fiſey ſeet, as that of Tanna; Veſuvius is three thouſand ſix hundred feet high, and tna eleven thouſand. They in general form loſty ſpires, and the volcano itſelf is internally ſaped like an inverted cone, placed on a broader baſis. This cone is called the cratęr, or bowl, and through it diæ lava generally paſſes, though ſometimes it burſts through the ſides, and even proceeds occaſionally from the bottom of the mountain. Sometimes the crater falls in and is effaced, ſometimes, in extinguiſhed volcanoes, it is filled with water. Sub-marine volcanoes have been obſerved, and from theſe ſome iſlands have derived their origin. Volcænic fires, taking place at the bottom of the ocean, would ſrequently, by the expanſive force of the ſteams which are generated, elevate thoſe parts which were once at the bottom of the deep, and overſ=low thoſe which vere habitable earth. It is very probahly conjectured, as was noticed in a preceding chapter, that ſubterraneous convulſions operated more poverfully in the early ages of the world than at any later period; and indeed ſuch an hypotheſis is ſupported by the moſt probable reaſoning, ſince we may well conceive, that at the firſt conſolidation of the earth, much heterogeneous matter would be included in the different maſſes, which might produce more frequent fermentations than at any after periods, when theſe have been, if I may ſo expreſs it, purged off by frequent eruptions, and in many parts, perhaps, rectified and aſimilated by ſ=low and ſecret proceſſes in the bowels oſ the earth. But hiſtory was not cultivated till a very late period, and the moſt eventſul ages of nature have paſſed unrecorded. The force of ſubterraneous ſires, or rather oſ the ſteam which is generated by them, is ſo great, rhat conſiderable rocks have been projected by Veſcvius to the diſtance of eight miles. A ſtune was once thrown from the crater oſ that volcano twdlve miies, and fell upon the Marquis of Lauro's houſe at Nola, which it ſet on firee. One alſo, which meaſured twelve ried, in 1767, by the projectile ſorce of the ſteam, a quarter of a mile from the crater. In an eruption of tna, a ſtone, fifteen feet long, was ejected from the crater to the diſtance of a mile, and buried ĩtſelf eight feet deep in the ground. A volcano broke forth in Peru, in 1600, accompanied with an earthquake, and the ſand and aſhes which were cjected covered the fields ninety miles one way and one hundred and twenty another. Dreadful thunders and lightning were heard and ſeen for upwards of ninety miles round Araquapa during this eruption, which ſeemed to denote ſome connection between the electric matter and theſe volcanic fires*; and this fact is ſtrongly confirmed by the very accurate obſervations of Sir William FHamilton, which I ſhall afterwards have occaſiun to notice more at large. Both the inſide of the crater and the baſe of many volcanoes conſiſt of lava, either entire or decompoſed, nearly as low as the level of the ſea, but they ſinally reſt either on granite, as in Peru, cr ſchiſtus, as the extinguiſned volcanoes of Heſſe and Bohemia, or on Iime-ſtone, as thoſe oſ Sileſia, Mount Veſuvius, &c. No ore is found in theſe mountains, except that of iron, of which Iava contains from twenty to twentyfive parts in the hundred, and ſome detached fragments of the ores of copper, antimony, and arſenic. Veſuvius cjected, ſrom the year 1779 to 1783, 309,658, 161 cubic feet of matter of different kinds; ve muſt therefore conclude the ſeat of theſe fires to be ſeveral miles, perhaps hundreds of miles, below ihe level of the ſea; and as iron makes from onefourth to one- fiſth of theſe ę-ections, we muy infer that * Dr. Hookes poſthumous Werks, p. 304. 3220. Artificial Voleano. IBook VI. the internal parts of the earth 2bound much i in this metal. i ; The origin of theſe ſubterraneous fires is not eaſily explained. Iron filings mixed with povdered ſulphur, and the whole moiſtened with water into a paſte, wve have ſormerly ſeen, will ſell, become hot, and, if the quantity is conſiderable, will throw out a blue flame: It is a mixture of this kind which is uſed for making an artificial earthquake, for ſuch a quantity of inlammable gas is produced during the fermentation, that if the maſ is buried in the carth, the gas will ſorce a paſſage for its eſcape, and exhibit, on a ſmall ſcale, the phenomena of an earthquake. I. Lemery ſeems to have been the firſt perſon who iiluſtrated, in this manner, the origin of volcanic fires and carthquakes.. He mixed twenty-five pounds of iron ſilings with an equal weight of ſulphur, and having made them into a paſte with the addition of water, he put them into a pot, covered them vith 3 cloth, and buried them a foot under ground. In about eight or nine hours rime the earth ſwelled, became warm, and eracked; and hot ſulphureous vapours were perceived *. Nov, large beds of martial pyrites, which Hllt are * Thàt part of this experiment (ſays Biſop Watſon) which relates to the production of fire, by the fermentation of iron filings and ſulphur when mãde into a paſte, has been frequertly repeated ſince the Time of Mr. Lemery. I myſelf have made it more than once, but I have nothing materĩal to add to his account, except that the flame, when the experiment is made in the open aly, is of very ſort duration; and that the vhole maſs, after the extinction oſ the flame, contintes at intervals, for a longer or ſhorter time, according to ĩts quantity, to throw out ſrarks; and that a ladle fll of the ignited maſs, being dropped down from a conſiderable height, deſcends like a mover of red- hot ahes, much reſembling the paintings of the eruptions of Mount Veſuvius, which may be ſcen at the Britih Muſeum. I has been obſerved, that large ſ Chap. 47.] Proboble C⸗ uſe of Volcaric Vires, ii 323 are natural combinations of jron and ſulphur, are known to exiſt in different parts of the earth; the only difficulty which attends 1his explanation of the origin of voleanoes, as vell as of earthquales, ĩs, that the preſence of air is in general neceſſary for the production of actual flame. It is well nown, however, that martial pyrites, when moiſtened, acquire heat; and if we ſuppoſe the heated pyrites to have been in contæct with black wad and petroleum, ve may ſuppoſe the flame to ariſe, as we ſee it produced by art, ſrom the deſiccation of the former ſubſtance, and. its mixture with mineral oil. Many minerals, when heated, afford vital air, a Very ſmall quantity of which is ſuſficient to produce flame; this flame, once produced, may be ſupported from other ores, and the combuſtion be maintãined by the preſence of bituminous ſchiſtus, bitumen, and coal. Mar], ſchiſtus, hornſtone, ſhoerl, with a further addition of iron, are the quentities of the materials are not requiſite to make the experiment ſucceed, provided there be a due proportion of water: half a pound of ſteel filings, half a pound of flowers of- brimſtone, and fourteen ources of w ater, will, when well mixed, acquie heat enough to make the maſi take fire. That heat anã fire ſiould be gererated from the ſpontoneous actions of minerals upon each other, i is a phenomencn by no means ſingular in nature, how diſficult ſoever it: may be to account for i it, The heat of putreſcent dunghills, of the fermentin g juices of vegetables, and, above all, the ſpontaneous firing of i not properly dried, are obvious prooſs that vegeables poſſeſs tũ property as vell as minerals. In both vegetables and mirerals, a definite quantity of moiſture is requiſite to enable them to commence ihat inteſtine motion of their parts, which ĩs neceſſary for the production of firee. Iron and ſulphur would remain mixed together for ages without taking fire, if they Were either kept perfectly free from moiſture, or drenched with too much water; and vegetables in Iike manner, which are quite dry, or exceedingly wet, are incapasie of taking fire whilſt they continue in that ſlate. E true ſources of lava. It ſeems, however, aſter all, difficult to conceivæ that ſuch extenſive and intenſe ſires ſhould be maintained without the acceſs of conſiderable quantities of aĩr; that. fluid may therefore be poſſibly ſupplied by a communication with ſome extenſive caverns, which may themſelves receive it by openings at the diſtance oſ many miles from the crater of the volcano. It does not ſeem improbable that the volcanoes, which now burn, may have a communication with the cavities and craters of extinguiſhed volcanoes, and thence derive a ſopply of air ſomcient to æccount for the inflammation of large beds of pyrites and bituminous matterss. M. Buſfon ſuppoſes, that the ſeat of volcanic fires is ſituated. but æ very little way below the bed of the mountains; but it appears more probable, that it is in general many miles below the ſurſace oſ the earth, for the quantity of matter diſcharged from Ztna alone is. ſuppoſed, on a moderate calculation, to exceed twenty times the original bulk of the mountain, and thereſore could not have teen derived from ĩts contents alone, but muſt come from the deeper receſſes of the eaith. M. Condamine aſerts, that all the mountains in the reighbourhood of Naples exhibit undoubted marks of a volcanic originn He ſays, he could trace ihe lava, and other productions of ſubterraneous fire, from Naples to the very gates of Rome, pervading the whole ſoll, ſomętimes pure and ſometimes differently combined. Wherever I ſee,” ſays he,  on an elevated plain, a circular baſon, ſurrounded with calcined rocks, I am not deceived by the verdure of the adjacent fields; 3I can diſcover, beneath the ſnow itſelf, the traces of an extinguiſied ſire If there is a breach in the circle, I uſually find out, by following the declivity of the ground, the traces ofa rivulet;. or the bed Vcvf of a torrent, which ſeems as if it was hollowed in the rock, and this rock appears ſrequently to be pure lava. If the circumſference cf the baſon has no breach, the rain and ſpring waters, which are collected there, generally form a lake in the very mouth of the velcano. The Apennines, as well as the Cordeliers of Peru and Chili, he ſuppoſes to have been a chain of volcanocs. The chain in both inſtances is interrupted, and muny oſthe ſires either extinguiſned or ſmothered, but many remain ſtill actually burning. This intelligent author is, however, far from attributing to all mcuntains the ſame origin; and adds, that in that part of the Alps, which he travelled over, he could obſerve no ſuch appearances. The traces of volcanoes hiave been obſerved in Ireland by Mr. Whitehurſt. Though no viſible crater is remaining between Port Ruſh Strand and Balley Caſtle eaſtward, yet, he obſerves, that whole ſpuece, about tventy Engliſh miles, is one continved maſs of lava. The cliffs, he ſays, are truly ſtupendous, and bear every poſilble mark of having been originelly liquid firc. The elevation of that, at the fęot of which the Glants Caufcway is ſituated, he preſumes cannot be leſs than five or ſix hundred feet perpendicular above the level of the Atlantic ocean, and yet compoſed entirely of lava; the ſame appearances extend towards the ſouth upwards of twenty miles. The moſt remarkable volcanoes in Europe are Atna and Veſuvius, and as theſe are not too far diſtant, we have the moſt accuræte deſcriptions of them from travellers of the firſt talents and reputation.  ZEtna, which is the moſt ſtriking object in Sicily, and indeed one of the moſt magniſicent productions oſ nature, ariſes from an immenſe baſc, and mounts cqually on all ſides to ĩts ſummit. The aſcent on each ſide is computed at about thirty miles, and the circumference of ĩts baſe, at one hundred and thirtythrce; but as ĩt has never becn meaſured with any great degree of accuracy, its dimenſions are but imperſcctly Lno own.  The whole mountain is divided into three diſtinct regions, called La Regione Culta, or Iiedmenteſe, the fertile regions; La Regicia ò S;lvoſa, or Nemcrcſa, the voody region; and I⸗ Regiona Deſerta, or Scoperta, the barren region. Theſe difſer as materiully both in ciimar and production as the three zones of the earth, ard perhaps with equil propriety might have been ſtiled the torrid, the temperate, and the frigid Zone.  The ſirſt region oſ tha ſurrounds the baſe oſ the mountæin, and conſtitutes the moſ fertile country in the worid on all ſides oſ it, to the extent of fourteen or ſiſteen miles, where the woody region begins. It is compoſed almoſt ent irely of lava, which, in time, Decomes the moſt fertile of æll ſoils, but the roads, which are entirely over old lavas, now converted into orchards, virevards, and corn-fields, are execrable. The luvas, which ſorm this region, ari from a number of beautiful little mountains, every where ſcattered over the immenſe declivities of  m. Thnheſe are all either of a conical or ſemiſpherical figure, and are in general covered with beautiſul trees, ænd the moſt luxurious verdure. The formation oſ them is owing to the internal fires of ZEtna, which raging ſor a vent. at ſo vaſt a diſtance from the great crater that it cannot poſſibly be carried to the height oſ twelve or thirteen thouſand fect, which is probably the hieight of the ſtmmit of tne, muſt neceſſerily be diſchar ged at ſome other orific. After ſhaking the mountuin, and ĩts ncighbourhcod for ſome time, at nę th the . s Chap. 47. 5 Firmation nev Momeins v37 fire burſts open its ſide; and this is calleè an eruption. At firſt it emits only a thick ſmoke and ſowers of ahes. Theſe are followed by. red hot ſtones, and rocks of a great ſize, which are thron to an immenſe height in the air. Theſe, ſtones, together with the quantities of aſhes diſc harged at the ſame time, form thoſe mountains, which cover all the declivities of tra. The ſize of them is in proportion to the duration of the eruption. When it continues a conſiderable time, it ſometimes forms an elevation of one thouſand feet in perpendioular height, which' at its baſe is ſeven or eight miles in circumference. c After the formation of the new mountain, the lava commonly burſts out from its lower ſide, and, ſweeping every thing before it, is generally terminated by the ſea. Sometimes it iſſues from the ſide of the mountain, without theſe attending circumſtances, vhich is commonly the caſe with the eruptions of Vefuvius; in which the elevation being ſo much ſmaller, the melted matter is carried up into the crater, where jtis diſ=cdged without forming any new mountain, but only adding to the height of the old onẽ; till at length the lava, rſing near the ſummit, burſts the ſide of the crater. But tna being upon a much larger ſcale, one crater is not ſuſcient to give vent to ſuch immenſe oceans of liquid fire.  At Nicoloſi, which is only twelve miles up the mountain, the climate appears totally changed. When the heats at Catania are inſupportable, ànd the harveſt entirely over, the temperature of the air is moderate at Nicoloſi, and in many places the corn quite green. Mr. Brydone, in travelling over tna, was ſtruck vith the degree of wildneſ and ferocity which appeared in the inhabitants of the mounta in, and which reminded him of an obſervation made by the Padre della Tore, the hiſtoriographer of Mount Veſuviur, that in places where the air is moſt impregnated with ſulphur and hot exhalations, the people are always moſt wicked and vicious. It was with great diſculty he could perſuade the people of Nicoloſi to ſuffer his guide to attend him in the proſecution of his reſearches. They were exceſſivelv troubleſome, and extremely ſuſpicious that his views were directed to the difeovery of ſome hidden treaſure, the only motivæ to which they could aſcribe ſo fatiguing a journey.. At length one of them recollected having heard many of their old people ſay, that the ſ nglita had a queen that had burnt in the mountain for many years peſt, and imputed the viſits of ſeveral of that nation to their reſpect to their deceaſed ſovereign. Upon enquiring who this queen was, they ſaid her name was Anna, that ſhe was vife to a king who had been a chriſtian, but ſhe had made him a hereti], and was condemned to burn for ever in Mount Atna. As this could only relate to the unfortunate Anne Bullen, Mr. Brydone aſked if ſhe was the victim alluded to, and whether her huſband wes net likewiſe condemred to the ſame puniſhment.  Certainly, ſaid the man,  and all his heretic ſubjects too; and if you are of that number you need not be in ſuch a hurry to get there, you vill be ſure of iĩt at laſt.”  The beautiful country of Hybla, in the neighbourhood of Nicoloſi, after repeated viciſſitudes, is now educed to æ melancholy monument of the fury of Etna; it was ſo much celebrated for ĩts ſertility, and particularly ſor its honey, that it was called Mel Paſi, till it was overwhelmed by the lava of ſtna, and became torally barren, when, by a liind of pun, it obtained the name of Mal Paſi. On a ſecond eru ption, however, a ſertile ſower of aſhes reſtored its priſtine : . : I Chap. 47.] Eruptions of ini. 329 beauty, and ĩts ſormer appellation. But in the dreadful eruption of 1669 it was again reduced to the moſt deplorable ſterility, ſincè which ĩt is once more known by the name which denotesits' wretchedneſs. The eruption. that firſt deſtroyed this beautiful country, iſſued from Montpelieri, which it then formed. Ir deſtroyed a great number of villages and palaces, and in particuler two noble churches, which are extr mely regretted on account of three ſtatues, conſidered, at that time, as the moſt perſect in the iſand. They have attempted to recover them, but in vain, nor is it be; lieved they ever can; for the churches were built of lava, which is ſuppoſed: to melt as ſoon as it comes into contact with a torrent of newly erupted matter. Maſſũa; a Sicilian æuthor of great credit, affirms, that in ſome eruptions of æ&tna, the lava has poured down with ſuch a ſudden impetuoſity, that, in the courſe of a few hours, palaces; churches, and villages, have been entirely melted down, and the whole run oſf in fuſion: It is however probable, that the impetuous force of the torrent, rather than its incorporating with the old maſs, may in many of theſe inſtances have occaſioned this devaſtation. Thus much at leaſt is certain, that if the lava has had æny conſiderable time to cool, this ſingulas eſfect never happens. EEE lilt The contraſt between the different regions of Itna is s extremely ſtriking. On entering into the romantic foreſts of the Regiona S  luoſa, a new creation ſeems to ariſe. The air, which before was hot and ſultry, is cool and refreſhing, and every breeze loaded with delicious perfumes Fom the aromatic plants, with which the whole ground is covered. Indeed every beauty, and every horror in nature, ſeems to be united on this wonderful mountain, and the moſt oppoſite and diſſimilar objects a are promiſcuouſly blended toge: ther. Here we obſerve a gulph which threw out torrents of fire, now covered with the moſt tuxurious verdure. Delicious fruits ariſing from what was but Ilately a black aænd barren rock. Delightſul flowers covering the earth, the ſurface of which is but a ſew vards removed from lakes cf liquid fire and brimſtone. An immenſe gulph of ſire for ever exiſling in the midſt of ſnows which it has not the põwer to melt, and immenſe fields of ſnow and ice unceaſingly ſurrounding this gulph of ſire, which they have not the power to extinguiſh. The voody region of ZEtna aſcends for àbout eight or nine miles, and forms a zone of the brighteſt green around the mountain. In this region, near the ſyelonca del Copricle, or goats cavern, are two of the moſt beautiſul mountains that adorn the ſides of tna. Their hollow craters are ench of them conſiderably lorger than thet of Veſuvius. They are now filled vith ſetely oaks, and covered with the richeſt ſoll to a great depth. A mountain at ſome diſtance, which vas formed by æn eruption in 1766, was, in 177, ſtill on ſire; nor as the lIavæe by any means cold. This region of Em, like the Regicne Calta, i is compoſed of Iava but this is now covered with ſo deep a layer of earth, that it is no where to be ſeen, except in the beds of the torrents, in many of which it is worn down by the water to the depth of ſiſty or ſixty ſeet, and in one of them conſiderably more. On approaching La Regiene Scoperta, the trees begin to aſiume a vintry appearance, and every chjcct indicates the proximity of birrenreſs and etern⸗l froſ. On completely bidding adicu to the vegetable reę ons, an expanſe of ice preſents itſelf, which is ſuffient to fages r the moſt derermined reſolution. Above mendous heãd, vomiring torrents of thick ſmoke. The diſiiculty of aſcending this. part of the mountain; is greatly increaſed by the uncertainty of a ſecure footing; for the ſurface of the mountain being hot below, frequently melts the ſnow in particular ſpoũ, 2nd forms pools of water where it is impoſſible to foreſee the danger; ſometimes, likewiſe, it happens that the ſurface of the vater, as vell as the ſoow, is covered with Black ahes, which render it exceedingly deceitſul At ſirſt the aſcent is not ſoſteep, but it becomes ſo by degrees. In this region are the remains oſan anciert ſtructure called Ji T crre del Filoſoſo, and ſuppoſed Io. have been built by Empedocles, a native of grigentum, who is ſaid to have died 4008 yeãrs before the chriſtian era. His vanity, perhaps, rather than his philoſophy, led him to this elevated ſituation. Peſirous of being regarded as a god, he is recorded to have thrown Timſũlſ into the great gulph of Etnæ, in hopes that the people would imagine he had been taken up to heaven, and never ſoppoſing that his death would be diſcovered to mankind. But the treacherous mountain threw out his ſlippers, which were of braſs; and announced to the world the fate of the pretended philoſopher, vho preferred an airy fame, which he was beyond the reach f ẽnjc oying, to the ſolid advantages of exiſtence, and who was content to purchaſe he admiration of an ignorant multitude vith the meanneſs of deceit, and the ſacrifice of life. Many ſtriking re remains of the great eruption in 1669 are ſtill to be ſeen, and will long continue as memorials of that dreadſul event vhich overwhelmed Catania, and all the adjacent country. Tremendous Sce preſent ſtate of Sicily and Malta. . earthquales ſiook the iſland, and loud ſubterranecus bellowings were heard in the mountain. During ſome weeks, the ſun ceaſed to appeaer, and the &uy ſeemed changed into night. Borelli who vas a witneſs to theſe terrible phenomena, ſays, that at ĩength a rent, twelve miles in length, waes opened in the mountain, in ſome places of which, when they threw down ſtones, they could not hcar them reach the bottom. Burning rocks, ſixty palms in length, were thrown to ihe di it ance of a mile, and leſier Ttones were carried three miles. After the moſt violent ſtrug⸗ęles, and a ſaking of the whole iſland, an immenſe torrent of lava guſred from the rent, and ſprung up into the æir to the heighth of ſixty palms, whence it poured down the mountain, and overwhelmed every object in its way in one promiſcuous ruin, This deſtructive torrent, which burſt from the ſille of ſẽtnn at a place cælied Ricini, ruſred impetuouſy againſt the beautiful mountæin of Montpelieri, ainl pierced into the ground to a conſiderable depth; then dividing and ſurrounding the mountain, it united again on the ſcuth ſide, and poured deſolation upon the adjacent country. The progreſs of the torrent was at firſt at the rate of ſeven miles a day, but ĩt æfterwards took four days to travel ſixteen; wherever ĩt directed its courſe, the whole appearance oſ nature was changed, ſeveral hills were formed in places which were formerly vælleys, and a large lake was ſo entirely filled up by the melted maſs, as not to leave a veſtige remaining. In its courſe it deſcended upen a vi - belonging to a convent of Jeſuits, which was formed upon an ancient and probebly a very thin layer of lava, with a number of caverns and crevices under it. The liquid maſs entering into theſe excavations ſoon filled them up, and by degrees bore up the vineyard, which in a Chep. 47] City eifowed with Levo. 355 ſhort time, to the great aſtoniſment of the ſpectators, began to move avay, and was carried by the torrent to a conſiderable diſtance. In 1770 ſonie remains oſ this vineyard were ſtill to be ſeen, but the greater pare of it was entirely deſtroyed. 3i In vain did the terrified inhabitants of Catania  œu ſor protection to the miraculous veil, or expect deſence from the lofty walls of their city. After deſtroying ſeveral convents, churches, and villages, this fiery current directed its courſe to Catanĩa, where it poured impetuouſy over the ramparis, which are near ſixty ſeet in height, and covered up five of ĩts baſtions, with the intervening curtains. Afier laying waſte a great part of this Beautiful city, and entircly deſtroying ſeveral valuable rerains of antiquity, its further progreſs was ſtopped by the ocean, over whoſe banks it pourcd] its deſtructive current. In its courſe from the rent in the mountain, till its arrival in the ſea, i it is ſaid to have totally deſtroyed the prope rty of near æ thirty thouſand perſons. i Sitill however did the infatuated inha abitants of Cotania adhere to the remains of their almoſt fuined city, nor did even the more dreadſul calamity with which they were afterwards viſited, abate their attachment. Twenty-four years æſter the fatal eruption of 1669, a violent earthquake, which extended along all the eaſtern coaſt, and deſtroyed in one hour more than ſixty thouſand perſons, overthrew the remaining buildings of Catania, and buried a very conſiderable umber of its inhabitants under the ruins of their houſes and churches; but again the place was rebuilt; a new and elegant plan was adopted, and the city is now much handſomer than before. The principal ſtreets aræ vide, ſtræit, and well paved with lava. The cathedral, vhich vas founded in they vear 1094, has ſſered ſo greatly ſrom earthquakes, that a very ſmall part of the original ſtructure remains. The other religious edifices are proſuſely ornamented, but in a bad taſte. But if the united eſſects of attachment to their ative ſoil, of contempt for dangers to which tley are habituated, and of confidence in the miraculous vell, have occaſioned the wonderſul adherence of the Catanians to this d:ngerous ſituation from which they have ſo ſeverely ſuſſered, it muſt, however, be confeſed, that they have ſometimes derived advantages from the very evils which they have ſo much reaſon to dread. They were always in great want of a port, with which they were furniſhed by one of thoſe cã⸗pricious changes which nature ſo frequently males in this ever varying ſpor. A ſtream of Ilava running irto the ſea, formed a mole, which no expence could have fursiſed them with. This advantage, however, proved but temporary; there remained for ſome time a ſaeſe and commodious harbour, but by a ſubſequent eruption ĩt was entirely filled up and demoliſhed. The celebrated Biſhop Berkeley has deſcribed an eruption of Mount Veſuvius, of which he was a witneſs in the yeur 1717, and the reader will find his narrative in the ſirſt volume of Dr. Goldſmith's Hiſtory of the Eaerth and Animated Nature, p. 94. But the moſt complete and philoſophical æaccouſt of this moſt formidable phenomenon, a volcanic exrloſion, is that with which Sir William Hamilton has favoured the public, in deſcribing the late dreadſul eruption of that mountain in 1794; and this I ſhall endeavour to give, as nearly as poſſible, in his own words.  Sir William begins lils narrative with remarking, that the frequent ſlight eruptions of lava for ſome years paſt had iſſued from near the ſummit, and ran in ſmall channels in diſferent directions down the: flanks of the mountain, and from running in coveredd channels, had often an appearance as if they came immediately out of the ſides of Veſuvius, but ſuch lavas had not ſuficient force to reach the cultivated parts at the foot of the mountain. In the year 1779, the vhole quantity of the lava in fuſion having been at once thrown up vith violence out of the crater of Veſuvius, and a great part of it falling, and cooling on its cone, added much to the ſolidity of the walls of this huge natural chimney, and had not of late years allowed of a ſufficient diſcharge of lava to calm that fermentation, which by the fubterraneoòs noiſes heard at times, and by the exploſions of ſcoriæ and aſhes, was knovn to exiſt within the bowels of the volcano; ſo that the eruptions of late years, beſore this laſt, wereſimply from the lava having boiled over the crater, the ſides being ſufficiently ſtrong to confine it, and oblige it to riſe and overſ=low. The mountain had heen remarkably quiet for ſeven months before the Iate eruption, ror did the uſual ſmoke iſſue from its crater, but at times it emitted ſmall clouds of ſmoke that floated in the air in the ſhape of little trees. It was remarked by the Father Antonio di Petrizæi, a capuchin friar (ho printed an account oſ the late eruption) from his convent cloſe to the unſortunate town of Torre del Greco, that for ſome days preceding this eruption, a thick vapour was ſeen to ſurround the mountain, about a quarter of a mile beneath ĩts crater, and it was obſerved by him and others at the ſ ſametime, that both the ſun and the moon had c oſten an unuſual reddiſ caſt, The water of the great ſountain ⸗ at r Tore del Greco began to decreaſe ſom c days beſore the eruption, ſo that the wheels of a corn-mill, worked by that water, moved very ſlowly; it was neceſſary in all the othe vells of the town and its neighbourhood to lengihen the ropes deily, in order to reach the water; and ſome cf the wells became quite dry. Although moſt oſ the inhabitants were ſenſible of this phenomenon, rot ore of them ſeems to have ſuſpected the true cauſe of it. Eight days alſo before the eruption, a man and wo boys, being in a vineyard above Torre el Greco (and preciſely on the ſot - here one of the ev mouths opered, whence the principal current of Iova that deſtroyed the town iſſued) were much alarmed by a ſudden puſf of ſmoke which iſſued ſrom the earth cloſe to them, and was attended with a ſlight exloſion. Had this circumſtance, with that of the ſubterrneous nciſes heard at Reſima for two days before the eruption (wich the additional one of the decreaſe oſ water in the wells) been communicãted at the time, it would have required no great foreſight to have been certæin that an eruption of the volcano was near at hand, and that its force was directed par ticularly towards that part of the mourtain. On the 12th of June 1794, in the morning, there was a violent ſall of rain, and ſoon aæfter the inhabitants oſf Reſina, ſituated directly over the ancient town of Ierculaneum, were ſenſible of a rumbling ſubterraneous noiſe, which was not heard at Naples. From the month of January to the month of May, the atmoſphere had been generally calm, and there was continued dry weather, In the menth of May there was a little rain, but the weather was unuſually ſultry. For ſome days preceding the eruption, the Duke della Forre, a learned and ingenious nobleman, who publiſaed two letters upon he ſubject of the eruption, obſerved by his electrometers, that the atmoſphere was charged in exceſs with the electric fluid, and continued ſo for ſeveral days during the eruption. About eleven clock on the night of the 12th of June, the inhabitants of Naples were all ſenſible of a violent ſhock of an earthquake; the undulatory motion was evidently from eaſt to weſt, and appeared to have laſted near half a minute. The ſky, which had been quite clear, was ſoon after covered with black clouds. The inhabitants of the towns and villages, which are very numerous at the foot of Veſuvius, felt this earthquaxe ſtill more ſenſibly, and ſay, that the ſhock at firſt was from the bortom upwards, after which followed the undulation from eaſt to weſt This earthquake extended all over the Campagna Felice; and the royal palace at Caſerta, which is fifteen miles from Naples, and one of the moſt magnificent and ſolid buildings in Europe (the walls being eighteen feet thick) was ſhaken in ſuch a maænner as to cauſe great alarm, and all the chamber bells rang. It was likeviſe much felt at Beneventum, about thirty miles from Naoples; and at Ariano in Puglia, which is at a much greater diſtance; both theſe towns, indeed, have been often aſflicted with earthquakes. On Sunday the I5th of June, ſoon after ten òclock at night, another ſhock of an earthquake was felt at Naples, but did not appear to be quite ſo violent as that of the 12th, nor did it laſt ſo long; at the ſame moment a fountain of bright fire, attended with a very black ſmoke and a loud report, was ſeen to iſſue, and riſe to a great height, from about the middle of the cone of Veſuvius; ſoon after another of the ſame kind broe out at ſome little diſtance lower down; then, as ĩs ſuppoſed by the blowing up oſ a covered channel ſull of red hot lava, it had the appearance as iĩi the lava had taken iĩts courſe directly up the ſteep cone of the volcano. Freſh fountains ſucceeded one another haſtily, and all in a direct line tending, for about a mile and a half down, towards the towns of Reſina and Torre del Greco. Sir William Hamilton could count fifteen of them, but believes there were others obſcured by the ſmoke. It ſeems probable, that all theſe fountains of fire, from their being in ſuch an exact line, proceeded from one ænd the ſame Iong fiſſure down the flanks of the mountain, and that the Iava and other volcanic matter forced its way out of the wideſt parts of the crack, and formed there the little mountains and craters that will be deſcribed in their proper place. It is impoſible that any deſcription can give an idea of the blazing ſcene, or of the horrid noiſes that attended this great operation of nature. It was a mixture of the Ioudeſt thunder, with inceſſant reports, like thoſe from a numerous heavy artillery, accompanied by a continued hollow murmur, like that of the roaring of the ocean during a violent ſtorm; and, added to theſe was another blowing noiſe, like that of the aſcending of a large ſlight of ſky-rcekets, or that which is produced by the action of the enormous bellows on the furnace of the Carron iron foundery in Scotland. The frequent falling of the huge ſtones and ſcoriæ, which were thrown up to an incredible height from ſome of the new mouths, one of which having been ſince meaſured by the Abbẽè Tata was ten feet high, and thirty-five in circumſerence, contributed undoubtedly to the concuſſion of the earth and air, which kept all the houſes at Naples for ſeveral hours in a conſtant tremor, every door and window ſhaking and rattling inceſſantly, and the bells ringing. This was an awſul moment] The ſky, from a bright full moon and ſtarc light, began to be obſcured; the moon had preſently the appearance oſ being in an eclipſe, and ſoon aſter was totally Ioſt in obſcurity. The murmur of the prayers and lamentations of a numerous populace forming various proceſſions, and parading. in the ſtreets, added to the horror. As the lavæ did not appear to have yet a ſufficient vent, and it was now evident that the earthquakes already felt had been occaſioned by the air and fiery matter confined within the bowels of the mountain, and probably at no ſmall depth (conſidering the extent of thoſe earthquakes) Sir William recommended to the company that was vith him, who began to be much alarmed, rather to go and view the mountain at ſome greater diſtance, and in the open air, than to remain in the houſe, which was on the ſea ſide, and in the part of Naples that is neareſt and moſt expoſcd to Veſuvius. They accordingly proceeded to Poſilipo, and viewed the conflagration, now become ſtill more conſiderable, from the ſea-ſide under that mountain; but whether from the eruption having increaſed, or from the loud reports of the volcanic exploſions being repeated by the mountain behind them, the noiſe was much louder, and more alarming than that they had heard in their firſt poſition, ai leaſt a mile nearer to Veſuvius. After ſome time, and which was ahout two oclock in the morning of the 16th, having obſerved that the lavæs ran in abundance, freely, and with great velocity, having made a conſiderable progreſs towards Reſina, the town which it ſirſt threatened, and that the fiery vapours which had been confined had now free vent through many parts of a crack of more than a mile and a half in length, as was evident from the quantity of inflamed matter and black ſmoke, which continued to iſſue from the new mouths above mentioned, vithout any interruption, our author concluded that at Naples all danger from earthquakes, vhi?h had been his greateſt apprehenſion, was totally removed, ænd he returned to his former ſtation at St. Tucia at Naples. All this time there was not the ſmalleſt appearance of fire or ſmoke from the crater on the ſummit of Veſuvius; but the black ſmoke and aſhes iſſuing continually from ſo many new mouths, or craters, formed an enormous and denſe body of clouds over the whole mountain, and which began to give ſigns of being replete with the electric ſuid, by exhibiting flaſhes of that ſort of zig-zag lightning, which in the volcanic language of the country is called ferilli, and which is the conſtant attendant on the moſt violent eruptions. Sir Villiam Hamilton proceeds to remark, that during thirty years that he had reſided at Naples, and in which ſpace of time he had been witneſs to many eruptions of Veſuvius, of one ſort or other, he never ſaw the cloud of ſmoke replete with the electric fire, except in the two great eruptions of 1767, that of 1779, and during this more formidable one. The electric fire, in the yeæar 1779, that played conſtantly vithin the enormous black cloud over the crater of Veſuvius, and ſeldom quitted it, was exactly ſimilar to that which is produced, on a very ſmall ſcale, by the conductor of an electrical machine communicating with an inſulated plate of glaſs, thinly ſpread over with metallic filings, &c. when the electric ꝶatter continues to play over it in zig-lag lines without quitting it. He was not ſenſible of any noiſe attending that operation in 17795; whereas the diſcharge of the electrical matter from the volcanic clouds during this eruption, and particularly the ſecond and third days, cauled exploũ]ns Iike thoſe of the loudeſt thunder; and indeed. the ſtorms raiſed evidently: by the ſole power of the volcano, reſembled in every reſpect all other thunder-ſtorms; the lightning falling and deſtroying every thing in its courſe. he houe of the Marquis of Berio at St. Jorio, ſituate at the foot: of Veſuvius, during one of theſe volcaric ſtorms vas: ſtruck with lightning, which: having ſhattered many doors and. windows, and damaged the furniture, leſt for ſome time a ſtrong ſmell of ſulphur in the rooms it paſſcd through. Out of theſe gigantic and volcanic clouds, beſides the lightning, both during this eruption and that of 1775, the author adds, he had, with many others, ſeen balls of fire iſſue, and ſome of a conſiderable magnitude, which burſting in the air, produced nearly the ſame effect as that from the air- balloons. in fire-works, the electric fire that came out having the appearance of the ſerpents with which thoſe fire-work balloons are often filled The day on which Naples was in the greateſt danger from the volcanic clouds, two ſmall balls of fire, joined together by a ſmall link like a chain- ſhot, fell cloſe to his Caſino at Poſilipo; they ſeparated, and one ſell in the vineyard above the houſe, and the other in the ſea, ſo cloſe to ĩt that he heard the ſplaſh in the water. The Abbẽ Tata, in his printed account of this eruption, mentions an enormous ball of this kind which flew out of the crater of Veſuvius while he was ſtanding on the edge of it, and which burſt in the air at ſome diſtance from the mountain, ſoon after vhich he heard a noiſe like the fall of a number of ſtones, or of a heavy ſiower of hail. During the eruption of the 15th at night, few of the inhabitants of Naples, from the dread of earthquakes, ventured to go to their bedss. The common people were either employedin devout proceſſions in the ſtreets, or were ſleeping on the quays and open places ; the nobility and gentry, having cauſed their horſes to be taken from their catriages, ſlept in them in the ſquares and open places, or on the high roads juſt out of the town. For ſeveral days, while the volcanic ſtorms of thunder and lightning laſted, the inhabitants at the foot of the volcano, both on the ſea ſide and the Somma ſide, were oſten ſenſible of a tremor in the carth, as well as of the concuſſſons in the air, but at Naples only the earthquakes of the 12ath and 15th of June were diſtinctly and univerſally felt: this fair city could not certainly have reſiſted, had not thoſe earthquakes been fortunately of a ſhort duration. Throughout this eruption, which continued in force about ten days, the fever of the mountain, as has been remarked in former eruptions, ſhowed itſelf to be in ſome meãſure periodical, and gererally was moſt violent at the break of day, at noon, and at midnight. About four òclock in the morning of the 16th, the crater of Veſuvius began to ſow ſigns oſ being open, by ſome black ſmoke iſſuing out of it; and at daybrealc another ſmoke, tinged v ſth red, iſuing from an opening near the crater, but on the other ſide of the mountain, and facing the town of Ottaiæno, ewed that a new mouth hæd opened there from which a conſidle: able ſtream oſ lava iſſucd, and ran vith great velocity through a wood, which it burnt; and having run about three miles in a few hours it ſtopped before it had arrived at the vineyards and cultivated lands. The crater, and all the conical pæart of Veſuvius, was ſoon involved in clouds and darkneſs, and ſo it remained for ſeveral days; but above theſe clouds, although of a great height, ſreſn columns of ſmoke were ſeen from the crater, riſing furiouſly ſtill higher, until the whole maſs remained in the uſual form of a pine-tree; and in that gigantic maſs of heavy clouds the ferilli, or volcanic lightning, was frequently viſible, even in the day time. About five ò'clock in the morning of the 16th, the lava which haæd firſt broken out from the ſeveral new mouths on the ſouth ſide of the mountain, had reached the ſea, and was running into it, having overwhelmed, buret, and deſtroved the greateſt part of Torre del Greco, the principal ſtream of lava having taken its courſe through the very center of the town (ſee plate II.. They obſerved from Naples, that when the lava was in the vineyards in its way to the town, there iſſued often, and in different parts of it, a bright pale flame, and very different from the deep red of the lava; this was occaſioned by the burning of the trees that ſupported the vines. Soon aſter the beginning of this eruption, aſnes fell thick at the foot of the mountain, all the way from Porticĩ to the Torre del Greco; and what is remarkable, although there were not at that time any clouds in the air, except thoſe of ſmoke from the mountain, the aſhes were wet, and accompanied with Iarge drops of water, which were to the taſte very ſalt; the road, which is paved, was as wet as if there had been a heavy ſower of rain. Thoſe aſhes were black and coarſe, like the ſand of the ſea- ſhore, whereas thoſe thet fell there, and at Naples ſome days aſter, were of a light-grey colour, and as ſine as Spaniſh ſnuſf, or powdered bark. They contained many ſuline perticles; thoſe aſhes that lay on the ground, expoſed to the burning ſun, had a coat of the whiteſt powder on their ſurface, which to the taſte vas ex-  This view was taken from a boat on the ſea near that town, about five in the morning of the 16th of June, and whila the lava was ſtill advancing in the ſea. The rocks, on which are two figures near the boat, were formed by a lava that ran into the ſea during a former eruption of Mount Veſuvius. tremely ſalt and pungent. In the printed account of the eruption by Emanuel Scotti, doctor of phyſic and profeſſor of philoſophy in the univerſity of Naples, he ſuppoſes (Which appears to be highly probable) that the water which accompanied the fall of the aſhes at the beginning of the eruption, was produced by the mixture of the inflammable and dephlogiſticated alr. BYy the time that the lava had reached the ſea between five and ſix ò'clock in the morning of the 16th, Veſuvius was ſo completely involved in darkneſ, that the violent operation of nature that was going on there could no longer be diſcerned, and ſo it remained for ſeveral days; but the dreadful noiſe, and the red tinge on the clouds over the top oſ the mountain, were evident ſigns of the activity of the fire underneath. The lava ran but Jowly at Torre del Greco after it had reached the ſea; and on the 77th of June i in the morning, its courſe was ſtopped, excepting that at times a little rivulet oſ liquid fire iſſued from under the ſmoking ſcoriæ into the ſea, and cauſed a hiſſing noiſe, and a white ſmole; at other times, a quantity of large ſcoriæ were puſhed off the ſurface of the body oſ the Iava into the ſea, diſcovering that it was redhot under that ſurface; and even to the latter end of Auguſt the center of the thickeſt part of the lava that covered the town retained its red heat. The breadth of the lava that ran into the ſea, and formed a new promontory there, after having deſtroyed the greateſt part of the town of Torre del Greco, having been exactly meaſured by the duke della Torre, is of Engliſh feet 1204. Its height above the ſea is twelve ſeet, and as many fcet under water; ſo that its whole height is twenty-four feet; it extends into the ſea 626 feet. The ſea water was boiling as in a cauldron, where it waſhed the foot of this new ſormed promontory: and although our author was at leaſt a hundred yards from it, obſerving that the ſea ſmoled near his boat, he put his hand into the water, which was Iiterally ſcalded; and by this tiime his boãtmen obſerved that the pitch from the bottom of the boat was melting faſt, and floating on the ſurface of the ſea, and that the boat began to leak; he therefore retired haſtily from this ſpot, and landed at ſome diſtance fſrom the hot lava. The town of Torre del Greco contained about 18,0080 inhabitants, all oſf whom (except about 15, vho ſrom either age or infirmity could not be moved, and were overwhelmed by the lava in their houſes) eſcaped cither to Caſtel-a-mare, which was the ancient Stabiæ, or to Naples; but the rapid progreſs of the lava was ſuch, after it had altered its courſe from Reſina, vhich town it firſt threatened, and had joined a freſh lava that iſſucd ſfrom one of the new mouths in a vineyard, about a mile ſfrom the town, that it ran like a torrent over the town of Torre del Greco, allowing the unfortunate inhabitants ſcarcely time to ſave their lives; their goods and effects were totally abandoned, and indeed ſeveral oſ the inhabitants, whoſe houſes had been ſurrounded with lava while they remained in them, eſcaped from them, and ſaved their lives the following day, by coming out of the tops of their houſes, and walking over the ſcoriæ on the ſurface of the redhot lava. Five or ſix old nuns were taken out of a convent in this manner, on the 16th of June, and carried over the hot lava; their ſtupidity was ſuch, as not to have been the leaſt alarmed, or ſenſible of their danger: one of upwards of ninety years of age was ſound actually warming herſelf at a point of redhot I.va, which touched the window of her cell, and which Bulls loprived of their Tone. ſBook VI. ſhe ſaid was very comſortable; and though now apprized of their danger, they were ſtill very unwilling to leave the copvent, in which they had been ſrut up almoſt from their infancy, their ideas being as limited a5 the ſpace they inhabitedc Having been deſired to pack up whatever they had that vas moſt valuable, rhey all loaded themſelves with biſcults and ſweetmeate, and it vas but by accident it was diſcovered that they had left a ſum of money behind them, which was recovered for them. The lava paſſed over the center and beſt part oſ the town; no part of the cathedral remaæined above it, except the upper part of a ſquare brick tower, in which were the bells; and ĩt is a curious circumſtance, that thoſe bells, although they were neĩther cracked nor melted, were deprived of their tone as much as if they had been cracked. When the lava firſt entered the ſea it threw up the water to a prodigious height; and particularly when two points of lava met and incloſed a pool of water, that water was thrown up with great violence, and a loud report: at this time, as well as the day aſter alſo, a great many boiled fiſh were ſeęn floating on the ſurface of the ſca. The lIava over the cathedral, and in other parts of the town, is ſaid to be upwards of forty feet in thickneſs; the general height of the lava during ĩts whole courſe was about twelve feet, and in ſome parts not leſs than a mile in breadth. When Sir William Hamilton viſited it on the 17th oſ June, the tops of the houſes were juſt viſible here and there in ſome parts, and the timbers within ſtill burning cauſed a bright lame to iſſue out of the ſurface; in other parts, the ſulphur and ſalts exhaled in a white ſmoke from the lava, forming a white or yellow eruſt on the ſcoriæ round the ſpots where ĩt iſſued with the greateſt forcee He oſten heard little exploſions, and ſv that they blew up, like little mines, ſfragments of the ſcoriæ and aſhes into the air; theſe he ſuppoſe: to have been occaſioned either by rarefied air in confired cellars, or, perhaps, by ſmall portions of gunpowder taking fire, as few in that country are without a gun and ſome little portion of gunpowder in their houſes. As the church feaſts there are uſually attended vith fireworks and crackers, a firework-maker oſ the town had a very great quantity of fireworks ready made for an approaching feaſt, and ſome gunpowder, all of which had been ſhut up in his houſe by the lava, a part of which had even entered one of the rooms; yet he actually ſaved all his fireorks and gunpowder ſome days aſter, by caærrying them ſafely over the ſcoriæ of the lava, while i it was redhot underneath. The heat in the ſtreets of the town, at this time, was ſo great as to raiſe the thermometer to very near one hundred degrees, and cloſe to the hot lava ĩt roſe much higher. Sir William remarked in his way home, that there was a much greater quantity of the petroleum floating on the ſurface of the ſea, and diffulng a very ſtrong and oſfenſive ſmell, than was uſual; for at all times in calms, patches of this bituminous oĩl are to be ſeen floating on the ſurface of the ſea between Portici and Naples, and pãrticularly oppoſite a village called Pietra Bianca. The minute aſhes continued falling at Naples; and the mountain, totally obſcured by them, continued to alarm the inhabitants with repeated Ioud exploſions. On Wedneſday June 18, the wind having for a ſhort ſpace of time cleared away the thick cloud from the top of Veſuvius, it was now diſcovered that a great part of its crater, particularly on the weſt ſide oppoſite Naples, ed fallen in, which it probably did about ſour oclock in the morning of that day, as a violent ſhock of an earthquake was ſelt at that moment at Reſina, and other parts ſituate at the foot of the volcano. The clouds of ſmoke, mixed with the aſhes, were of ſuch a denſity as to appear to have the greateſt difſiculty in forcing their paſſage out of the now widely extended mouth of Veſuvius, which, ſince the top fell in, is deſcribed as not much ſhort of two miles in circumſerence. One cloud heaped on ancther, and ſucceeding one another inceſſantly, formed in a few hours ſuch a gigantic and elevated column of the darkeſt hue over the mountain, as ſcomed to threaten Napies with immediate deſtruction, having at one time been bent over the city, and appearing to be much too maſiive and ponderous to remain long ſuſpended in the air; it was, beſides, replete with the ferilli, or volcanic lightning, vhich was ſtronger than common lightning, juſt as Pliny the younger deſcribes ĩt in one of his letters to Tacitus, when he ſays ſulgoribus illæ et ſimiles et majores erant?. (See plate III.) Veſuvius was at this time completely covereq, as were all the old black lavas, with a thick coat of thoſe fine light-grey aſhes alrcady fallen, which gave it a cold and horrid appearance; and in compariſon of the abovementioned enormous maſs of clouds, vhich certainly, however it may contradict our idea of the extenſion of our atmoſphere, roſe many miles abcve the x This view was taken from Naples, and gives a very good idea of the appearance of Mount Veſuvius, like a molehill, in compariſon of the enormous maſs that hung over itThe black lines ow the form of the top of Veſuvius, as it was before this ereption, and when the crater was only the width of the upper line. On the ſide of the mountain is repreſented the ſpot whence the lava firſt iſſued on the 15th of June, vith ĩts courſe to Torre del Greco and the ſea. mountain, it appeared like a molehill, although the perpendicular height of Veſuvius, from the level of the ſea, is more than three thouſand ſix hundred feet. The abbẽ Braccini, as appears in his printed account of the eruntion of Mount Veſuvius in 1631, meaſured with a quedrant the elevation oſf a maſi of clouds of the ſame nature, which waæs formed over Veſuvius during that great eruption, ard found ĩt to exceed thirty miles in height. Dr. Scotti, in his printed account of this eruption, ſays, that the hæight of this threatning cloud of ſmoke and aſhes, meaſur ed from Naples, was found to bæ f an elevation of thirty degrees. The ſtor æ thunder and lightning, attended at times with heavy ſalls of rain and aſhes, cauſing the moſt deſtructive torrents of water and glutinous mud, mixed with huge ſtones, and trees torn up by the roots, continued more or leſs to afilict the inhabitants on both ſides of the volcano until the 7th of July, when the laſt torrent deſtroyed many hundred acres of cultivated land, between the towns of Torre del Greco and Torre del Annunziata. Some of theſe torrents, both on the ſea ſide and the Somma ſide of the mountain, came down with a horrid ruſhing noiſe; and ſome of them, after having forced their way through the narrow gullies of the mountain, roſe to the height of more than twenty feet, and were near half a mile in extent. The mud, of which the torrents were compoſed, being a kind of natural mortar, completely caſed up and ruined ſome thouſand acres of rich vineyards; for it ſoon becomes ſo hard, that nothing leſs than a pickaxe can break it up. The laudable curioſity of our author induced him to 70 upon Mount Veſuvius, as ſoon as it was conſiſtent with any degree of prudence, which was not until the 53th of June, and even then it was attended with ſome riſc. The crater of Veſuvius, except at ſhort intervals, had been continually obſcured by the volcanic clouds from the 16th, and was ſo on that day, with frequent flaſhes of lightning playing in thoſe clouds, and attended as uſual with a noiſe like thunder; and the fine aſhes were ſtill falling on Veſuvius, but ſtill more on the mountæin of Somma. Sir William went up the uſual way by Reſina, and obſerved, in his way through that village, that many of the ſtones of the pavement had been looſened, and were deranged by the earthquakes, particularly by that of the 18th, which attended the falling in of the crater of the volcano, and which had been ſo violent as to throw many people down, and obliged all the inhabitants of Reſina to quit their houſes haſtily, to which they did not dare return for two days. The leaves of all the vines were burnt by the aſhes that had fallen on them, and many of the vines themſelves were buried under the aſhes, and great branches of the trees that ſupported them had been torn oſf by their weight. In ſhort, nothing but ruin and deſolation was to be ſeen. The æſhes at the foot oſ the mountain were about ten or twelve inches thick on the ſurface oſ the earth, but in proportion as he aſcended, their thickneſs increaſed to ſeveral feet;, not leſs than nine or ten in ſome parts; ſo that the ſurface oſ the old rugged lavas, that before was almoſt impracticable, was now become a perfect plain, over vhich he walked with the greateſt eaſe. The aſhes were of a light-grey colour, and exceedingly fine, ſo that by the footſteps being marked on them as on ſnow, he learnt that three ſmall parties had been up before him. He ſav likewiſe the track of a fox, which appeared to have been quite bewildered, to judge from the many turns he had made. Even the ſects, were viſible on theſe fine aſhes. Sir William and his companion aſcended to the ſpot whence the lava of the 15th firſt iſſued, and followed the courſe of it, which was ſtill very hot (although covered with ſuch a thick coat of aſhes) quite down to the ſea at Torre del Greco, which is mere than five miles. It was not poſſible to get up to the great crater oſf Veſuvius, nor had any one yet attempted it. The horrid chaſms that exiſted from the ſpot where the late eruption firſt took place, in a ſtrait line for near two miles towards the ſea, cannot be imaginedl. They formed vallies more than two hundred feet deep, and from half a mile to a mile wide; and vhere the ſountains of fiery mætter exiſted during the eruption, were little mountains with deep craters. Ten thouſand men, in as many years, could not make ſuch an alteration on the face of Veſuvius. Except the exhalations of ſulphureous and vitriolic vapours, which broke out ſrom different ſpots of the line abovementioned, ard tinged the ſurface of the aſhes and ſcoriæ in thoſe parts wit either a deep or pale-yellow, with a reddiſh ochre colour, or a bright white, and in ſome parts with a deep green and azure blue (ſo that the whole together had the eſfect of an iris) all had the appearance of a ſandy deſart. Our adventurers then went on the top of ſeven of the moſt conſiderable of the newformed mountains, and looked into their craters, which. on ſome of them appeared to be little ſhort of half a mile in circumference; and although the exterior perpendicular height of any of them did not exceed two hundred feet, the depth of their inverted cone within was three times as great. It would not have been poſſible to have breathed on theſc new mountains near their craters, if they had not taken the precaution of tying a doubled hankerchief over. their mouths and noſtrils; and even with that precaution they could rot reſiſt Iong, the fumes cf the vitrivlic acid were ſo exceedingly penetrating, and of ſuch a ſuffocating quality. They found in one a double crater, like two funnels joined together;, and in all there was ſome little ſmoke and depoſitiuns of ſalts and ſulphurs, of the various colours abovementioned, juſt as is commonly ſeen adhering to the inner walls of the principal crater of Veſuvius. Two or three days after heyl had been there, one of the new mouths, into which they had looked, ſuddenly made a great exploſion of ſtones, ſmoke, and aſhes, which would certainly have proved fatal to any one vho might unfortunately have been there at the time of the exploſion. We read of a ſimilar accident having proved fatal to more than twenty people, who had the curioſity to look into the crater of the Monte Nuovo, near Puzzuoli, a few days after its formation, in the year 1538. The 15th of Auguſt, Sir William ſav a ſudden exploſion of ſmoke and aſhes thrown to an extreme height out of the great crater of Veſuvius, that muſt have deſtroyed any one within half a mile of it; and yet on the 19th of July a party not only had viſited that crater, but had deſcended 170 feet within it. While they were on the mountain, two vhirlwinds, exactly like thoſe that form water-ſpouts at ſea, made their appearance; and one of them, which was very near, made a ſtrange ruſhing noiſe, and having taken up a great quantity of the fine aſhes, formed them into an elevaeted ſpiral column, which, with a whirling motion and great rapidity, was carried towards the mountain of Somma, where it broke and was diſperſed. One of our author's ſervants, employed in collecting of ſulphur, or ſal ammoniac, which cryſtallizes near the ſumaroli, as they are called (and which are the ſpots whence the hot vapour iſſues out of the freſh lavas) found, to his great ſurprize, an exceeding cold wind iſſue ſfrom a fiſſure v|æry near the hot fumaroli upon his leg. In a vineyard not in the ſame line vith the new-formed mountains juſt deſcribed, but in a right Iine from them, at the diſtance of little more than a mile from Torre del Greco, they found three or four more of theſe new- formed mountains with craters, out of which the lava flowed, and by uniting with the ſtreams that came from the higher mouths, and adding to their heat and ſluidity, enabled the whole current to make ſo rapid a progreſs over the unfortunate town, as ſcarcely to allow its inhabitants ſuſficient time to eſcape with their lives. The rich vineyards belonging to the Torre del Greco, and which produced the wine called Lacrima Chriſti, that were buried, and totally deſtroyed by this lava, conſiſted of more than three thouſand acres; but the deſtruction of the vineyards by the torrents of mul and water, at the foot of the mountain of Somma, was much more æxtenſive. In that part of the country, the firſt ſigns of a torrent that our author met with, was near the village of the Madonna dell Arco, and he paſſed ſeveral others between that and the town of Otitaiano; one near Trochia, and two near the town of Somma, were the moſt conſiderable, and not leſs than a quarter of a mile in breadth; and, according to the teſtimony of eyevwitneſſes, vhen they poured down from the mountain of Somma, they vere from twenty to thirty fect high; the matter of theſe torrents was a liquid ghutinous mud, compoſed of ſcoriæ, aſhes, ſtone; (ſome of an enormous ſize) mixed with trees that had been torn up by the roots. Such torrents, at it may vell be imagined, were irreſiſtible, and carried off every thing before them; houſes, walls, trees, and not leſs thæn ſour thouſand ſneep and other cattlee. At Somma, a team oſ eight oxen, which were drawing a large timber tree, were at once carried off, and never were heard of more. The appearance of theſe torrents was like that of all other torrents in mountainous countries, except that what had been mud was become a perſect cement, on which nothing leſs than a pickaxe could make any impreſſion. The vineyards and cultivated lands were here much more ruined; and the limbs of the trees much more torn by the weight of the aſhes, than thoſe which have been already deſcribed on the ſea ſide of the volcano. The abbè Tata, in his printed account of this eruption, has given a good idea of the abundance, the great veight, and glutinous quality of theſe aſhes, when he ſays, that having taken a branch from a fig-tree ſtill ſtanding near the town of Somma, cn which were only ſix leaves, and two little unripe figs, and having weighed it with the aſhes attached to it, he found it to be thirty-one ounces; when having waſhed oſf the volcanic matter, it ſcarely weighed three. In the town of Somma, our author found ſour churches and about ſeventy houſes without rooſs, and full of alhes. The great damage on that ſide of the mountain, by the fall of the aſhes and the torrents, happened on the 18th, I9th, and 20th of June, and on the 12th of July. The 19th, the aſhes ſell ſo thick at Somma, that unleſs a perſon kept in motion, he was ſoon fixed to the ground by them. This fall of aſhes was accompanied alſo with loud reports, and frequent flaſhes of the volcanic lightning, ſo that, ſurrounded by ſo many horrors, it was impoſſible for the inhabitants to remain in the town, and they all fled; the darkneſs was ſuch, although it was mid- day, that even with the help of torches it was ſcarcely poſible to keep in the high roadl. On the 16th of July, ſignor Guiſeppe Sacco went up to the crater, and, according to his account, which has been printed at Naples, the crater is of an irregular oval form, and as he ſuppoſes (not having been able to meaſure ĩt) of about a mile and a half in circumſference; the inſide, as uſual, in the ſhape of an inverted cone, the inner walls of which on the eaſtern ſide are perpendicular; but on the weſtern ſide of the crater, which is much lower, the deſcent was practicable, and Sacco with ſome of his companions actually went down one huncred and ſeventy-ſix palms, from which ſpot, having lowered a cord with a ſtone tied to it, they found the whole depth of the crater to be about five hundred palms. But ſuch obſervations on the crater of Veſuvius are of Iittle conſequence, as both its form and apparent depth are ſubject to great alterations from day to day. The 22d of July, one of the new craters, which is the neareſt to the town of Torre del Greco, threw up both fire and ſmoke, which circumſtance, added to that of the lava's retaining ĩts heat much longer than uſual, ſeemed to indicate that there was ſtill ſome fermentation under that part of the volcano. The lIava in cooling often cracks, and cauſes a loud exploſion, juſt as the ice does in the glaciers in Swiſſerland; ſuch reports were frequently heard at this time at the Torre del Greco; and a vapour was oſten ſeen to iſſue from the body of the lava, and taking fire in air, fall like thoſe meteors vulgarly called falling ſtars. The darkneſs occaſioned by the fall of the aſhes in the Campagna Felice extended itſelf, and varieq, according to the prevailing winds. On the 19th of June ĩt was ſo dark at Caſerta, which is fifteen miles from Naples, as to oblige the inhabitants to light canAu dles at mid-day; and one day, during the eruption, the darkneſs ſpread over Beneventum, which is thirty miles from Veſuvius. The archbiſhop of Taranto, in a letter to Naples, and dated from that city the 18th of June, obſerves, c We are involved in a thick cloud of minute volcanic aſhes, and we imagine that there muſt be a great eruption either at Mount Etna, or of Stromboli The biſhop did not ſuſpect their having proceeded from Veſuvius, which is about two hundred and fiſty miles from Taranto. Aſhes alſo fell, during the late eruption, at the very extremity oſ the province of Lecce, which is ſtill farther off; at Martino, near Taranto, a houſe was ſtruck and much damaged by the lightning from one of the clouds. In the accounts of the great eruption of Veſuvius in 1651, mention is made of the extenſive progreſs of the aſhes from Veſuvius, and of the damage done by the ferilli, or volcanic lightning, which attended them in their courſe. Our author in this place mentions a very extraordiary circumſtance, which happened near Sienna, on the Tuſcan ſtate, about eighteen hours aſter the commencement of the late eruption of Veſuvius on the 15th of June, although he adds, that phenomenon muſt have no relation to the eruption; it was communicated to him in the following words by the earl of Briſtol, biſhop of Derry, in a letter dated from Sienna, July 12, 1794:  In the midſt of a moſt violent thunder- ſtorm, about a doZen ſtones of various weights and dimenſions fell at the feet of different people, men, women, and children; the ſtones are of a quality not found in any part of the Sienneſe territory; they fell about eighteen hours after the enormous eruption of Veſuvius, which circumſtance leaves a dinary phenorhenon: either theſe ſtones have been generated in this igneous maſs of clouds, which produced ſuch unuſual thunder, or, which is equally incredible, they were thrown from Veſuvius at a diſtance of at leaſt two hundred and fifty miles; judge then of its parabola One of the largeſt ſtones, when entire, weighed upwards of five poundss. The outſide of every ſtone that was found, and aſcertained to have fallen from the cloud near Sienna, was evidently freſhly vitrified, and black, having every ſign of having paſſed through an extreme heat; when broken, the inſide was found of a light-grey colour mixed with black ſpots, and ſome ſhining particles, ſuppoſed to be pyrites. Stones of the ſame nature, at leaſt as far as the eye can judge of them,, are frequently found on Mount Veſuvius; and ſhould ſimilar ſtones be found there, with the ſame vitrified coat on them, the queſtion would be decided in favour of Veſuvius, unleſs it could be proved that there had been, about the time of the fall of theſe ſtones in the Sienneſe territory, ſome nearer opening of the earth, attended with an emiſſion of volcanic matter, which might very poſſibly happen, as the mountain of Radicofani, within fifty miles of Sienna, is certainly volcanic. The celebrated father Ambrogio Soldãni, profeſſor of mathematics in the univerſity of Sienna, has printed there a diſſertation upon this extraordinary phenomenon; wherein, it is ſaid, he has decided that thoſe ſtones were generated in the air independently of volcanic aſſiſtance. Until after the 7th of July, when the laſt cloud broke over Veſuvius, and formed a tremendous torrent of mud, which took its courſe acroſs the great road between Torre del Greco and the Torre del Annungiata, and deſtroyed many vineyards, the eruption couũd not be ſaid to have finiſhed, although the force of it vas over the 22d of June. The power of attraction in mountains is well known; but whether the attractive power of a volcanic mountain ĩs greater than that of any other mountain, is a queſtion. During this eruption, however, it appeared that every watery cloud was evidently attracted by Veſuvius, and the ſudden diſſolution of thoſe clouds left marks of their deſtructive power on the face of the country all round the baſis of the volcano. After the mouth of Veſuvius was enlarged, our author ſays he has ſeen a great cloud paſſing over it, and which not only was attracted, but was ſucked in, and diſappeared in a moment. After every violent eruption of Mount Veſuvius, ve read of damage done by a mephiric vapour, which coming from under the ancient lavas, inſinuates itſelf into low places, ſuch as the cellars and wells of the houſes ſituate at the foot of the volcano. Aſter the eruption of 1767, there were ſeveral inſtances, as in this, of prople gbing into their cellars at Portici, and other parts of that neighbourhood, having been ſtruck down by this vapour, and who would have expired if they had not been haſtily removed. Theſe occaſional vapours, or mofete, are of the ſame quality as that permanent one in the Grotta del Cane, near the lake of Agnano, and which has been proved to be chieſly fixed air. The vapours, that in the volcanic language of Naples, are called fumaroli, are of another nature, and iſſue from ſpots all over the freſh and hot lavas while they are cooling; they are ſulphureous and ſo ſuffocating, that often the birds which are flying over them are overpowered, and fall down dead. Theſe vapours depoſit a cruſt of ſulphur, or ſalis, particularly of ſal ammoniĩac, on the ſcoriæ of the lava through which they paſi; and the ſmall eryſtals of which they are compoſed are often tinged with deep or pale yellow, with a bright red like cinnabar, and ſometimes with green, or an azure blue. Aſter the late eruption, many pieces of the ſcoriæ of the freſh lava were found powdered with a lucid ſubſtance, exactly like the brighteſt ſteel or iron filings. The firſt appearance of the mofete, after the late eruption, was on the 17th of June, when a peaſant going with an aſs to his vineyard, a little above the village of Reſina, in a narrow hollow way, the aſs dropped down, and ſeemed to be expiring; the peaſant was ſoon ſenſible of the mephitic vapour himſelf, and vell knowing its fatal eſfects, dragged the animal out of its influence and it ſoon recovered. This heavy vapour, when expoſed to the open air, does not riſe much more than a foot above the ſurface of the earth, but when it gets into a confined place, like a cellar or vell, it riſes and fills as any other fluid would; having filled a well, ĩt riſes above it about a foot high, and then bending over, falls to the earth, on which it ſpreads, always preſerving its uſual level. Wherever this vapour iſſues, a wavering in the air is perceptible, like that which is produced by the burning of charcoal; and when it iſſues from a fiſſure near any plants or vegetables, the leaves of thoſe plants are ſeen to move, as if they were agitated by a gentle vind. It is extraordinary, that although there does not appear to be any poiſonous quality in this vapour, which in every reſpect reſembles fixed air, it ſhould prove ſo very fatal to the vineyards, ſome thouſand acres of which were deſtroyed by it after the late eruption: when it penetrates to the roots of the vines, it dries them up, and ills the plant. A peaſant in the neighbourhood of Reſina, having ſuffered by the mofete, which deſtroyed his vineyards in the year 1767, and having obſerved then that the vapour followed the laws of all fluids, made a narrow deep ditch all round his vineyard, vhich communicated with ancient lavas, and alſo with a deep cavern under one of them; the conſequence of his well planned operation was, that although ſurrounded by theſe noxious vapours, which Iay conſtantly at the bottom oſ his ditch, they never entered his vineyard, and his vines were in a flouriſhing ſtate, while thoſe of his neighbours were periſhing. Upwards of thirteen hundred hares, and many pheaſants and partridges, overtaken by this vapour, were found dead within his Sicilian majeſty's reſerved chaſes in the neighbourhood of Veſuvius; and alſo many domeſtic cats, who in their purſuit aſter this game fell victims to the mofete. A ſhoal of fiſh, of ſeveral hurndred weight, having been obſerved by ſome fiſnermen at Reſina in great agitation on the ſurface of the ſea, near ſome rocks of an ancient lava that had run into the ſea, they ſurrounded them with their nets, and took them all with eaſe, and aſterwards diſcovered that they had been ſtunned by the mephitic vapour, which at that time iſued forcibly from underneath the ancient Ilava into the ſea. The account of Sir William Hamilton is concluded by two remarks, which as they are curious I ſhall inſert: 1. Within a mile of Caſtel-a-mare, the moſete were ſtill very active (on Sept. 2.) and particularly under the ſpot where the ancient town of Stabia was ſituated. The 24th of Auguſt, a young lad by accident falling into a well there that was dry, but full of the mephitic vapour, vas immediately ſuſfocated; there were no ſigns of any injury from the fall, as the well was mallow. This circumſtance called to our author's mind the death of the elder Pliny, who moſt probably loſt his life by the ſame ſort of mephitic vapours, on this very ſpot, and which are active after great eruptions of Veſuvius. 2. Mr. James, a Britiſn merchant, aſſured our author, that on Tueſday night, the 17th of June, which was the third day of the eruption of Mount Veſuvius, he was in a boat with a ſail, near Torre del Greco, when the minute aſhes, ſo often mentioned, fell thick; and that in the dark they emitted a pale light like phoſphorus, ſo that his hat, thoſe of the boatmen, and the part of the ſails that were covered with aſhes, were luminous. Others had mentioned having ſeen a phoſphoric light on Veſuvius after this eruption; but until it was confirmed to him by Mr. James, he did not chuſe to ſay any thing about it *. C n a r. XLVIII. EARTHQUAKES. Conrnection betveen Earibquates and VolcanoesEarthquates cauſid by the Progreſi of Steam beteen the Strata of the EurthSigns of opproaching EarthquakesCreat Eartbquate at Liſbon, in 1755. e2Earthquates in Calabria, in 1783. H E ſudden exploſions which take place ſrom volcanoes, probably depend on the acceſs of a quantity of water, which enters through ſome fiſſure communicating with the ſea, or which is derived from other ſources in the earth. If this maſs of water is ſuſficiently great, it will extinguiſh the volcano; if not, it will be converted into ſteam, the expanſive force of which far exceeds that of gun-powder. The elaſtic fluid, thus formed, either finds vent at the mouth of the volcano, or, if the ſuper-incumbent weight ſhould be too great, it will force a paſſage between the ſtrata oſ the earth, and occaſion that undulatory but ſometimes violent motion which is called an earthquake. From various facts demonſtrative of the coheſion and elaſticity of bodies, ve are warranted in concluding, that the different ſtrata of which the earth is compoſed will adhere together, and that a freer paſſage vill be afforded to any intervening body between the ſtrata than directly through them. If the confined fire acls directly under a province or town, it will heave the earth perpendicularly upwards, and the ſhocks will be more ſudden and violent. If it acts at a diſtance, it will raiſe that tract obliquely, and the motion will be more oblique, undulatory, and tremulous. The great earthquake at Liſbon, in 1755, was felt as far as Scotland, and from the phenomena which attended it, it was evident that the ground had a waving motion from ſouth to north. All the oblong lakes, that lay from north to ſouth, were much agitated, the wave commencing at the ſouth end, vhilſt all other lakes which lay acroſs, from eaſt to weſt, were much leſs affected. The great diſtance to which earthquakes extend depends on the compreſſibility and elaſticity of the earth, which may be underſtood from the vibration of the walls of houſes, occaſioned by the paſſing of carriages in the adjacent ſtreets. Another inſtance ĩs the vibration of ſteeples by the ringing of bells or guſts of wind. The Eddiſtone lighthouſe often vibrates from the force of the waves which beat againſt its foundation. revious to an eruption of Veſuvius the earth always trembles, and ſubterraneous exploſions are heard. On the iſt of November, 1755, the era ſo fatal to Liſbon, the iſland of Madeira was violently ſhaken by an earthquake, accompanied with ſubterranecus exploſions. So thoroughly convinced, indeed, are the inhabitants of volcanic countries of the connection between earthquakes and volcanoes, that when a great eruption takes place from a volcano, they congratulate themſelves on having eſcaped an earthquake. Earthquakes as well as volcanic eruptions are always preceded by a violent agitation of the ſea. Previous to the breaking out of Veſuvius, the ſea retires from the adjacent ſhores till the mountain is burſt open, and then it returns with ſuch impetuoſity as to overſlow its uſual boundary. About an hour aſter the firt ſocks, which alarmed the city of Liſbon wards the city like a torrent, though againſt both wind and tide; it roſe forty feet higher than was ever Enown, and as ſuddenly ſubſided. A ſhip, fifty leagues off at ſea, received ſo violent a ſhock as greatly to injure the deck, &. The ſame effect was obſerved at Cadiz, and at a number of ports throughout the Mediterranean, and, indeed, more or leſs, all over Europe. That earthquakes are the effect of ſteam generated within the bowels of the earth, and that they are produced in the manner which has been deſcribed, appears highly probable from the quantities of ſteam and boiling water which have occaſionally been thrown up by volcanoes in different parts of the world. In 1631 and 1698 vaſt torrents of boiſing vater flowed from the crater of Veſuvius, previous to the eruption of fire: and what was, perhaps, ſtill more remarkable, many ſpecies of ſea-ſhells, in a calcined ſtate, were found on the brink oſ the crater, and alſo in the channel ſormed by the flood. The ſame thing happened at Etna, in 1755, vhen a dreadful torrent of boiling water floved from the crater at the time of an eruption of fire. Sir William Hamilton obſerves, that the ſeaſnells emitted along with the water clearly indicate a communication with the ſea. All warm ſprings probably receive their heat from the action of pyrites, near which the water paſſes. The following account of the great Liſbon earthquake is extracted from a volume of letters, publiſhed a few years ago by the reverend Mr. Davy:  There never was a finer morning ſeen than the firſt of November (1755); the ſun ſhone out in its full Iuſtre; the whole face of the ſky was perfectly ſerene and clear, and not the leaſt ſignal or warning of riſhing, opulent, and populous city, a ſcene of the utmoſt horror and deſolation, except only ſuch as ſerved to alarm, but ſcarcely left a moment's time to fly from the general deſtruction.  It was on the morning of this fatal day, between the hours of nine and ten, that I was ſat down in my apartment, juſt finiſhing a letter, when the papers and table I vas writing on began to tremble with a gentle motion, which rather ſurprized me, as I could not perceive a breath of wind ſtirring; whilſt I was reflecting with myſelf what this could be owing to, but without having the leaſt apprehenſion of the real cauſe, the whole houſe began to ſhake from the very foundation, which at firſt I imputed to the rattling of ſeveral coaches in the main ſtreet, which uſually paſſed that way, at this time, from Belem to the palacæ; but on hearkening more attentively, I was ſoon undeceived, as I found it was owing to a ſtrange ſrightful kind of noiſe under ground, reſembling the hollow diſtant rumbling of thunder; all this paſſed in leſs than a minute, and I muſt confeſs  now began to be alarmed, as it naturally occurred to me, that this noiſe might poſſibly be the forerunner of an earthquake, as one I remembered, which had happened about ſix or ſcven years ago, in the Iſland of Madeira, commenced in the ſame manner, though it did little or no damage. Upon this I threw down my pen, and ſtarted upon my ſeet, remaining a moment in ſuſpenſe, whether I ſhould ſtay in the apartment, or run into the ſtreet, as the danger in both places ſeemed equal; and ſtill flattering myſelf that this tremor might produce no other effects than ſuch inconſiderable ones as had been felt at Madeira; but in a moment I was rouſed from my dream, being inſtantly ſtunned with a moſt horrid craſh, as if every edifice in the city had tumbled down at once. The houſe I was in ſhook with ſuch violence, that the upper ſtories immediately ſell, and though my apartment (Which was the firſt floor) did not then ſhare the ſame fate, yet every thing was thrown out of its place in ſuch a manner, that it was with no ſmall difficulty I kept my feet, and expected nothing leſs than to be ſoon cruſed to death, as the walls continued rocking to and fro in the frightfulleſt manner, opening in ſeveral places, large ſtones falling down on every ſide from the cracks, and the ends of moſt of the rafters ſtarting out from the roof. To add to this terrifying ſcene, the ſky in a moment became ſo gloomy, that I could now diſtinguiſh no particular object; it was an Egyptian darkneſ indeed, ſuch as might be felt; owing, no doubt, to the prodigious clouds of duſt and lime, raiſed from ſo violent a concuſion, and as ſome reported, to ſulphureous exhalations, but this I cannot afirm; however, it is certain I found myſelf almoſt choaked for near ten minutes.  As ſoon a3 the gloom began to diſperſe, and the violence of the mock ſeemed pretty much aba ted, the firſt õbject I perceived in the room vas a woman ſitting on the floor, with an infant in her arms, all covered with duſt, pale and trembling; I aſked her how ſhe got hither: but her conſternation was ſo greãat that ſhe could give me no account of her eſcape; I ſuppoſe, that when the tremor firſt began, ſhe ran out of her own houſe, and finding herſelf in ſuch imminent danger from the falling of ſtones, retired into the door of mine, which was almoſt contiguous to hers, ſor ſhelter, and when the ſhock increaſed, which filled the door with duſt and rubbiſh, ran up ſtairs into my apartment, which was then open: be ĩt as it might, this was no time for curioſity. I remember the poor creature aſked me, in the utmoſt agony, if I did not think that the world was at an end; at the ſame time ſne complained of being choaked, and begged for God's ſake I would procure her a little drink; upon this I went to a cloſet where I kept a large jar with water (which you know is ſometimes a pretty ſcarce commodity in Liſbon) but finding it broken in pieces, I told her ſhe muſt not now think of quenching her thirſt, but ſaving her life, as the houſe was juſt falling on our heads, and if a ſecond ſhock came, would certainly bury us both; I bade her take hold of my arm, and that I would endeavour to bring her into ſome place of ſecurity.  I ſhall always look upon it as a particular providence, that I happened on this occaſion to be undreſied, for had I dreſſed myſelf, as I propoſed, when I got out of bed, in order to breakfaſt with a friend, I ſould, in all probability, have run into the ſtreet at the beginning of the ſhock, as the reſt of the people in the houſe did, and conſequently have had my brains daſhæd out, as every one of them had; however, the imminent danger I was in did not hinder me from conſidering that my preſent dreſs, only a gown and ſlippers, would render my getting over the ruins almoſt impracticable: I had, therefore, ſtill preſence of mind enough leſt to put on a pair of ſhoes and a coat, the firſt that came in my way, which was every thing I ſaved, and in this dreſs IT hurried down ſtairs, the woman with me, holding by my arm, and made directly to that end of the ſtreet which opens to the Tagus, but finding the paſſage this way entirely blocked up with the fallen houſes to the height of their ſecond ſtories, I turned back to the other end which led into the main ſtreet (the common thoroughfare to the palace) and having helped the woman over a vaſt heap of ruins, with no ſmall hazard to my own liſe, juſt as we were going into the ſtreet, as there was one part I could not well climb over without the aſſiſtance of my hands, as well as feet, I deſired her to let go her hold, which ſhe did, remaining two or three feet behind me, at which time there fell a vaſt ſtone, from a tottering wall, and cruſhed both her and the child in pieces: ſo diſmal a ſpectacle at any other time would have affected me in the higheſt degree, but the dread I was in of ſharing the ſame fate myſelf, and the many inſtances of the ſame kind which preſented themſelves all around, were too ſhocking to make me dwell a moment on this ſingle object.  I had now a long narrow ſtreet to paſs, with the houſes on each ſide four or five ſtories high, all very old, the greater part already thrown down, or continually falling, and threatening the paſſengers with inevitable death at every ſtep, numbers of whom lay killed beſore me, or what I thought far more deplorable ſo bruiſed and wounded that they could not ſtir to help themſelves. For my own part; as deſtruction appeared to me unaveidable, I only wiſhed I might be made an end of at once, and not have my limbs broken, in. which caſe I could expect nothing elſe but to be left upon the ſpot, lingering in miſery, like theſe poor unhappy wretches, without recciving the leaſt ſuccour from any perſon. c As ſelf-preſervation, however, is the firſt law oſ nature, theſe ſad thoughts did not ſo far prevail, as to make me totally deſpair. I proceeded on as faſt as I conveniently could, though with the utmoſt caution, and having at length got clear of this horrid paſſage, I found myſclf ſafe and unhurt in the large open ſpace before St. Paul’'s church, which had been thrown down a few minutes before, and buried a great part oſ the congregation, that was generally pretty numerous, this being reckoned one of the moſt populous pariſes in Liſbon. Here I ſtood ſome time, conſidering what I ſnould do, and not thinking myſelf ſafe in this ſituation, I came to the reſolution of climbing over the ruins oſ the weſt end of the church, in order to get to the river ſide, that I might be removed, as far as poſſible, from the tottering houſes, in caſe of a ſecond ſnock.  This, with ſome diſficulty, I accompliſhed, and here I found a prodigious concourſe oſ people, of both ſexes, and of all ranks and conditions, among whom I cbſerved ſome of the principal canons oſ the patriarchal church, in their purple robes and rochets, as theſe all go in the habit of biſhops; ſeveral prieſts who had run ſrom the altars in their ſacerdotal veſtments in the midſt of their eelebrating maſ; ladies half dreſſeq, and ſome without ſhoes; all theſe, whom their mutual dangers had here aſſembled as to a place of ſefety, were on their knees at prayers, with the terrors of death in their countenances, every one ſtriking his breaſt, and crying out inceſſantly, Miſereccrdia meut Dios.  In the midſt of our devotions, the ſecond great ſhock came on, little leſs violent than the firſt, and completed the ruin of thoſe buildings which had been already much ſhattered. The conſternation now became ſo univerſal, that the ſhrieks and cries of Miſerecordia could be diſtinctly heard from the top of St. Catherines hill, at a conſiderable diſtance off, whither a vaſt number of people had likewiſe retreated; at the ſame time we could hear the fall of the pariſh church there, whereby many perſons were killed on the ſpot, and others mortally wounded. You may judge of the force of this ſhock, when I inform you, it was ſo vioVouL. lent, that I could ſcarce keep on my knees, but it wa: attended with ſome circumſtances ſtill more dreadful than the former.On a ſudden I heard a general outcry, The ſea is coming in, we ſhall be all loſtUpon this, turning my eyes towards the river, which in that place is near four miles broad, I could perceive it heaving and ſwelling in a moſt unaccountable manner, as no vind was ſlirring in an inſtant there appeared, at ſome ſmall diſtance, a large body of water, riſing like a mountain; it came on foaming and roaring, and ruſhed towards the ſhore with ſuch impetuoſity, that we all immediately ran for our lives as faſt as poſſible; many were actually ſvept away, and the reſt above their wait in water at a good diſtance ſrom the banks. For my own part, I had the narroweſt eſcape, and ſhould certainly have been Iloſt, had I not graſped a large beam that Iay on the ground, till the water returned to ĩits channel, which it did almoſt at the ſame inſtant, with equal rapidity. As there row appeared at leaſt as much danger from the ſea as the land, and I ſcarce knew whither to retire for ſhelter, I tcok a ſudden reſolution of returning back with my cloaths all dropping, to the area of St. PauP s: here I ſtood ſome time, and obſerved the ſhips tumbling and toſſing about, as in a violent ſtorm; ſome had broken their cables, and were carried to the other ſide oſ the Tagus; others were whirled round with incredible ſæiftneſs;. ſeveral large boats were turned keel upwards; and all this without any wind, which ſeemed the more aſtoniſhing. It was at the time of which I am now ſpeaking, that the ſine new quay, built of rough marble, at an immenſe expence, was entirely ſwallowed up, with all the people on it, who had fled thither for ſafety, and had reaſon to think themſelves out of danger in ſuch a place; at the ſame time a great number of boats and- ſmall veſſels, anchored ncar it (all likewiſe full of people, who had retiredthithe. for the ſame purpoſc) were all ſallowed up as in a whirlpool, and never more appeared: li This ſaſt dreadſul incident I did not t ſee vith my own eyes, as it paſſed three or four ſtones throws ſrom the ſpor where I then was, but: Ihad the account as here given from ſeveral maſters of mips, who were anchored ithin twõ or three hundred yards of the quay,. and ſaw the whole cataſtrophe. DOrne of them in particular informed me, that when the ſecond ſhock came on, he could perceive the whele city waving back- võrds and ſorwards, like the ſea when the wind ſirſt begir ns to riſe; that the agitation oſ the earth was Io great even under the river, that it threw up his large anchor ſrom the mooring, which ſwam, as he termed it, on the ſurface of the water; that immediately upon this xtraordinary concuſſion, the river roſe: at or ce near twenty ſeet, and i in a moment ſubſided; at which inſtant he ſaw tie quay, vith the whole concourſe of people upon it, ſink down, and at the ſame time every one of the boats and veſſels that were near it were drawn into the cavity, which he ſuppoſes inſtantly cloſed' npon them, inaſmuch as not the leaſt ſign of à wreck was ever ſeen afierwards. This account you may give ſull credit to, for às to the loſ of the veſels; it is confirmed by every body; and with regard to the quey, I went myſelf a few days after, to convince myſelf of the truth, and could not find even the ruins of a place, where I had- taken ſo many agrèeable walks, as this was the common rendeZvous of the factory in the cool of the evening. I found it all deep ater, and in ſome parts ſcarcely to be fathomed. l e This is the only place I could learn which was ſwallowed up in or about Liſbon, though I ſaw many large cracks and fiſſures in diſferent parts, and one odd phenomenon I muſt not omit, which was communicated to me by a friend who had a houſe and vine-cellars on the other ſide of the river, viz. that the dwelling-houſe being firſt terribly ſhaken, which made all the family run out, there preſently fell down a vaſt high rock near it, that upon this the river roſe and ſubſided in the manner alrea ady mentioned, and immediately a great number of ſmall fiſſures appeared in ſeveral contiguous pieces of ground, whence there ſpouted out lie a jet denu a large quantity of fine white ſand, to a prodigious height.  IT had not been Iong in the area  of St. Pauls, vhen Ifclt the third mock, which though ſomewhat leſs violent than the two former, the ſea ruſhed ©n again, and retired with the ſame rapidity, and I remained up to my knees in water, though I had gotten upon a ſmall eminence at ſome diſtance from the river, with the ruins of ſeveral intervening houſes to break its ſorce. At this time I toòk notice the waters retired ſo impetuouſly, that ſome veſſels were leſt quite dry, which rode in ſeven fathom water: the river thus continued alternately ruſhing on and retiring ſeveral times together, in ſuch ſort, that it was juſtly dreaded Liſbon would now meet the ſame ſate, which a few years ago had befallen the city of Lima.  Perhaps vou may think the preſent doleful ſubject here concluded; but, alas the horrors of the firſt of November, are ſufficient to fill a volume. As ſoon as ĩt grew dark, another ſcene preſented itſeli  This happened in 1746. Iittle leſs ſnocking than thoſe already deſcribed the whole city appeared in a blaze, which was ſo bright that I could eaſily ſee to read by it. It may be ſaid, without exeggeration, it was on ſire at leaſt in an hundred different places at once, and thus continued burning for ſix days together, without intermiſſion, or the leaſt attempt being made to ſtop its progreſs.  I could never learn, that this terrible fire was oving to any ſubterraneous eruption, as ſome reported, but to three cauſcs, which all concurring at the ſame time, will naturally account for the prodigious havock it made; the firſt of November being All Saints Day, a high feſtival among the Portugueſe, every altar in every church and chæpel (ſome of which have more thai twentv) was illuminated with a number of wax tapers and lamps, as cuſtomaery; theſe ſetting fire to the curtains and timber work that fell with the ſhocl, the conflagration ſoon ſpread to the neighbouring houſes, and being there joined with the fires in the itchen chimnies, increaſed to ſuch a degree, that it might eaſily have deſtroyed the whole city, though no other cauſe had concurred, eſpecially as it met with Do interruption.  But what would appear ncredible to you, were the fact leſs public and notorſous, is, that a gang of hardened villains, who had been conſined, and got out of priſon when the wall fell, at the ſirſt ſock, were buſily employed in ſetting fire to thoſe buildings, which ſtood ſome chance of eſcaping the genceral deſtruction. i  The fire, by ſome means or other, may be ſuid to have deſtroyed the whole city, at leaſt every thing that vas grand or valuable in it; and the damage on this nccaſion ĩs not to be eſtimated. /The whole number of perſons that periſhed, inB cluding thoſe who were burnt, or afterwarde cruſhed to death whilſt digging in the ruins, is ſuppoſed, on the loweſt calculãtion, to amount to more than ſixty thouſand; and though the damage in other reſpects cannot be computed, yet you may ſorm fome idea of it, when I aſſure you, that this extenſive and opulent city, is now nothing but a vaſt heap of ruins, that the rich and poor are at preſent upon a level, ſome thouſands of families which but the day before had been eaſy in their circumſtances, being now ſcattered about in the fields, wanting every conveniency of life, and finding none able o relieve them.  A few days aſter the firſt conſternation was over, I ventured down into the city, by the ſaſeſt ways I could pick out, to ſee if there was a poſſibility of getting any thing out of my lodgings, but the ruins were now ſo augmented by ihe late fire, that I was ſo far from being able to diſtinguiſh the individual ſpot where the houſe ſtood, that I could not even diſtinguiſh the ſtreetr, amidſt the mountains of ſtone and rubbiſh which roſe on every ſide Some days after, I ventured down again with ſeveral porters, who, having long plied in theſe parts of the town, were ell acquainted with the ſituation of particular houſes; by their aſiſtance, I at laſt diſcovered the ſpot; but was ſoon convinced, that to dig for any thing there, beſides the danger of ſuch an attempt, would never anſwer the expence.  On both the times when I attempted to make this fruitleſs ſearch, eſpecially the firſt, there came ſuch an intolerable ſtench ſrom the dead bodies, that I was ready to faint away, and though it did not ſeem ſo great this Inſt time, yet it had nearly been more fatal to me, as I contracted a fever by it, but of which, God be praiſed, I ſoon got the better. Hoever, this made me ſo cantious for the future, that I avoided paſſing near certain places, where the ſtench was ſo exceſſive that people began to dread an infection: a gentleman told me, thet going into the town a few days after the earthquake, e ſaw ſeveral bodies lying in the ſtreets, ſome horribly mangled, as he ſuppoſed, by the dogs, others half burnt, ſome quite roaſted; and that in certain places, particularly near the doors of churches, they hay i in vaſt heaps piled one upon another. The yvear 1783 was fatally marked by the deſolation of ſome of the moſt fertile, moſt beautiful, and moſt celebrated provinces of Europe. The two Calabrias, with a part of Sicily, were doomed to be a ſcene of the moſt tremendous, and the moſt fatal eærthquaes that ever were known, even in thoſe volcanic regions. The firſt ſhock happened about noon, on the 5th of February, and was ſo violent as to involve almoſt the whole of Calabria in ruin. This vas but the commencement of a ſucceſſion of earthquakes, vhich begirning ſfrom the city of Amantea, on the coaſt of the Tyrrhene ſea, proceeded along the weſtern coaſt to Cape Spartivento, and up the eaſtern as far as Cape DAlice; during the whole of which ſpace not a town was leſt undeſtroyed. During two years repeated ſhocks continued to agitate the aſfrighted minds of the inhabitants of Calabria and Sicily, but the principal miſchieſs aroſe in the months of February and March in the Tĩrſt year. For ſeveral months the earth continued in an unceaſing tremor, which at certain intervals increaſed to violent ſhocks, ſome of which were beyond deſcription dreadful. Theſe ſhocks were ſometimes horizontal, vwhirling like a vortex; and ſometimes by pulſſtions or beating from the bottom upwards, and vere at times ſo violent that the heuds oſ the lorgeſt trees almoſt touched the ground on cĩther ſide. ſhe rãins, during a great part of the time, were continual and violent, often accompanied with lighiring, and ſurious guſts of wind. All that part of Calubria, which luy between the 538th and 359th ũegrees, aſumed a new appearancee. Houſe', churches, to⸗ns, cities, and villages, were buried in one promiſcuous ruin. Mountains were detached from their foundations, and carried to a conſiderable diſtance?. Rivers diſappeared from their beds, and ægain returned and overflowed the ædjacent country 7. Streams oſ water ſuddenly guſhed out of the ground, and ſprang to a conſiderable height. Large pieces of the ſurſace of the plain, ſeveral acres in extent, were carried five hundred ſcet from theſr former ſituation down into the bed of the river, and Ieft ſtanding at nearly the diſtance of a mile, ſurrounded by large plantations of olives and mul* Sir William Hamilton, whoſe ardens and laudoble ſvirit of Inquiry occaſoncd his viſiting Calabria and Sicily during this calar itous ſeaſon, accounts for the removal of a mountain of about to hundred and fifty feet in height, and about fcur hundred feet in diameter at ĩts baſe, from th]e diferent nature of is jnferior and ſoperior ſtrata. The undær part being more ſolid and compact, was more ſtrongly acted upon by the violent motion of the earth, and the volcanic vapours, which drove jt to the diſtarce of ſome hundred yards from its original ſcite, where iĩt lay in confuſed blocks, after having leſt ithe ſuperior ſtratum, whic, with its trees and vineyards, vas carried ĩn œrother direction to the diſtance of four miles. + The ſame philoſopher accounts for this phenomenon by ſuppœſing the firſt impulſe of the earthquake to have come from the bottom upwarãs, which raiſing the ſurſace of the ground, the rivers which are not deep muit naturally diſappear; but the earth returning again with violence to its former level, the rivers muſ as naturally return and overilow their barks; at the ſame time the boggy grounds being ſuddenly depreſied, would force out the water vihich lay hid under their ſurface, berry trees, and corn growing as well upon them as upon the ground from which they were ſeparated. Amidſt thee ſcenes of devaſtation, the eſcapes of ſome of the unhappy ſuſferers is extremely wonderſul. Some of the inhabitants of houſes which were thrown to a conũderable diſtance, were dug out from their ruins unhurt. But theſe inſtances were few, and thoſe who were ſo fortunate as to preſerve their lives in ſuch ſituations, were content to purchaſe exiſtence at the expence of broken limbs and the moſt dreadſful contuſions. During this calamitous ſcere, it is impoſſible to conceĩive the horrors and wrerchedneſ of the unhappy inhabitants. The jaws of death were opened to ſwallow them up; ruin had ſeized all their poſſeſſions, æand thoſ- dear connections to Which they might have looked for conſolation in their ſorrows, were for ever buried in the mercileſs abyſs. All was ruin and deſolation. Every countenance Indicated the extremity of afiction and deſpair; and the whole country formed a vwide ſcene of undeſcribable horror. One of the moſt remarkable towns which was deſtroyed was Caſal Nuova, where the Princeſs Gerace Grimaldi, with more than four thouſand of her ſubjects, periſned in the ſame inſtant. An inhabitant happening to be on the ſummit of a neighbouring hill at the moment of the ſock, and looking earneſtiy back to the reſidence of his family, could ſee no other remains of it than a white cloud which proceeded from the ruins of the houſcs. At Bagnara, about three thouſand perſons were illed, and not fewer at Radicina and Palma. At Terra Nuova four thouſand four hundred periſhed, and rather more at Semniari. The inhabitants of Scilla eſcaped from their houſes on the elebrated rock of that name, and with their prince, deſcended to a little harbour at the ſoot oſ the hill; but, in the courſe of the night, a ſtupendous wave, vhich is ſaid to have been driven three miles over land, on its return ſwept away the unſortunate prince, ?ith two thouſand four hundred and ſeventy-three of his ſubjects. It is computed thaet not leſs than forty P o o x VII. o F IW A4 T E R. C u A P. I. OF WVATER IN GENERAL. Vater a Compound Body.7TVhree States of WaterVWater in a fluid Srate.Florentine Experiment. —Vapour.Experiments aſcertaining the Force of VatourSteam Engine. IceIhenomena of Frecæing.OFV Thawing.l ater extanded in ihe State of IceImmenſe VForce excrted by later on paſſing to that State.lhy Ice is not perfeclly tranſparent. W⸗ R was univerſally conſidered as a ſimple ſ elementary ſubſtance till the chemiſts of the preſent age proved, by experiments, the ſubſtance of which has been ſtated in a preceding volume *, that it is in reality a compound body. Its principles have been aſcertained both by compoſition and decompoſition; and one hundred parts of water are found to conſiſt of eighty-five parts of oxygen, and fifteen of hydrogen, or the baſis of inflammable air. This very uſeful and neceſſary fluid preſents iĩtſelf to our notice in three diſtinct forms, namely, in iĩts liquid ſtate, in the ſtate of vapour or ſteam, and laſtly  Eook V. Chap. I. j in iĩts frozen ſtate. Of theſe I ſhall ſpeak in their order. Water, when pure and in.its fluid ſtate, ĩs tranſparent, colourleſs, and without ſmell. It adheres to moſt bodies which come in contact with it, it pervades porous ſubſtances, diſſolves gummy and ſaline matters, and extinguiſhes fire. Water, when ſluid, is not in its moſt ſimple ſtate, for its fluidity depends on a certain quantity of caloric, or the matter of heat, which enters into combination vith it, and inſinuating itſelf between the particles of the water, renders them capable of moving in all directions. We are ſupplied with water either from the atmoſphere, whence it deſcends in the form of rain, hail, or ſnow, or from the earth, which ſends ĩt forth in ſprings and rivulets. In the former caſe the watery exhaletions drawn from the ſea, æand the ſurface of the earth by the ſun's heat, form clouds, whoſe particles being aſterwards condenſed, fall back again in ſowers. In the latter, the water which falls on the tops of mountains, anct other loſty ſituations, penetrates the earth, and, aſter paſſng dovnwards, breals forth at ſome iit : or aperture æt a diſtaneæ ſrom its ſouice. e e quanti⸗; of water arrracted from the ſurfſace e ę0  is ahroſt incredible e. Dr. Halle ey has calculated haſ poiton hich ĩs vielded by the ſea, to be at the rate oſ one cubie inch ſon every ten inches ſurſace in tuelve honrs*. To form an adequate of this, let us ſuppnſc onty haif the giobe to be covered by the ſea. The whole ſurſace oſ the earth being about 25,7957,278 leagues, that of the ſea will conſcmently he œs Suppoſing the evaporation  See Biſiop Wa:ſon's Calculation, vol. i. p. 122. which takes place in twelve hours to be that above mentioned, without having any regard t0n what is evaporated ſrom the whole of the land, or from the ſea during the other twelve hours, it will be found that the atmoſphere has taken up no leſs than 29,302,535,177,834, or more than twenty millions of millions of cuhic feet of water; an enormous quantity, a and much more than ſufficient to ſupply all the rivers that interſeõt hæ different quanters of the globe * li What particularly ditinguites water, and thoſe Hluids which are of a ſimilar conſiſtence, and in common language are termed liquids, from thoſe ſubtile fluids hich vere treated oſ at large in the preceding volume, is, that the former are not, likè the others, poſſeſſed of that ſorprizing elaſticity which admits of the volume of fluid being condenſed into a ſmall compaſs; but, or the contrary, may be conſidered as incapabie of compreſſion, or at leaſt are compreſſible in a very ſlight degree. The Florentine academicians filled a globe of oll with water, and compreſſed I it with immenſe ſorce; the firſt effect oſ this compreſſion vas, that the ball was conſiderably heated by the emiſſion of latent heat from the water, and aſterwards the ſluid ſorced i its way throngh the pores of the gold, or x There will poſibly be apparent, in this part of h ork, ſome degree of repetition wher compnred With what was ſaid of vapour in the firſt book. It was then receſary to ſpeak oſ vapour, in explanation of the properties of heat; it is now nece ſſary t0 treat of ſt in conneſtion with tho fluld of which ĩt ĩs uſually formed; H and I conceive it better to do this, with the riſk of ſome repetition, than to refer to a former volume, both becauſe it vill ſerve more firmly to impreſs on the minds of young readers ſome of the moſi important doctrines of philoſophy: and becauſe what may. nov appear às repetition, is, in this place, mixed with new facts, which could æ not be previouſly introduced. 2 EEE: li trough i through certain cavities, and appeared in diops on the ſurſface. The concluſion, however, which was haſtily drawn from this experiment, that water, in its liquid ſtate, is abſolutely void of all elaſticity, is not warrantable. Since other experiments ſew that water as well as mercury vill yield, in a certain degree, to the preſſure of the air in a condenſing machine, as Mr. Canton proved by including it in a glaſs veſſel, with a narrow neck or ſtem nicely graduated; its condenſation appears proportioned to the force, and as ſoon as the preſſure cf the air is removed, the fluid vill be obſerved gradually to recover its accuſtomed dimenſions. b VWhen water becomes heated to a degree beyond that of the air upon its ſurſace, the matter of heat, which has a conſtant propenſity to diffuſe itſelſ equally through all bodies with which ĩt is in conract, riſes and carries  ith ĩt part of the water, which it converts into an elaſtic ſluid or vapour. Until the water, however, arrives at the boiling point, the evaporation ĩs very gradual; but when this happens it becomes very rapid, and the part of the water which is moſt heated, being converted into vapour, riſes ſuddenly to the ſurface, and occaſions conſiderable agitatiom Ebullition requires a determined degree oſ heat, becauſe the ſteam cannot be formed within the water, unleſs it is ſtrong enough to overcome the actual preſſure of the uid and air incumbent on ir. But in ordinary evaporation, the vapour is ſormed at the ſurface of the water, and has therefore no other preſſure to overcome than that of the atmoſphere. The elaſtic fluid, however, which is formed by ordinary evaporation is different from that produced by ebullition, for the latter ulways returns to the ſtate of water by a diminution of temperature, vhereas the former is relllS hap- . Vater in Cudi 383 duced almoſt to the ſtate of a permanently elatic ſluid by mixture with air. We find that all fluids boĩl more eaſily in proportion as the preſſure of the atmoſphere is removed; whether this is eſfected by aſcending a mountein, or making uſe of the air pump. M. ſavoiſier ſays, that if the weight of the a 2tmoſphere wãs only equal to between twenty or twenty-fſour inches of a column of męrcury, inſtead of twenty- eight inches, we ſhould never be able to obtain æther in a liquid ſtate, at leaſt in ſummer; and that the formation of æther muſt conſequently be impoſſible upon mountains of a moderate degree of elevation, without employing extraordinary means of compreſſion for its condenſation. Upon the whole, ĩt appears moſt probable that all bodies are capable ef exiſting in a ſolid, a liquid, and aæn aeriform ſtate; that the firſt is the moſt ſimple ſtate of all bodies, and that the two others depend on combinations with different quantities of the matter of heat, of which the aeriſorm ſtate requires by far the moſt. Vapour, as it firſt riſes from boiling water, is inviſible, but as it mixes with the air it is deprived of part of its heat, returns to its fluid form, and the very minute drops of water which are produced, aſcend in a copious cloud of a white or light- grey- -colour. Vapour is the more readily ciſcernable in proportion to the coldneſs and humidity of the atmoſphere. The cloudy appearance of ſtèam is occaſioned by the difficulty vith which its particles are ſeparated and diſolved in the atmoſphere; the difficulty is increaſed in proportion to the coldneſs and humidity of the air, and this is the reaſon that the moiſture exhaled with the breath, is viſible i in winter and not in ſummer. It was ſtated in a former volume, that the combination of water, in that degree which conſtitutes ſteam, rarifies them ſo exceedingly, as to occaſion them to occupy à ſpace ſome hundred times greater than the original bulk of the fluid, and it is that alſo which volatilizes and enables them to aſcend through the air, and to overcome its reſiſtance. But when ſteam is expoſed to a ſtill greater degree of heat, its volume is angmented ſtill more conſiderably. That heat which makes water boĩl, and which rarifies it only one twenty- ſixth, rarifies its vapour to eighteen hundred times the bullk of the water which produced i itt. This may be very readily demonſtrated, by taking a glaſs tube, at one end of which is a hulb of two inches in diameter, and dropping into it a ſingle drop of water, the diameter of which we will ſupPoſe to be one-tenth of an inch. The ſquares of theſe two ſpheres, vith regard to each other, vill be as 1800 are to one. Upon heating the bulb of the tube over the flame of a ſpirit Iamp, the air will firſt be expelled, and aſterwards the drop of vater will be converted into ſteam, and take poſeſion of the whole of the bulb; as may be proved by plunging the mouth of the tube into cold water, and ſuffering the ſteam within the bulb to return to its ſiuid ſtate. In this cuſe, the preſſure of the atmeſphere will cauſe the vater to ruſh into the tube, and to cccupy that ſpace within the bulb, which beſore was occupied by the va;our, and thus the fact wiil be aſcertaincd. If, however, any obſtacle is oppoſed to the expanſive force of ſteam, the heat augments ĩts reſiſtance in a degree proportiomate to the augmentation of its volume. The pouer of reſiſtance aff. rded by the vapour of water is prodigious, and has of late years been made ſubſervient to ſome mechanical purpoſes of the greateſt importance. Muſchenbroek has proved by experiment, that the force of gunpowder is feeble, when compared to that of riſing ſteam. An hundred and forty pounds of gunpowder blew up a weight of thirty thouſand pounds; but on the other hand, an hundred and forty pounds of water, converted by heat into ſteam, liſted a weight of ſeventy-ſeven thouſand pounds, and would liſt a much greater, if there were means of giving the ſteam greater heat with ſaſety; for the hotter the ſteam the greater is its force. The ſteam engine, to which I had formerly occaſion ſlightly to advert*, is a machine which may be; and is occaſionally applied to various mechanical purpoſes where great force is required; but which has hitherto been principally uſed to clear mines from vater, and to raiſe water to a proper height for the ſupply of cities. In theſe caſs, the expanſive power of ſteam is ſo managed as to operate on immenſe pumps, which could not conveniently be worked by any other means. In order to give the reader a ſuperficial idea of this machine, let us imagine a common pump prepared, and that we want to move the handle of this pump upwards by the force of ſteam orly. In the firſt place, let us ſuppoſe, that the handle of the pump, or ſomething connected to it, was ſo contrived as to admit of being inſerted in the barrel of a gun, or ſome cylindrical tube, ſet upright over a cauldron containing boiling water. Next let us ſuppoſe, that the ſteam could be admitted into the tube; through the touch- Eole, and ſo confined as to paſs only by that vay. Now as the fire begins to dilate the ſteam, a part oſ it will enter the tube by the touchhole, and this will preſs up the pump, which is ſuppoſed to be ſo fitted to the tubè as to prevent any part æ See vol B i pi 1io: of the ſteam from eſcaping. In this way the pump handle would be driven quite out at the mouth of the tube, but let us imagine, that be fore this can happen a valve is opened, which allows a ſmall quantity of cold water to be ſpouted into the tube, which eſfectually and inſtantaneouſly deſtroys, or, more properly, condenſes. the ſteam. The tube being now leſt empty, there is nothing to counteract the preſſure of the atmoſphere, which again forces down the handle into the tube, into which no ſteam is permitted to enter, on acccunt of a valve which now ſtops the touch- hole below; but when the handle is thus preſſed down, the valve below is again opened, and new ſteam entering again preſſes the handle upwards; when the handle comes near the top, the ſteam is again cooled and condenſed as before, and the handle is again preſſed down by the weight of the atmoſphere. In this manner it is alternately driven upwards and downwards by the expanſive power of the ſteam and the preſſure of the external air, and works the pumꝑ with unwearied aſiduity. Though the principle however, is plain, the machinery is complex in the ſteam engine; but the annexed plate IV. wilt probably render it tokrably intelligible. In fig. . A Fepreſents the fire-place under the boiler, for the boiling of the water, and the aſhhole below it. B, the boiler, filled with water about three feet above the bottom, made of iron plates. C, the ſteam pipe, through which the ſteam paſſes from the boiler into the receiver. D, the receiver, a cloſe iron veſſel, in which is the regulator or ſteam- cock, which opens and ſhuts the hole of communication at each ſtroke. E, the communication pipe between the receiver and the cylinder; it riſes five or ſix inches up, in the inſide of the cylinder bottom, to prevent the injected water from deſcencing into the receiver. F, the cylinder, of caſt iron, about ten feet long, bored ſmooth in the inſide; it has a broad flanch in the middle on the outſicdle, by which it ĩis ſupported when hung in the cylinder-beams. G, the piſton, made to fit the cylinder exactly: it has a flanch riſing four or five inches upon its upper ſurface, between which and the ſide of the cylinder a quantity of junk or oakum is ſtuffed, and kept down by weights, to prevent the entrance of air or water and the eſcaping of ſteam. F, the chain and piſton ſhank, by which ĩt is connected to the working beam. II, the working beam or Iever: ĩ&t is made of two or more large logs of timber, bent together at each end, and Lept at the diſtanee of eight or nine incheę from each other in the middle by the gudęeon, as repreſented in the plate. The arch-heads, II, at the ends, are for giving a perpendicular direction to the chains of the piſton and pump-rods. K, the pump-rod which works in the ſuck ing pump. I, and draws the water from the bottom of the pit to the ſurface. M, a ciſtern, into which the water drawn out of the pit is conducted by a trough, ſo as to keep it always full; and the ſuperſluous water is carried off by anQther trough. N, the jack- head pump, which is a ſucking-pump wrought by a ſmall lever or working-beam, by means of a chain connected to the great beam or lever near the arch ꝗ at the inner end, and the pump rod at the outer end. This pump commonly ſtands near thę corner of the. front of the houſe, and raiſes the column of water up to the ciſtern O, i intò which it is conducted by a trough. O, the Sack-head cittern for ſopplying the injection, which i is always kept full by the pump N; it is fixed ſo high as to give the jet a ſuſficient velocity into the cylinder when the cock is opened. This ciſtern has a pipe on zhe oppoſite ſide for conveying away the ſuperſluous watero. PP, the injection- pipe, of three or four inches dinmeter, which turns up in a curve at the lower end, and enters the cylinder bottom; it has a thin plate of iron upon the end a, with three or four adjutage holes in it, to prevent the jet of cold water of the jack- head ciſtern from ſiying up againſt the piſton, and yet to condenſe the ſteam cach ſtroe, when the injectioncock i is open. e, a valve upon the upper end of the injection- pipe vwithin the ciſtern, which is ſhut when the enginè is not working, to prevent any waſte of the vater. ; a ſmall pipe which branches off from the injectionpipe, and has a ſmall cock to ſupply the piſton with a little water to keep it air-tight. Q; the working plug, ſuſpended by a chain to the arch &4, of the working beam, It is uſually a heavy piece of timber, with a ſit vertically down its middle, and holes bored horizontally through it, to receive pins ſor the purpoſe of opening and ſhutting the injection and ſteam cocks, as it aſcends and deſcends by the motion of the working beam. B, the handle of the ſteam- cock or regulator. It is fixed to the regulator by a ſpindle which comes up through the top of the receiver. The regulator is a circular plat or braſs or caſt iron, vhich is moved horizontally by the handle à, and opens or ſhuts the communication at the Iower end of the pipe E within the receiver. It is repreſented in the plate by a circular dotted line. i i, the ſpanner, which is a long rod or plate of iron ſor communicating motion to the handi le of the regulator, to Which it is fixed by means of a ſlit in the Iatter, and ſome pins put through to ſaſten it. k l, the vibrating Iever, called the Y, having the weight æ at one end and two legs at the other end. It is fixed to an horizontal axis, moveable about its centerpins or pivots mn, by means oſ the two ſhanks o» fixed to the ſame axis, which are alternately thrown backwards and forwards by means of two pins in the working plug; one pin on the outſide dæpreſſing the ſhank ę, throws the loaded end æ of the Y from the cylinder into the poſition repreſented in the plate, and cauſes the legſ to ſtrike againſt the end of the ſpanner, which, forcing back the handle of the regulator or ſtenm-cock, opens the communication, and permits the ſteam to ſly into the cylinder. The piſton immediately riſing by the admiſſion of the ſteam, the working beam II riſes; which alſo raiſes the workingplug, and another pin whieh goes through the ſit raiſes the ſhank ꝓ, which throws the end æ of the Y towards the cylinder, and, ſtriking the end of the ſpanner, forces it forward, and ſhuts he regulator ſteamcock. qr, the lever ſor opening and ſnutting the injection cock, called the F. It has two toes for its center, which take between them the key of the injectioncock. When the working- plug has ſcended nearly to its greateſt height, and ſhut the regulator, a pin catches the end ꝗ of the F and raiſes it up, which opens the injection-cock, admits a jet of cold water to ſly into the cylinder, and, condenſing the ſteam, makes a vacuum; then the preſſure of the atmoſphere biinging down the piſton i in the cylinc der, and alſo the plugframe, another pin fixed in it catches the end of the lever in its deſcent, and, by preſſing it down, ſhuts the injection- cock, at the ſame time the regulator is opened to admit ſteam, and ſo on alternately; when the regulator is ſhut the injection ĩs open, and when the former is open the latter is ſhut. R, the hot-well, a ſmall ciſtern made oſ planks, which receives all the waſte vater from the cylinder. S, the ſink-pit to convey away the water which is injected into the cylinder at each ſtroke. Its upper end is even with the inſide of the cylinder bottom, its lower end has a lid or cover moveable on a hinge, which ſerves as a valve to let out the injected water, and ſhuts cloſe each ſtroke of the engine, to prevent the water being forced up again when the vacuum is made. T, the ſecding-pipe, to ſupply the boiler with water from the hot-well. It has a cock to let in a large or ſmall quantity of water, as occaſion requires, to make up ſor what is evaporated; it goes nearly down to the boiler bottom. U, two gage cocks, the one larger than the other, to try when a proper quantity of water is in the boiler: upon openring the cocks, if one gives ſteam and the orher water, it is right; if they both give ſteam, there is too little vater in the boiler; and iſ they both give vater, there is too much. V, a plate which is ſcrewed on to a hole on the ſide oſ the boiler, to allow a paeſſage into the boiler for the converience of cleaning or repairing it. X, the ſteam-clack or puppet valve, which is braſ⸗ m braſs valve on the top ofa pipe opening into the boiler, to let off the ſteam when it is too ſtrong. It ĩs loaded vith lead, at the rate of one pound to an inch ſquare; and when the ſteam is nearly ſtrong enough to keep it open, it will do for the working of t the engine. f, the ſuiſting valve, by hich the air ĩs diſcharged ſrom the cylinder each ſtroke, which was admitied vith the injection, and would otherwiſe obſtruct the due operation of the engine. t 1, the cylinder-beams; which are ſtrong joiſts going through the houſe for ſupporting the cylinder. v, the cylinder cap of lead, ſoldered on the top of the cylinder, to prevent the water upon the piſton from flahing over when ĩt riſes too high. v, the waſte-pipe, which conducts the ſuperſluous water from the top of the cylinder to the hot-well. x æ, iron bars, called the catch-pins, fixed horizontally through each arch head, to prevent the beam deſcending too low in caſe the chain ſhould break. y5, two ſtrong wooden ſprings, to weaken the blow given by the catch-pins when the ſtroke is too long. æ æ, two friction-wheels, on which the gudgeon or center of the great beam is hung; they are the third or fourth part of a circle, and move a little each way as the beam vibrates. Their uſe is to diminiſh the ſriction of the axis, which in ſo heavy a lever, would otherwiſe be very great. When this engine is to be ſet to work, the boiler muſt be ſilled about three or four fcet deep with water, and a large ſire made under it; and when the ſteam is found to be of a ſuſficient ſtrength by the puppet-clack, then by thruſting back the ſpanner, which opens the regulator or ſteam-cock, the ſteam ĩs admitted into the cylinder, which raiſes the piſton to the top oſ the cylinder, and forces out all the air at Cc 4 the ihe ſniſting valve; then by turning the key oſ the injection- cock a jet of cold water is admitted into the cylinder, which condenſes the ſteam and makes a vacuum; and the atmoſphere then preſſing upon the piſton, forces it down to the Iower part of the cylinder, and makes a ſtroke by raiſing the column of water at the other end of the beam. Aſeer two or three ſtrokes are made in this manner, by a man opening and ſhutting the cocks to try if they are right, then the pins may be put into the pin-holes in the working plug, and the engine left to turn the cocks of itſclf, vwhich it will do with greater exactneſs than any man. Many important improvements have been lutely made in the ſteam engine by the ingenious Mr. Watt, of Birmingham He has contrived to preſerve an uniſorm heat in ihe cylinder of his engines, by ſufſering no cold water to touch ĩt, and by protecting it from the air, er cther coll bodies, by a ſurrounding caſe ſilled with ſtenm, or with hot air or water, and by coating it over with ſubſtarnces that tranſmit heat ſlowly. He mekes his vacuum to approach rearly ro that of the barometer, by condenſing the ſteam in a ſeparate veſiel, called the condenſer, which may be cooled at pleaſure without cooling the cylinder, either by an injection of cold water, or by ſurrounding the condenſer. with it, and generally by both. He extracts the injection water and detached air from the cylinder or condenſer by pumps, which are wrought by ihe engine ĩtũlf, or blows them out by the ſteam. As thiæ entrance of air into the cylincer would ſtop the operation of he engines, and as ĩt is hardly to be expecied that ſuch enormons piſtons as thoſe of ſteam engines can move up and down, and yet be abſolutel ly tight in the common engines, a ſtrenm of water is kept always running upon the piſton, which prevents the entry of the air; but this modè of ſecuring the piſton, though not injurious in the common ones, would be highly prejudicial to the new engines. Their piſton is therefore made more accurately; and the outer cylinder, having a liq, covers it, the ſteam js introduced above the piſton; and vhen a vacuum is produced under it, acts upon it by its elaſticity, as the atmoſphere does upon common engines by its gravity. This way of working effectually excludes the air from the inner cſinder, and gives the advantage of adding to the power, by inereaing the elaſticioy o the ſteam. In Mr. Wart 's engines, the ylinder, the great beams, the pumps, &c. ſtand in their uſual poſition. The &; linder is ſmaller than uſual, in proportion to the load, and is very accurately bored. lE In the moſt complete engines it is ſurrounded, at a ſmall diſtance, with another cylinder, furniſhed with a bottom and a lid. The interſtice between the cylinders communicates with the boilers by a large pipe, open at both ends, ſo that it is always filled with ſteam, and thereby maintains the inner cylinder alvays of the ſame heat with the ſteam, and prevents any condenſation within it, which would be more detrimental than an equal condenſation in the outer one. The inner cylinder has a bottom and piſton as uſual; and as ĩt does not reach up quite to the lid of the outer cylinder, the ſteam in the interſtice has always free acceſs to the upper ſide of the piſton. The lid of the outer cylinder has a hole in its middle; and the piſton rod, which is truly cylindrical, moves up and down through that hele, which is kept ſteam- tight by a collar of akum ſcrewed down upon it. At the bottom of the inner eylinder, there are to regulating valves, one of which admits the ſteam to paſs ſrom the inſterſtice into the inner cylinder below the piſton, or ſhuts ĩt out at ;leaſure; the other opens or ſhuts the end of a pipe, which leads to the condenſer. The condenſer conſiſts of one or more pumps furniſhed vith clacks and buckets (nearly the ſame as in common pumps) which are wrought by chains faſtened to the great working beam of the engine. The pipe, which comes from the cylinder, is joined to the bottom of theſe pumps, and the whole condenſer ſtands immerſed in a ciſtern cf cold water ſupplied by the engine. The place of this ciſtern is either within the houſe or uncter the ſloor, between the cylinder and the lever wall; or without the houſe between that wall and the engine ſhaſt, as conveniency may require. The condenſer being exhauſted of air by blowing, and both the cylinders being filled with ſteam, the regulating valve which admits the ſteam into the inner cylinder is ſhut, and the other regulator which communicates vith the condenſer is openeq and the ſteam ruſhes into the vacuum of the condenſer with violence; but there it comes into contact with the cold ſides of the pumps and pipes, and meets a jet of cold water, which vas opened at the ſame time with the exhauſtion regulator; theſe inſtantly deprive it of its heat, and reduce it to water; and the vacuum remaining perfect, more ſteam continues to ruſh in, and be condenſed until the inner cylinder ĩs exhauſted. Then the ſteam which is above the piſton, ceaſing to be counteracted by thet which was below it, acts upon the piſtcn with iĩts whole elaſticity, and torces it to deſcend to the bottom oſthe cylinder, and ſo raiſcs the buckets of the pumps which are hung to the other end of the beam. The exhauſtion regulator is now ſhut, and the ſteam one opened again, which, by letting in the ſlcom, ilion⸗ the piſton to be pulled up by the ſuperior weight of the pump rods; and ſo the engine is ready for another ſtroke. But the nature of Mr. Watt's improvement will be perhaps better underſtood from the following deſcription of it, as reſerred to a figure.The cylinder or ſteam veſſel A, of this engine (fig. 2.) is ſhut at bottom and opened at top as uſual, and is included in an outer cylinder or caſe BB, of wood or metal, covered with materials which tranſmit heat ſlowly. This caſe is at a ſmall diſtance from the cylinder, and cloſe at both ends. The cover C has a hole in it, through which the piſton rod E ſlides; and near the bottom is another hole F, by which the ſteam from the boiler has always free entrance into this caſe or outer cylinder, and by the interſtice GG between the two cylynders has acceſs to the upper ſide of the piſton HH. To the bottom of rhe inrer cylinder A is joined a pipe I, with a cock or valve X, which is opened and ſhut when neceſſary, and forms a paſſage to another veſſel L called a condenſer, made of thin metal. This veſſel is immerſed in a ciſtern M full of cold water, and it is contrived ſo as to expoſe a very great ſurface externally to the water, and internally to the ſteam. It is alſo made air-tight, and has pumps N wrought by the engine, which keep it always exhauſted of air and ater. Both the cylinders A and BB being filled with ſteam, the paſſage K is opened from the inner one to the condenſer L, into which the ſteam violently ruſhes by its elaſticity, becauſe that veſſel is exhauſted; but as ſoon as it enters it, coming into contact with the cold matter of the condenſer, it is reduced to vater, and the vacuum ſtill remaining, the ſteam continues to ruſh in till the inner cylinder A below the piſton is leſt empty. The ſteam which is above the piſton, ceaſing to be counteracted by that which is below it, acts upon the piſton FIH, and forces it to deſcend to the bottom of the cylinder, and ſo raiſes the bucket of the pump by means of the lever. The paſfage X between the inner cylinder and the condenſer is then ſhut, and another paſſage O is opened, which permits the ſteam to paſs from the outer cylinder, or from the boiler into the inner cylinder under the piſton; and then the ſoperior veight of the bucket and pump rods pulls down the outer end of the lever or great beam, and raiſes the piſton, which i is ſoſpende to the i inner end of the ſame beam. When water is expoſed tò a cold atmoſhers it firſt loſes its free caloric, and is reduced in temperature, but no part of it begins to freeze till the maſ' is reduced ſome vhat below the thirty-ſecond degree of Tahrenhcits thermometer; a ſmall quantity of the water then becomes ſolid, which, by changing its ſtate, ſets at liberty a quantity of its combined heat, which reſtores the water in contact with it to the temperature of 32 degrees, or rather above it. The congelation ĩs thereſore at a ſtand till this ſenſible heat is abſtracted by the atmoſphere, and the maſs again reduced ſomewhat below the thirty-ſecond. degree. Another portion of water then congeals, and the proceſ is agaim ſtopped by the emiſſion of heat. In this manner congelation pervades the whole maſs, and is performed at intervals, which are very obſervablè when the phenomenon of freezing is accurately attended to. The ſame law operates in the paſſage of other bodies from the ſtate of fluids to that of ſolids, and the contrary. Dr. Irvine hes ſhewn, that when ſpermaceti and wax are melted, they contain the matter of heat in a combined or latent ſtate. By heating them much above their point of fluidity, he' found that they Ioſt their heat very ſoon, till ſome parts became ſolid; aſter this they continued of exactly the ſame temperature till-the, whole became ſoliq, though expoſed all the whi le to cold air; but when all became ſolid they cooled as they did at firſt. In the ſame manner water mixed with ice, whatever may be the temperature of the ſurrounding medium, and whether the quantity of ice is increaſing or diminiſhing, ; alWays nearly preſerves the temperature of 32 degrees. The ſreezing of water was ſormerly attributed to the entrance of frigoriſic particles i into that fuid; but the. above doctrine, founded on the great diſcoveries of Dr. Black, is almoſt univerſally deemed ſo ſatisfactory as to have leſt the other, which is a mere hypotheſis, ſcarcely a ſingle advocate. The augmentation of the bulk of water in ſreeZing ſeems to be the only fact which can with reaſon be alleged in ſupport of the doctrine of frigorific particles; but this increaſe of bulk is not attended with any increaſe of weight, and may be much better explained, than by attributing it to the addition of frigorific particles, which were never proved to have any xiſtence. The increaſe which water acquires in becoming ſolid is about one- ninth or one- tenth oſits whole bulk. Boyle too a braſs tube, three inches in diameter, and put ſome water into it; he then brought down into the tube a plug with a weight placed at the head oſ it of ſeventy- four poũnds. On expoſing the tube to the cold, the water freezing and expanding itſelf, raiſed the ſeventy- four pounds. The expanſive power of water, in the proceſ of freezing, was proved by a remarkable experiment made in Canada. An iron ſhell, after having its mouth vell plugged up, vas filled up with water and expoſed to a ſevere froſt which prevailed in that country. The expanſion of the ice forced out the plug, and the water, which immeciately followed, was frozen into an irregular maſs r column of ice. The inſtances, however, already mentioned, are for leſs ſtriking than one deſcribed by Muſchenbrocck, in which æ ball of iron, an inch thick, was burſt aſunder in the courſe of twelve hours by the expanſive power of ſroſt. That philoſopher having calculated the force exerted by the freezing of water in a ſimilar caſe, found it equal to a force capable of raiſing a weight of twenty- ſeven thouſand ſeven hundred and twenty pounds. That the expanſive power of freezing water, however, has certain limits, appears from the following experiment, made by the Florentine academicians. A braſs globe filled with water, and cloſed at its oriſice by a well-fitted ſerew, was immerſed in freezing water, but did not burſt; they then pared oſf ſuch a quantity oſ the metal as leſt the ſides of the globe unable to reſiſt the expanſion of the water; the force which was required to burſt the globe in this ſtate vas computed at twenty-ſeven thouſand poundis. Whehen ſuch is the expanſive power exerted by ater in paſing to the ſtate of ice, we cannot be ſurprized that veſcls, which are leſt ſilled with water in froſty weather, ſhould be burſt by its freezing, and that the ſame thing ſhould happen to water-pipes expoſed to the action of froſt. The pavement is ſometimes looſened from the ſame cauſe, and in countries where very ſevere colds prevail, the ſap of trees congeals, ænd their trunks are burſt aſunder with a noĩſe like that of cannon. Froſt fertilizes the ground, by lcoſening the c coheſion of the particles of earth. As ice is never perfectly clear or tranſparent, and as we ſind ſmall cavities in it, ſome have thought that the æir inſinuates itſelf; but this has been refuted by water being frozen under an exhauſted receiver, and the ſame cavities being found in the ice. The ice, in fact, inſtead of being heavier, was found to be lighter. The expanſion of ice, indeed, is evidently owing to the cryſtalliZzation of the water, and the particles aſſuming a diſſerent arrangement, and not being in cloſe contact. If this is admitted, as I apprehend it muſt, we cannot ſay, with propriety, that the ſolid particles of water expand. The ſpiculæ, of which ice conſiſts, cut each other at angles of ſixty or one hundred and twenty degrees. When it ſnows at Moſcow, and the air is not too dry, ir is obſerved to be loaded with beautiſul cryſtallizations, regularly flattened, ænd as thin as a leaf of paper. They conſi©t of an union of fibres, which ſoort from the center to form ſix principal rays, which are themſelves divided into extremely ſmall blades. It appears, however, that the air previouſly contained in water is ſet at liberty on the congelation of that fluid, and may thus partly contribute to the ſuelling of ice, and occaſion ſome of the cavities obſervable in it. When water freezes ſlowly, its ſurſace preſerves its tranſparency to ſome depth, owing to the air which is ſeparated paſſing downwards as the freezing proceeds. The air bubbles, however, ſoon begin to collect, and produce conſiderable inequalities, which increaſe as they approach the center. When, on the contrary, water is frozen with great rapidity, the bubbles of air diſperſe themſelves pretty equally through the maſs, which, in conſequence, becomes opake through its vhole ſubſtance. Reaumur obſerves that caſt iron melted, in paſſing from a fiuid to its ſolid ſtate, expands. This effect ĩs more ſenſible in this than in any other of the metals, on account of its platey texture. He found that caſt iron, thrown among ſome of the ſame metal melted, ſwims upon the top. In the caſe of immediate expanſion upon congealing, the iron ſeems to agree with water: they differ in this; the iron never expands by cold afterwards, whereas the ice, being expoſed to greater degrees of cold, becomes more bulky; the ſolid parts not being ſo cloſely connected ſſom a particular arrangement, which renders the whole maſ⸗ lighter than before. Quickſilver contracts in becoming ſolid; and both caſt iron and icẽ contain ſeveral interſtices, which, if allowed for, make it apear that theſe bodies in reality occupy leſ ſpace when ſolid, art of determining the ſpecific gravities of bodies ĩs uſually included, but this I have already been under a neceſiſity of anticipating* in ſome degree. Archimedes, among the ancients, accompliſhed the moſt remarkable diſcoveries in this ſcience. He is honoured even at this day, as the inventor of the ingenious hydroſtatic proceſs, by which the purity or baſeneſs of a crown of gold was aſcertained. Among the moderns we are indebted to Gallileo, Torricelli, Deſcartes, Paſcal, Guglielmini, and Mariotte, for the beſt information on this ſubject; and by their experiments (Which are as curious as they are deciſive) we are inſtructed in what we may expect or fear from the power of ſluids violently acted upon by the principle of gravity, and in what manner and upon what principles we may employ, for the uſe of man, the hydraulic machines. It has been obſervæd in another place, that the propenſity which bodies have oſ approaching towards the earth, or perhaps towards ĩts center, is the only cauſe of what we term weight or gravity, and that iĩt is by the continual efforts which they make to obey that law, that they preſs upon every obſtacle which impedes theĩr progreſs. As fluids, like ſolid bodies, are impelled by their gravity, ſo in this caſe they preſs upon every object which oppoſes their fall; but from their nature they preſs in a different manner from ſolid bodies; hence ariſe the peculiar phenomena into which we are now to inquire. Fluids are matters, the component parts of which  See Book I. Chap. III.. It was neceſſary to explain the nature of ſpeciſic gravity in that part of the work, both becauſe ĩt relates rather to bodies in general than to ſluid ſubitances; ard bæcauſe the fequent alluſions to it in the progreſs of the work would rot have been otherwiſe underſtood. are moveable among themſelves, havin⸗ ſcarccly any coheſion one with another, and moving: idependently of each other. Some philoſophers* have included in this definition what they term the groũer ſluids, æs, for example, a heap of corn, a heap of ſhet, of ſard, &c. as well as the rarer and more elaſtic uids, as common air, and all other aeriform ſubſtances. The proper objects, however, of the hydroſtatic ſcience, are thoſe fluids which, in common language, are termed liquids, or thoſe which always preſent to us a plane ſurface, level or parallel to the horiZon. All liquids are not equally fluid; herce it follows, that the Iaws of hydroſtatics apply with leſs exactneſs in proportion as thoſe ſubſtances depart ſrom perfect fluidity. Water and oil botli flow when the veſſels, which contain thiem, are either overturned or broken; but the effuſion of oil is ſlower than that of vater, becauſe the particles of oll have more coheſion among themſelves. The moſt ſingular effects in hydroſtatics principally depend upon the extreme minuteneſs of the particles of fluids, and upon their great mobility. To preſerve a lucid order in the conſideration of this ſubject, it will be neceſſary to divide the objects of our inquiry into three branches. In the firſt place, therefore, I ſhall conſider in what manner the principle of gravity acts on the particles of fluids, and the phenomena which it produces in the ſluids themſelves; as vell as their action againſt the ſides, the bottoms, and tops of the veſſels in which they are contained. Secondly, I ſhall conſider in what manner ſluids of different denſities act upon each other; and thirdly, the action of fluids on bodies immerſed in them. I. In purſuing the firſt object oſ this inquiry, ĩt may be eſtabliſhed as an axiom: 1ſt, That the parts of the ſame ſfluid act with reſpect to their weight or preſſure, inder endently of each other. This property ariſes from their having ſcarcely any coheſion among themſelves. It is otherwiſe with ſolid bodies; their ſeveral parts adhering together, they preſs in one common maſs; hence the falling of ſolid bodies is productive of a diſferent effect from that of liquidss We dread the ſalling of a pound of ice upon our heads, while we are much more indifferent concerning that of a pound of water. The latter, in its deſcent, is divided by the reſiſtance of the air, by which ſome of its parts are retarded more than others; and the ſwiſtneſs of the whole maſs is ſtill more retarded by this diviſion than ĩit otherwiſe would be; for by being thus divided it acquires a larger ſurface, which abates its eſfect. On the contrary, a ſolid body falls upon a ſmall ſpace, which receives its whole force. Hence it follows, that angular bodies falling upon any part of the human frame are more dangerous than flat or plane ones of the ſame weight, and deſcending from the ſame height. It follows from this principle, that if an aperture is made at the bottom of a veſſel full of any ſfluid, in order to prevent the flowing out of the liquor, it is only neceſſary to counteract the weight of that column of fluid which has the aperture ſor ; its baſe, and that to counteract thaet weight it is the ſame whether the veſſel is full of liquor or hether i it contains only a column, the baſe of which ſhall be equal to the aperture at the bottom. Let the cylindrical veſſel of glaſs A B (plate V. fig. I.] have æ hole in the bottom at C, furniſhed with a cylindrical ſerule oſ copper of æn inch diameter D, which is to be ſtopped with a piſton G, or the ſucker oſ a pump vell fitted to the ferule, and oĩled, that it may yield to a moderate preſſuree Let the piſton be ſupported by a ſmall rod G H, faſtened at H to the ſilk which unites with the portion of the pulley M, with which the extremity of the leverM N is furniſhed, and which has for its center cf motion the point L. The other portion of the pulley N, which terminates the other extremity of the lever, is alſo furniſhed with lines of ſilk, which ſupport the ſmall baſon or ſcale . Upon the copper ferule D then fit a cylindrical tube of glaſs F E, the interior diameter of which is equal to that of the ferule, and its height equal to that of the veſſel A B. When the apparatus is diſpoſed in this manner, fill the tube E F with water, and cont'nue to put ſmall weights into the baſon or ſcale I, until the piſton begins to riſe Aſterwards take away the glaſs tube E F, and place the piſton G in the copper ferule D, and pour water into the large veſſel AB, and it will appear that the ſame weights as before in the baſon I, wiill raiſe up the piſton when the larger veſſcl A B is entirely ful. Hence it follows that there is the ſame power to be counteracted, vhether there reſts upon the piſton only a column of water of its own ſize, or whether the veſſel A B is entirely ſul. Such a column, therefore, preſſes upon its baſe independently of the reſt of the water contained in the veſſel. To account for this, let us ſuppoſe all the water in a veſſel to be divided into ſeveral columns, I, 2, 3 4,5, (plate V., fig. 2.) each compoſed of an equal number of parts. If the bottom of the veſſel, which ſcrves for the baſe and ſupport of all the columns, is opened in 4, the column 3, being no longer ſupported, vill deſcend through the aperture, ſliding berween the two columns 2 nd 4, which are ſupported by the paris of the bottom of the veſſel  and ſ, all the moveatie parts of which become (if T may uſe the i ſion) ſmall rollers, which retard the fall only n a very ſight degree. This effect is the reſult of the ſmull degree of coheſion between the parts of the fluid. If the columns I and 2 on the one part, and 4 and 5 cn the other, were compoſed of parts adhering together, they vould retard each other in their deſcent during their whol? lengrh, in the ſame manner as a wax candle would do; and by the fall of the column 3, a vold would be made between them. But as all the perticles are extremely minute, moving eaſily upon cach ether, they deſcend when the ſummit of the coJum: begins to deſcend, having no longer any ſupport ſiom rhat ſide; and the ſuperficies of the whole maſs  icends in the ſame manner, though only one oſ the columns cauſed the flow from'its fal. When the parts have a degree of viſcoſity, as thoſe of oily ſnuids, or when the maſs oſ the flowing liquor has much more of breadth than of height, the void which the deſcending column leaves above ĩt is eaſily perceived, for then the ſurface, inſtead of being plane and even, is hollow in the middle, and aſſumes a funneliike form, becauſe the adjacent parts do not arrive vith ſuſficient ſwiftneſs to replace thoſe which deſcend through the aperture; beſides the preſſure of the air above the aperture is ſtronger than its reſiſtance below. From what has been now ſtated, it is eaſy to perceive how fluids differ from ſolids in the phenomena of gravitation. If the veſſel A B (plate V. fig. I.) being full of water, and the tube E F being removeq, it was required to raiſe up the piſton G; all that is neceſſary in this caſe is, to ſupport the weight of the column of water directly above the piſton, becauſe this column can move inde pendently of the remainder; but if the whole maſs of water was converted into ice, then the maſę ceaſing to be a liquid, and all its parts adhering toge ther, to raiſe up the piſton it would be nece ſſary to ſupport the weight of the whole maſi. adly, Fluids preſs equally in all directions. In other words, they not only preſs from the top to the bottom like other bodies, but they alſo preſs, according to their weight, upon all bodies that oppoſe them in a lateral direction, and even from the bottom to the top. Hence, if a caſk is filled with liquid oil, the oĩ will run out if an aperture is made in the ſide, but when it is congealed it will not run out on account of its having become a ſolid body, for ſolid bodies preſs only from their vertex to their baſe, and not laterally. To underſtand properly this lateral preſſure of ſuids, and alſo that which they exert from their baſe towards their vertex, it Is neceſſary to conſider them as a maſs of ſmall globules depoſited in a veſſel; and to remember that theſe minute globules are not arranged regularly as upon a cord, but that very ſrequently one column exerciſes its preſſure between two others, and has a propenſity to diſplace them, as may be ſeen in plate V. (fig. 3.) where the perpendicular preſſure which is made oppoſite to the point 4, is directed by the lateral columns towards the ſides, e f, of the veſſel, in ſuch a manner, that if the verſel was open in thoſe places the liquid would flow out, on account of the great mobility of ĩits parts. It is by the ſame mode of reaſoning that the preſſurt of fluids, from their baſe tovards their vertex, is accounted ſor: for example, when the column 4 (fig- 3.) has a tendency to diſplace the two particles g h, the particle g cannot move any farther becauſe it is impeded by the ſide and bottom of the veſſel; but the particle may be raiũed from the baſe towards the top, unleſs a column equal to the column iĩ à, or ſomething equivalent, preſſes upon it to prevent it. It is upon this principle that the water, elevated by the New River water-works, aſter having deſcended from a baſon in a vertical pipe, and then aſter having flowed horizontally in a ſucceſſion of pipes under the pavement, is raiſed up again, through another pipe, as high as the fountain at the Temple Garden. It is alſo upon this principle that a veſſel may be filled either at the mouth or at the bottom indifferently, provided that it is done through a pipe, the top of which is as high as the top of the veſſel to be filled. Fence it follows, that when pſers, aqueducts, reſervoirs, or other hydraulic works for the retention of water are to be conſtructed, it becomes neceſſary to proportion their ſtrength to the lateral preſſure which they are likely to ſuſtain, hich becomes greater as the height of the water is more conſiderable. Nearly the ſame precautions are neceſſary to be taken with reſpect to what ſome philoſophers call the groſer fluids, which alſo have a propenſity to expand, as well on account of the ſmallneſs of their parts as from the ſmall degree of coheſion which exiſts between them. Woalls deſigned to ſupport terraſſes ought to be ſufficiently ſtrong to reſiſt the lateral preſſure of the earth and rubbiſh which they are to ſuſtain, ſince this preſſure will be greater as the particles of earth, and of the other materials of which the terraſſes are compoſed, are leſs bounti together, and in proportion as the terraſies are more elevatedd brium with each other, whether they are containèd in one veſſel or many, provided they communicate with each other; and their ſurfaces alſo are alvays in a plane parallel to the horizon. This is a conſequence of the principle which has been before eſtabliſhed: for, ſince the particle b (fig. 3.) would be raiſed from the baſe towards the top, unleſs a column equal to the column i , preſſed upon it to retain ĩt in its place; it follows that to be in equilibrium, the upper extremities of the two columns ſould be in the ſame horĩzontal plane, or in points equally diſtant from the center of the earth; which points, however, cannot be found by a right line; for in the diſtance of a thouſand fathoms there is about one foot difference in the perpendicular height. From this property of flulds it follows, that water conducted by pipes placed in the earth, will remount as high as the place whence it flowed, vhatęver the depth under ground through which it may have been conducted by the pipes. It ĩs cuſtomary to allow half an inch of inclination in the length oſ ſix fect, to counteract the reſiſtance produced by friction; but it is clear from what has been ſaid, that this is not abſolutely neceſſary, for however long the paſſage might be, the water vould ſtill aſcend as high as the place whence it came, but it would require a little Ionger time to accompliſh the aſcent. We are enabled, upon this principle, to account for the ſprings which are ſometimes found on the tops of mountains. Such waters flow from mountains ſtill more elevated (whether they are far or near) by ſubterraneous canals. It follows ſrom this principle, that if there are many reſervoirs which communicate together, it ĩs neceſſary orly to ſee one of them to know the height of the water in the others; for it muſt neceſſærily be of the ſame height there as in all the reſt. From what has been obſerved, viz. that when all the perts of the ſame ſluid are in equilibrium, their ſurfaces will alſo be in a plane parallel to the horizon, or, in other words, every part of the Iurface at an equal diſtance from the center of the earth, it follows, that when the ſurface of water is very large, it becomes neceſſarily and ſenſibly convex. This is eaſily perceived at ſea, where the maſts of ſiips are cbſerved at a diſtance before any other part of the ſhip can be diſtinguiſhed. 4thly, Fluids preſs as well perpendicularly as laterally, not, however, in proportion to their quantity, but in proportion to their height above the plane of the horizon, For example, if ſeveral veſſels oſ the ſfame height ard baſe are filled with water, all their bottoms will bear the ſame degree of preſſure, whatever may be the form and ſize of the veſſels in other reſpects. Suppoſe three veſſels to be filled with water, A B CD (ng:. 4) E F G H (fig. 5) LM NOP Qſ(fg. 6.) whoſe heights A B, IF, LT are equal, and alſo ſupported by equal baſes B C, F G, NO; it will be found, by experiment, that all the bottoms of theſe veſſels will be equally preſſed, though the quantities of water which they contain may be very different. In the veſſel (fig, 4.) the bottom B C is preſſed by the whole maſs oſ water A B C D, becauſe the ſluid, in this caſe, preſſes in the ſame manner as a ſolid body; let us ſuppoſe the weight of the water to be ſix pounds: in the veſſel (fig. 5.) it is eaſy to conceive, from what has been ſaid before, that the bottom F G is alſo only preſſed by ſix pounds, though the veſſel is evidently much larger than the firſt; becauſe the bottom F G ſupports only the column IF GK, equal to that of the veſſel (fig. 4.) and this column exerciſes its preſfure independently of the reſidue oſ the æater in the veſſel, which is ſupported by the ſides E F, H G, of the veſſel (fig. 5 But the principal difficulty conſiſts in comprehending how the bottom of the veſſel N O is ſiill rreſſed by a weight of ſix pounds, although one pund of water would be ſuſficient to fill the eſũ. It is accounted for in this manner: it is ceræin that upon the portion TV of the bottom N O, there is a preſſurc equal to that of a column of water of which TV is the baſe, aud LT the height. If, upon every cther ſimilar portion of the ſame bottom, there is a preſiure equal to that of the column L TV Qq, the bottom is equally preſſed upon all ĩts parts. For inſtance, there is a preſſure upon the portion VX equal to that of a column of water QVXR, which is itſelf equal to the column I TV Q; for the ſmall column of water P VXS, which reſts above, has a propenſity to be elevated hy the preſſure of the adjacent column LTVQ, and with a force equal to the exceſs LM P Qof this great column over the ſmall one; therefore the ypper part, PS, is preſſcd by the ſame power; but the re-action is equal to the preſſure. The part PS re-acts with a force equal to the exceſs LM Q of the great column over the ſmall one. There is, thereſore, a preſſure upon the portion VX of the bottom N O, from the ſmall column of water PVXS, and from the re-action of the part PS, equal to the preſſure of a coluinn of water, QP S R, both of which added together are equal to the preſſure of the column LT VQ. What has been ſaid of the portion VX may be ſaid of all the reſt. Hence t follows that the bottom of the veſſel (fig. 6.) is every where equally preſſed. There is a maxim deduced ſrom what has been ſtated, which ĩs termed by philoſophers the hydroſtatic paradox; it is nevertheleſs founded upon the ſureſt baſis of truth, and has a conſiderable influence in almoſt all hydraulic engines, viæ.  that a given quantity of water may exert a force two or three hundred times leſs or greater, according to the manner in which it is employed.? If, for inſtance, the ſame quantity of vater as the veſſel (fig. 5.) will contain, is poured into a veſſel reſembling that of (fig. 6.) but high enough to contain it, the preſſure upon the bottom N O will be conſiderably greater than that upon the bottom F G. One of the moſt uſeſul machines to ſew that a ſmall quantity of water is capable oſ great preſſure, is the hydroſtatic bellows. This machine (Plate VI. fig. 1.) conſiſts of tvo thick oval boards, each about three feet broad, and four feet Iong, united to each o:her by Ieather, like a pair of common bellows, or a barber's puſſ. Into the lower board a pipe B, ſeveral fcet high is ſixed at . Now, in ſhewing experiments with this ſimple machine, which even the reader himſelf might eaſily make, let water be poured into the pipe at ĩts top C, which will run into the bellows, and ſeparate the boards a little: then to ſhew how much a littlc water will be able to eſſect by preſſure, let three weights, each of an hundred pounds, be laid upon the upper hoard. Now if we pour more water into the pipe, it will as before run into the bellows, and raiſe up the board with all the weights upon it. And though the water in the tube ſhould weigh in 2ll but a ſingle pound, yet the preſſure of this ſmall force upon the water below in the bellows, ſhall ſuppor t the weights, which are three hundred pounds; nor will they have weight enough to make them deſcend, and conquer the veight of the water, by forcing it out of the mouth of the pipe. It is clear from theſe principles, that the tun TO (figs- 2.) filled with water, may be burſt by preſſing it with ſome pounds additional weight of the ſluid, through the tube A B, which may be ſuppoſed to be from twenty-five to thirty feet in height. From what has been ſaid of the veſſel (fig. 6.) it ndecd neceſſarily follows, that the ſmall quantity of water which the tube AB contains, preſſes upon the bottom of the tun as much as if a column of water had been added as wide as. the tun itſelf, and as long as the tube, which would evidently be an enormous weight. I. The effects of gravity on fluids or different denſities vill, from what has preceded, not be very diſficult to comprehend. It has been obſerved, that fluids are  maſes of ſmall particles moveable with great ſacility among themſelves independently ofeach other, preſſing ſeparuely and in proportion to their maſſes. : It is proved alſo by chemical analyſis, that even theſe minute particles are compoſed of particles ſtill ſmalle. Now whether it reſults from the interpoſition of caloric ſor the matter of fire) in greater or leſs quantities, Which we know is the cauſe of all fluidity, and alſo of the difference that exiſts between the incompreſſible and elaſtic fluids; or whether t: may depend upon the ſhape or ſize of the particles, which, as in ſolid bodies, may increaſe or diminiſh the poroſity, it is certain, taat there is a conſiderable difference with reſpect to denſity i in'di ſFerent fluidss. TFrom this difference in point of denſity, a ſeparation may be obſerved generally to take place, ſoon after mixing two heterogeneous flulds tegether, unleſs this effect is counteracted by ſome more powerful cauſe. It has been obſerved, that the particles, according to their weight, preſs inde pendently of each other. Thoſe therefore which have the moſt denſity, having more power to gain poſſeſſion of the lower part of the veſſel which contains them, oblige the others to yield and reſign their ſituation; and hence a ſeparation ĩs eſſectedlc When oil and water, for inſtance, have been well ſraken together, and afterwards the whole left in a ſtate of reſt, the water, having more denſity than the oil, takes the lower poſition and the oil riſes to the ſurface. If this effect does not take place, it is owing to the intervention of one of the following cauſes. Firſt, a kind of elective attraction, which may exiſt between the particles of different fluids, as when water and wine are mixed together, the water, though heavier than the wine, does not ſeparate itſelf. Secondly, the viſcoſity of ore of the ſubſtances, as when the whites of eggs are beaten together, and by that means a conſiderable quantity of air mixes with them; the air, though much lighter, has not power to diſengage iĩtſelf from the matter in which it is enveloped, in order to effect ĩts eſcapeIf two ſiuids of different denſities are placed in a ſtate of equipoiſe with each other, and have the ſame baſe, their perpendicular heights above the horizon vill be in a reciprocal ratio to their denſities or ſpecific gravities. If, for example, mercury is put into an inverted ſiphon, and ater Is poured into one of the branches, in order to elevate the mercury in the other branch one inch above its level, ĩt is neceſſary that the water ſhould be about thirteen inches and an half high. The height of the water then will be thirteen times and a half of that of the mercury; becauſe the ſpecific gravity of mercury is about thirteen times and a half as great as that of water. This obſervation will alſo apply to the reciprocal action oſ air and water, or air and mercury upon eàch other, as was evinced in a former book, vhen treating of the Torricellian experiment and the barometer . Many oſ the phenomena, indeed, of hydroſtatics and hydraulics are to be referred to the preſiure of the atmoſphere, and for this reaſon, the preſent ſubject has been in part anticipated, when it was neceſſary to treat of air as a fluid. It is, however, proper on the preſent occaſion, to recal to the reader's attention ſome of the properties of this fluid, and he will caſily remember, that as a fluid, air is poſſeſſcd of gravity, and conſequently preſſes upon all bodies which oppoſe it; and it is neceſſary to add, that like water, it preſſes in all directions. Its perpendicular preſſure has been already ſufficiently proved; and its lateral preſſure may alſo be eaſily demonſtrated. If a ſmall hole is made vith a gimblet, either in the ſide or bottom of a caſk or veſſel which is quite full of liquor, it will not run out, becauſe the external air which preſſes againſt the hole, ſuſtains the liquor, which has not a ſuſicient height to overcome its preſſure. Ience the neceſſity of a vent peg, to enable liquor to be drawn out of a full caſk. The elaſticity of the ſmall quantity oſ air which is introduced at the vent preſſes the ſluid, and overcomes the preſſure of the air at the cock. There is an inſtrument in common uſe, called a Valencia, for extracting ſmall quantities oſ liquor out of the * See Book v. Chæp. ę. bung-holes of caſks. It is a tube with a ſmall aperture at the bottom and the top. When ſull, if the hole at the top is ſtupped with the thumb or finger, ſo as to prevent the preſſure of the air at the top, the liquor will not run out of the hole at the bottom, being kept in by the force of the external air. It is proper to obſerve, that all the effects which depend upon the preſſure of air, take place in æa room where the column of air is terminated by the ceiling, as well as without doors where the column oſ air has the whole height of the atmoſphere; and the reaſen is, becauſe the air in the room has a communication with that on the outſide, ſuppoſing it to be only by means of the key-holee Thus a barometer placed in a hall, will have its mercury as high as if it was placed in an open fſield. The curious eſfects produced by ſiphens, æll depend upon the preſiure of the arr. A ſiphon is a bent tube A B C (fig- 3), made of glaſs, of metal, or of wood. One branch of which a B, is ſorter than the other B C. In order to make uſe of this inſtrument, place the extremity of the ſhort branch A B in the veſſel EE, (fig. 4.) which may be ſuppoſed to contain any fluid matter, as vater for inſtance. If the air then is drawn by ſuction* out of the ſiphon at the extremity C of the long branch BC, the liquor will begin to flow, and will not ceaſe vhile the ſhort branch A B remains immerſed in the fluid. It is eaſy to ſee thet the preſſure of the air upon the ſurface of the ſiuid in the veſſel, is the cauſe æ Suction is here evidently uſed in the porular ſerſe of the word, to imply that action of the mouth which extracts the air from a given ſpace: for in ſtrict philoſophical language there is no ſuch thing. of its diſcharge through the ſiphon. For ſuppoſe GF the confines oſ the atmoſphere, all the points of the ſurface A of the liquor will be equally preſſed by the column of air AF; if, therefore, at ſome point of this ſurſace, the preſſure is ſuſpended, the liquor muſt flow at that point, becauſe it finds leſõ reſiſtance there than in any other part; this is therefore the obvious reaſon why the ſiphon becomes full immediately aſter the air is dtawn out at the extremity C. If the two branches of the ſiphon were of equal lengths, as B A, B D, the flow through the bent tube would not take place; becauſe the column of air D G which would reſiſt in D, being of an equal height vith that which preſſes at A, would alſo be in equilibrium with it, in the ſame manner a5 the two columns of the ſfluid B A, B D. But ſince B C, one of the legs, is longer than the other, though the column of air G C, which anſwers to it, is really longer than that which preſſes in A; yet it is not capable of preventing the paſſage of the fluid. To underſtand this more perfectly, let us conſider the column of air G C to be divided into two parts, one of which G D, would form an equipoiſe with the column of air FA, and would be capable of ſtopping the iow from the tube if the branch B C ended in D. The portion of fluid which fills the part D C of the ſiphon, will find no other reſiſtance in C than one column of air D C of the ſame length with it, which is evidently very inferior to it in weight. This portion of fluid then flows out, becauſe it greatly exceeds in weight the column of air which is oppoſed to it. But while it continues to flow, nothing ſuſtains that which is above it, which ſflows neceſſarily, while the preſſure oſ the air at A furniſhes a new ſupply of fluid to replace that which runs out. It is by theſe means, that the vater im the ſiphon continues to flow without intermiſſion; becauſe the reſiſtance of the air in C ĩs as much exceeded, as the length of the branch B C of the ſiphon exceeds that of the branch AB. In order to prove this, ſuppoſe there is added at C a tube to lengthen that branch, then it will plainly appear, that in a given time more water will flow than would have been diſcharged without that augmentation to the branch BC. Since it is the preſſure of the air which elevates the fluid in the ſnort branch B A, it follows, that the hæight of this branch is Iimited to thirty-two feet when the fluid is water, becauſe the preſſure of the atmoſphere cannot elevate water higher; but when the fluid is mercury, the height of the ſhort branch ſnould not exceed thirty inches, becauſe the atmoſphere cannot ſuſtain mercury at a greater height. III. The action of fluids on ſolid bodies immerſed in them, has been already in part anticipated, in treating of ſpecific gravity. It is neceſſary, however, to reſume that ſubject to a certain extent in this place, and I ſhall endeavour as much as poſſible to avoid repetition. It is evident, that when a ſolid body is Dlunged into a ſluid, it occupies a ſpace in that fluid exactly equal to its own magnitude. The quantity oſ fluid then ſo diſplaced, either equals in denſity and conſequently in weight, the ſolid which diſplaced it; or, on the contrary, one of the two muſt weigh more than the other. In the laſt caſe, which ĩs moſt common, the quantity by which the heavier body ſurpaſſes the lighter, ĩs called the ſpecific weight or gravity. It has been obſerved before, that ſlulds exerciſe their preſſure in all directions, conſequently a ſolid body plunged into a fluid is preſſed at all points. It has alſo been proved, that this preſſure increaſes in 2 proportion proportion to the height of the fluid; the preſſure, therefore, which the body undergoes, is greater in proportion to the depth into which it is plunged. Laſtly, it has been proved, that when two fluids are placed i in equipoiſe, their reſpective heights are in proportion to their denſities; and therefore bodies plunged to an equal depth, are compreſſed according to the denſity of the reſpective Auid. If a body is heavier than the ſluid in whichĩ it is immerſed, it is evident that it will ſink to the' bottom by its ſpecific gravity. If a body is lighter tHan the ſame bulk of the fluid into which ĩt ĩs lungeq, a part of it will ſwim, and the remaining part which is immerſed diſplaces a quantity oſ Auid u hich weighs ex-actly as much as s the whole of the ſolid body *. lEti Iis c From vwhat I have alreàdy explained, you u® neceſſarily have diſcovered the rationale of ſaking and fwimming. You ſaw that when a body was bulẽ for bulk heãvicr than the ſluid, by being immerſed it Ioſcs only the weight of an equal bulk of the fluid, and conſequently the ręſidual or remaining gravity of the ſolid muſt carry it down to he bottom, or make it ſint. . On the other hand, if the ſolid has leſs weight in the ſame bulk than the ſluid, then ĩt cannot by ĩts weight diſplace or raiſe upvards its whole bulk of the fiuid, but only ſo much of it as is equal to its own weight; and from this deficiency in weight it will be only partly immerſcã, and will thereſore ſim upon the upper pan of the fiuid. Of all the animals, however, thron into the vater, man is the moſ helpleſs; the brute creation receive the art of ſwimming frompature, while man can only acquire it by practice; the one eſcapes without danger, the other ſinks to. the bottom. Some have aſſerted, that this ariſes from the different ſenũbilities each have of the danger; the brute, unterrificd at his ſituation, ſiruggles, while his very fears ſink the lord of the creation. But much better reaſons may be aſigned for this; impotene⸗ of man. in water, when compared to other animals; and one is, that he has actually more ſpecific gravity, or contains more matter vithin the ſame ſusface than any other animal. The. trunk of. the If, for inſtance, water is poured into a glaſs veſſel (fig. 5.) furniſhed with a ſmall cock near the bottom; if the height of the water in the veſſel is marked with a ſmall bandage oſ thread or paper; and, laſtly, if a ball of wood ĩs thrown into it, it will appear that part of the wood will be immerſed, and part of it remain above the water, and that the immerſed part vill raiſe the water in the veſſel jut as much as if a volume of water had been added equal to the ſolid contents of the part under water. If a quantity of water is then let out of the veſſel by means of the ſmall cock, until the ſurface is reduced as low as the mark which pointed out its height at the beginning of the proceſs, it is clear, that the water drawn out in this. manner will be equal in its ſolid contents to thoſe of the immerſed part of the wooden ball; and alſo, if this volume of water is weighed, it vill be found to be of exactly the ſame weight as the whole ball of wood. EHence it follows, that a boat upon a river diſplaces a quantity of water exactly of the ſame weight with the boat and its Iading; and if more weight is added, it will ſink deeper in the water in the ſame proportion; and the immerſed part is more or leſs in extent, acbody in other animals is large, and their extremities proportionably ſmall; in man iĩt is the reverſe, his extremities are very large in proportion to his trunk. The ſpecific weight of the extremities is proportionably greatq; than that of the trunk in all animals, and therefore man muſt have the greateſt weight in water, fnce his extremities are the largeſt. Beſides this, other animals to ſuim have only to walk (as it vere) forvards upon the water; the motion they give their limbs in ſWimming is exactly the ſame they uſe upon land; but ĩt ĩs different with man, who makes uſe of thoſe Iimbs to help him forwards upon water, vhich he employs to a very different purpoſe spon land. Adauss Lecturts, Vol. iĩii. p. 408. - cording to the denſity of the water. Hence, as water when impregnated with ſalt, is heavier and denſer than pure water, as was formerly proved*; it follows, that the ſame boat and lading will.draw leſs vater (according to the ſeamans phraſe) in the ocean, than in a river of freh water, and that iſ it is laden to the utmoſt extent in ſalt water, it will ſink when it comes into freſh water. Upcn this principle depends the uſe of the hydrometer. For it will be found that bodies immerſed in mercury, ſuſtain a greater loſs of weight, or require a greater power to ſink them, than in ſalt water; in ſalt water than in freſh; and in pure water, they ſtill ſuſtain a greater loſs of weight than in ſpirit of wine, which is a lighter and leſs denſe fluid. The hydrometer, then, is an inſtrument by which the ſpecific gravity of different fluids is determined. The moſt ſimple, and that which is moſt in uſe, conſiſts of a glas globe with a long narrow neck (plate VII. fig- 1.) AC, divided all the way up into equal parts. In order that this inſtrument may ſuſtain itſelf in the middle of liquors in a vertical poſition, it is made in ſuch a manner that the center of gravity is in the lower part oſit; ĩt is ſor this purpoſe, that another ſmall hollow ball S is placed under the larger ball, in which ſome mercury is uſually lodged, but in ſuch a quantity only as that the whole hydrometer ſhall weigh about as much as an equal bulk of that fluid which is appointed to be proved. When the hydrometer is conſtructed in this manner, if it is plunged in the liquors which are to be compared, it will not entirely ſink, becauſe ĩit is ſuppoſed æ Book vi. chap. 7. to be a ſpecific gravity, about or nearly equal with that of the fluid. If, therefore, the weight of the hydrometer is ſuch, that ĩt will ſink in water as far as E, it will ſink ſtill deeper in lighter fluids; it willſink for inſtance in wine as far as F; in ſpirit of wine as far æs G, &c. But if it is plunged into liquors heavier than water, it will not ſink ſo far as E; for example, in beer it will only ſink to D, and always as much leſs as the liquor into which it is plunged ĩs denſer and conſequently heavier. By this proceſs it will be eaſily diſcovered, whether one kind of fluid is lighter than another with which ĩt is compared; but the proportion cannot be accurately determined; for in order to that, it would be neceſſary to know exactly the proportion between the tube A C ænd the balls B and S; which is impoſſible according to the above mode of conſtructing the inſtrument; ænd it would alſo be further neceſſary that the tube AC ſrould be perfectly cylindsical, which never is the caſe. The moſt certain mode of acquiring this exact knowledge is, to operate always with equal volumes of ſuids: and for this purpoſe, it is neceſſery to mahs uſe of Fahrenheit's hydrometer. This inſtrument (fig. 2.) is compoſed of a ſinall oval glaſs bulb or bottle B; the neck of which A C is very ſmall, and terminates with a baſon D E, deſigned to receive ſmall weights. The inſtrument is ballaſted by means of a ſmall ball of glaſs S fixed underneath it, in which there is depoſited ſome quickſilver. A ſmall grain of ſmalt (a) is fixed upon the neck, and the inſtrument is then complete. In order to make uſe of this hydrometer, ĩt is neceſſary to begin by knowing its exact weight, which ſhould be marked upon it, to prevent its being forgotten. The inſtrument is then plunged into diſtilled water; and by putting weights into the baſon D E, it is made to ſink as far as the grain of ſmalt (a). The weights which were made uſe of to produce this immerſion, added to the weight of the hydrometer, gives exactly the weight of the volume of water meaſured by the inſtrument. BY repeating the ſame operation upon any other fluid, the weight of the volume of that fluid meaſured by the hydrometer, may be known with equal exactneſs. Hence it follows, that the quantity of theſe two volumes are equal, becauſe they are meaſured by the ſame inſtrument: the difference oſ their weight then will give the difference of their ſpecific gravity, or the relation between their denſitiess. To determine this relation exactly, the following proportion muſt be obſerved: The ſpecific grævity of the proved liquor, is to that ofdiſtilled water as the weight of a volume of that ſluid meaſured by the hydrometer, is to the weight of the volume of water alſo meaſured by it. Ifthe ſpecific gravity of the one is known exactly, the ſpecific gravity of the orher may be determined by it, and alſo that of all other fluids which are proved i in the ſame manner. The whole of what has been advanced in this chapter, and in that of the firſt book upon ſpecific gravity, may be brieſly ſummed up in the following propoſtions: Firſt, when two bodies are equal in their magnitude, bulk, or volume, their ſpecific gravities are to each other as their denſities. So that one body has twice the ſpecific gravity of another, when it has twice the denſity of that other body comprized in the ſame ſpace or magnitude. Secondly, when two bodies loſe an equi weight in 1he ſame fluid, they have the ſame magnitude or ſolid contents, whatever form they may aſſume, ſince they each loſe a weight equal to the bulk or volume of fluid vhich they diſplace. Thirdly, the ſpeciſic gravity of bodies is inverſely as their bull. when their weights are equal. As one body has twice the ſpecific gravity of another, when vith the ſame weight it has only half the magnitude of that other body. Fourthly, the ſpecific gravities of two bodies are in a direct proportion to their denſities, and in an inverſe proportion to their magnitudes. This propoſition is a neceſſary conſequence of two preceding, viz. of the ſirſt and third. Fiſthly, the ſame body will loſe a greater quantity oſ its weight in a ſluld ſpecifically heavier than in a lighter ore; becauſe it will always loſe a portion of its v ight equal to the weight of thet bul of fuid which jt diſplaces. It requires then a greater force to ſuſtain it in a lighter than in a heavier fluld: ĩt will require more ſorce to ſuſtain it in æi than in water. Sixthly, the ſpecific gravities of bodies of an equal weight (vhen weighed in a common balance) are proportionate to the weight which they loſe in the ſame fluid. So that of two bodies of equal weight, iſ the one loſes one- fifth and the other two-fifths of ĩts weight in the ſame fluid, the ſpecific gravity of the firſt is to that of the ſecond as two to one. Seventhly, if a body is of the.ſame ſpecific gravity as a fiuld, vhen immerſed in that ſiuid it will be in equilibrium vith it, and remain at t any depth at which it is placed. Eighthly, if a body ſpecifically lighter than a fluid is plinged entirely into it, and then ſeſt to itſelf, it will remount with a force equal to the exceſs of weight which a volume of that fluid poſſeſes above an equal bulk of the body immerſed. Ninthly, the ſpecific gravity of a ſolid is to that of a fluid heavier than itſelf, and upon which it will ſwim, as the bulk of the immerſed part is to the bull of the whole body. So that if the magnitude or bulk of the immerſed part is to the magnitude of the whole body as two or three, the ſpecific gravity of the ſolid is to that of the fluid as two is to three. Tenthly, the weight and the magnitude of a body, and alſo the weight oſ a ſluid ſpecifically heavier than the body, being given, ſuppoſe it is required to find the force requiſite to keep that body entirely immerſed in the fluid. As this force is equal to the ſpecific weight of the fluid, find, by means of the given bulk oſ the ſolid, and the known weight of a cubic foot of the fluid, by the rule of three, the weight of a bulk of the fluid equal to the bulk of the ſolid. Subſtract from this weight, the weight of the ſolid, and the remainder will be the ſorce required. For example, ſuppoſe it was required to find the force neceſſary to retain under water a ſolid oſ eight cubic feet in contents, ànd of four hundred pounds weight. Since a cubic foot of vater weighs about ſeventy pounds, the weight of eight cubic feet of water is five hundred and ſixty pound ; then if four hundred pounds are ſubſtracted, the one hundred and ſixty remainder, is the force neceſſary to eep the ſolid immerſed in the water, and to prevent it from riſing to the ſurſace. Eleventhly, the eight of a body ſpecifically heavier than a ſiuid, and the weight of that fluid ſpecifically lighter, being given, ſuppoſe it is required to determine the cavity which that body ſhould have, in order that it may ſim upon the fluid. The weight of a cubic foot of the fluid being given, the bulk of the portion of the fluid equal in weight to that of the body, is found by the rule of three. I? then the cavity of the body is made ſo, that the bulk may be a little larger than the magritude already found, the body will have leſs weight under the ſame magnitude than the fiuid. For example, ſuppoſe that iĩt is required to make a ball of iron of thirty pounds, and of ſuch a magnitude as that it will ſwim upen water. girce the weięht of a cubic foot of water is ſeventy Jounds, a volume of water weighing thirty pounds vill be iliree- ſevenths of a cubic foot: Lence it will be cæſy to find what the diameter of a ſphere muſt be, the ſclid contents of which ſhall be three- ſevenths of a cubic foct. Therefore, the ball of iron muſt be made hollow within, and in ſuch a manner that its diameter mæy be greater than the diameter of a ſphere, the ſolid contents of which is three-ſevenths of a cubic foot: if this bull is made eleven inches three lires in diameter, it wll ſnim. Hence we ſee that it is not neceſſary for a body to ſvim, that it ſiould be compoſed of matter ſpecifically lighter than water; it ſuſfices that its bulk or volume ſhould be great and its gravity ſmall: for though copper is about eight times as heavy as water, yet military men have occaſionally employed Loats of copper in corſtructing bridges for the paſſage oſ troop;s. A copious table of ſpecific gravities ĩs given in the C u A P. III. H Y D R AUL ICS* Of the Diſcharg: x Fluids through ſmall Apertures The Diſtbarge of Fluids through ſucceſſive Pipes. Aupilal FountainsPumps Th] Raiſing Punyt.7The Fercing Pump.The Suching Pump. The Conipound Pon 7he Fire EugineMotion cf Waier in Conduit PigesOfeillatory Motion of Water in a SiphouOſillator7 Moticn of WavesMotion of Wheels acted upon by Water; and Cnſiruction of Water Mills. r7 HE ſcience which has for its object the motion of fluids is called hydraulics; and its immediate application ĩs to furniſh us with the means of conducting water from one ſituation to another, by canals or aqueducts, and to elevate it by pumps, jets-deaux, and other hydraulic engines, either for the purpoſes of ornament or uſe. In treating of this ſubject I ſall commence with the ſimpleſt principles, and ſhall firſt ſpeak of the diſcharge of fluids through ſmall apertures. When water flows frorn a veſſel which has a hole or aperture in the bottom, ſmall in compariſon to the vidth of the veſſel, the water deſcends vertically, and the ſurface appears ſmooth, but at three or four inches from the bortom the particles turn from this direction, and proceed on all ſides with a motion more or leſ oblique towards the aperture. The ſame effect takes place vhen water ſlows through an aperture lateæ Almoſt the whole of this chapter, and great part of the preceding, ere tranſlated from the firſt volume of Briſſons  Traite Dlementaire de Phyſique,” Chap. VIII. rally. The tendency of the particles towards the aperture ĩs a neceſſary conſequence of their perfect mobility; for they will certainly be directed towards the point where there is the leaſt reſiſtance, and that point is the aperture. It is alſo to be obſerved, that in this caſe, at a ſmall ]iſtance ſrom the bottom, a kind of funnel is formed in the water, the ;oint of which correſponds to the center of the aperture; When, however, the water flows through a lateral orifice or aperture, there is formed only a kind of halſ funnel, which does not appear to commence till the ſurface Is near touching the upper ſide of the hole. It is probable that the ſunnel begins to form itſelf from the firſt moment of the 2 ow; but it does not become pereeptible till the ſurface is only at æ ſmall diſtance from the bottom. t appears alſo, that the funnel commences higher or lower, according to the width of the bottom; and that the formation of ĩ is leſs prompt or leſs perceptible, according to the proportion of the æperture to the extent oſ the bortom. ſhe funnel is alſo augmented by any roughneſ”s which may exſſt at the ſides or bor00m of the veſic Water flows out of a ſmall hole in the bottom of a veſſel with a velocity equal to that which a ponderous body acquires in falling from a hæight jpꝶu to the vertcal height of the ſrt ace of the fiuid above the aperture. The ſame law takes place in a lateral orifice; for the preſiurę of the fluid is equal (at the ſame depth) in 2ll directions, aid conſequently produces the ſame degree of velocity. A fluid, in running out of an aperture, acquires a velocity ſuſſicient to make it remount to a vertical height equal to that of the ſurface of the fluid above the aperture, in the ſame manner as a falling body acquires a velocity capable of making it aſcerd to the height from which it deſcende⸗. It is evident, from the theory of falling bodies, that if the velocity of the fluid in running through the aperture was uniforml; continued, the fluid ould move through a ſpace double the height of the fluid above the aperture, in the ſame time that a falling body would employ in deſcending from that height. The height being the ſame, the velocity of the fluid in running out of the orifice will always be the ſame, whatever the ſpecies of the ſluid may be, and whatever its denſty. It is true, that when the fluid has more denſity it preſſes more forcibly, but then the maſ™ is nore conſiderable, and it is evident, that when the moving powers are proportioned to the maſſes which they put in motion, the velocities are equal. The quantities of a fluid diſcharged in the ſame ſpace of time through different orifices, fuppoſing the veſſels equally full during the whole of the experiment, are to each other as the products of the areas of the apertures by the ſquare roots of the heights. For inſtance, it has been proved by experiment, that a circular orifice oſ an inch diameter, made in a thin veſſel or partition, and under a ſurface of Aluid four feet in height, will furniſh, in one minute of time, five thouſand four hundred and thirty- ſix cubic inches French. If, therefore, it was an object to aſcertain how much a circular orifice oſf two inches diameter, under nine feet of height from the ſurface of the water, would furniſh in the ſame time, the following proportion muſt be employed it muſt be obſerved, that the orifice of two inches is four times as great as an orifice of one inch, becauſe the areas of circles are as the ſquares of their diameters): I xX V 4: 4X V 9: 5836: æ Or at length 2: 12:: 5436: 32616 12 2)653232 Thereſore 32616 cubic inches oſ water vill flow from an aperture of two inches in diameter in one minute, the orifice being made nine inches ſfrom the ſurface, which is ſuppoſed to be kept at that height the whole time. Iſ a veſiel oſ a priſmatic form is filled with water, ærnd permitted to empty itũlf ern⸗Lly through an criFice at the bottom, and the time that it conſumes in emptying itſelf is obſerved; and if afterwards, having repleniſhed the veſſel, the water is made to ſlow through the ſame aperture, the veſſel being kept ſull the whole time, there will run out in this ſecond inſtance, dvring the ſame time that the veſſel took to empty itſelf at ſirſt, a quentity of water double that which runs out in the firſt caſe, for the abſtraction of the water produces a kind of furnebl, which in this Ioſt caſe does not tale place. We often percelve water flow through lateral apertures, which, though ſmæil in conpariion to the width of the reſcrvoirs, cannot be reg/ded a: hev ing ãall their ponts at an equæl diſtance trom the ſurface of the fluid; ſuch, for example, as the apertures through vhich water ſometimes ſiows in mills. The common method of determining the quantity diſcharged is as follows: ſuppoſe, in the firſt place, the aperture to be ſtopped up by a plate of metal, which is perforated with a number of holes; if each o theſe holes is regarded as particular and inſtlated, the rapidity of the flow through each will be accorting to the corre ſpondent height of the fluid; then if the rumber oſ holes are multiphied ad infinitum, or, which. wijl amount t~ theſame: thing, if the plate i is ſuproſed to be entirely taken away, the velocity at each point of the ſuppoſed orifice will be according to the corre ſpond dent height of. the fluid; and in etimating the quantity of water diſcharged, ſome attention muſt be paid to the inequality of the motion; yet it muſt not be aſcrted that this reaſoning is entirely concluſive. In proportion as the ſum of the ſmall holes made in the plate is ſmall in compariſon with the ſize of the reſervoir, the portions of water which flow threugh each hole are forced out by the.abſolute weight of the column above; but the moment that the number of apertũres augment ad infinitum, and the ſtreams of water which run through- them become conti”uous; it cannot be clearly id thet the: liquid flows in the ſame manner ãa through ſmall inſuſat: cd holes; yet ãs this hypotheſis gives a reſult ſuficiently conformable to experiments, it may be uſeful to preſerve it, and the more ſo, as it leads to very ſimple calculations, and in all common queſtions this ſimplicĩty may be preſerable to the minuteneſs of fractional operations. Thr quantity of water which iſſues from thee apertures in a given time is not ſo great as their ſize might at Arſt ſuggeſt, becauſe the fiream is contracted by running out of each oriſice, and that contraction extends to a diſtance nearly equal to half the diameter of the eperture; and the diameter of the contracted ſtream is to the diameter oſ the aperture a little more than as three to four, or as three and one-ſixth to ſour, or nineteen to twent v- four, ſo that i its area is to that of the aperture as ten to ſixteen. It ĩs nearly the ſame when water flows through lateral apertures. The contraction of the ſtream is a proof of what has been beſore ſtated, viz. that withinſide a veſſel, the lateral particles direct themſelves towards the orifice with a motion more or leſs oblique; and this oblique motion may be decompoſed into two forces, the one parallel to the plane of the orifice, and which contracts the ſtream; the other perpendicular to the ſame plane, and the only one which produces the efflux. This contraction occurs alſo when water is made to flow through pipes, and that at the entrance of the water into the pipe, and not at ĩts exit, where the ſtream preſerves a cylindrical form. I ſhall prove that this contraction diminiſhes, in a ſenſible manner, the quantity of water which would naturally flow. In order to aſcertain theſe facts by experiments, many have bæen made. In all the following inſtances the orifices, through which the water flowed, were pierced perpendicularly through plates of copper of about one- tenty- fourth of an inch thick, and the time nt height of the water above the each orifice was 11 feet S inches Through an horizontal circular orifice of  inch (6 lines) diameter - - Through ditto of 1 inch diameter- - - Through ditto oſ 2 inches diameter - Through an horizontal rectangular oriſice of I inch long and ; inch wide - Through an horizontal ſquare orifice of 1 inch the ſide Through ditto of 2 inches each ſide of the orifice - height / - feet. Through a lateral circular orifice of ; inch diameter - Through ditto of 1 inch diameter - - height / 4 feet. Through a lateral circular orifice oſ inch diameter Through ditto, of 1 inch diaæmeter - - ieight inch. Through a lateral circular orifice of 1 inch diameter F It follows from the preceding table, 1. That the quantities of water diſcharged in the ſame time, by different apertures, under the ſame height of ſurface in the reſervoir, are to each other nearly as the areas of the apertures. Compare together the reſults of the ſecond and third experiments, of which the areas of the orifices are in the proportion of one to four, and it will be found that the quantities of water afforded, viz. nine thouſand two hundred and eighty- one cubic inches, and thirty-ſeven thouſãnd two hundred and three inches, are very nearly in the ſame proportion. 2. That the quantities of water diſcharged in the ſame time through the ſame aperture, under different heights of ſurface in the reſervoirs, are to each other nearly as the ſquare roots of the correſponding heights of the water in the reſervoir above the center of the aperture. Compare together the reſults of the eighth and tenth experiments, where the heights of the reſervoirs are nine and four feet, the ſquare roots of which are three and two, and it will be found that the two quantities of water, eight thouſand one hundred and thirty-five cubic inches, and five thouſand four hundred and thirty-ſix cubic inches, which run through the ſame orifice of one inch diameter under the different heights oſ nine feet and four feet, are to each other nearly in the proportion of three to to. 3. That in general the quantities of water diſcharged in the ſame time through diſferent apertures, under different heights of ſurface in the reſervoirs, are to each other as the areas of the apertures are to the ſquare roots of the heights of water in the reſervoirs. 4. That in conſtquD of the friction, the ſmall apertures furniſh a leſs quantity of water in proportion than the great ones, under the ſame height of water in the reſervoir; becauſe, comparatively to the extent of the area of each orifice, there are more points of friction againſt the ſides of the orifice in the ſmall than there are in the great ones; for the circumferences do not diminiſh ſo much as the areas. 5. That of many apertures oſ equal areas, that of which the circumference is the leaſt will, on account oſ the friction, furniſh more water than the others, under the ſame height of the reſervoir; circular apertures are, for this reaſon, the moſt advantageous of all; for the circumference of a circle is the ſhorteſt line that can be made uſe ofto incloſe a given ſpace; therefore there is leſs ſurſace of friction relatively to the ſize of the area. It is eaſy to perceive, that the quantity of water diſcharged in the table of experiments is not near ſo great as might be expected from the extent of the areas and the heights of the reſervoirs. The quantity is in fact diminiſhed by the friction, and ſtill more by the contraction of the ſtream; for the velocity which is in proportion to the entire altitude of the ſluid is not ſenſibly changed. Suppoſing, firſt, that the area of the ſtream is the ſame as that of the orifice; and ſuppoſing, ſecondly, that the ſtream is contracted, then the difference of the quantities aſſorded is as ſixteen to ten; that is, ſuppoſing the area of the aperture to be diminiſhed in the proportion of ſixteen to ten, the diſcharge of the fluid out of veſſels kept equally full may be determined with ſufficient exactneſs. By the expreſſion, an inch of water, is underſtood the quantity which flows out of a circular and lateral orifice of one inch diameter, the ſurface of the water being conſtantly kept ſeven-twelfths of an inch above the center of the orifice. This ĩs the caſe with the eleventh experiment in the preceding table, where it appears that the quantity of water furniſhed is ſix hundred and twenty-eight cubic inches. M. Mariotte, vho made the ſame experiment, found the quantity to be a litile more; but it is probable that he might commit a ſmall error, becauſe the experiment I have juſt cited vas made, M. Briſſon informs us, with the utmoſt care and attentionn. A (French) pint of water, he adds, inſtead of weighing two pounds, as is commonly believed, is provæd to fall ſhort of that weight conſiderably, as will be evident by ſtrictly examining that experiment. Theſe facts being premiſed, I ſhall requeſt the attention of the reader, ſecondly, to the diſcharge of ſluids through additional pipes. When, inſtead of cauſing water to paſs through an aperture made in a thin ſubſtance, it is made to flow through an additional vertical pipe of the ſame diameter with the orifice, the quantity of water diſcharged is more conſiderable, becauſe the contraction of the ſtream is greater in the firſt caſe than in the ſecond. In the following experiments, the conſtant height oſ the water in the reſervoir above the upper baſe of the additional vertical pipe is 11 feet 8:5 inches (French) and the diameter of the pipe one inch. Number of cubic inches of The variable heights of the water diſcharged in one tubè expreſſed in lines. minute. Lines. Exper. 1I. 48ſ The vater  uI2,4 ) running 2.2 through a -- I2,88 3.18 Lnll pipe. J I21638 The vater 4. - inſ filling - 9,282 the pipe. It appears from this table of experiments, that the longer the vertical pipe is, the greater will be the quantity of water diſcharged, becauſe the contraction of the ſtream is leſs, as may be ſeen by comparing the three firſt experiments. There is always, however, ſome contraction, though the water appears to flow out of a full pipe. In comparing the quantities of water diſcharged in the third and fourth experiments, it will appear, that tiœ two quantities, 12, 168 cubic inches and ꝗ,282 cubic inches, are to each other nearly in the relation of thirteen to ten; but it has been obſerved beſore, that the quantity of water diſcharged through an aperture made in a thin ſubſtance, if the ſtream was not contracted, would be to the quantity of water diſcharged through the ſame oriſice, if the ſtream was contracted, nearly as ſixteen to ten. Hence then it may be concluded, that the height of the water in the reſervoir and the different apertures being the ſame, the quantity of water diſcharged through an orifice made in a thin ſubſtance, in which there was no contraction of the ſtream, the quantity of water diſcharged through an additional pipe, and the quantity which would ſlow through an orifice made in a thin partition, in which there was a contraction of the ſtream, are to each other nearly as the three numbers, ſixteen, thirteen, ten, and theſe proportions are found ſufficiently accurate for common purpoſes. Hence alſo it may be inferred, that additional pipes counteract only in part the contraction of the ſtream. The moſt ſenſible of all contractions of this nature is that which takes place when water flows ſrom a large reſervoir through a ſmall aperture made in a thin ſubſtance. If the additional pipe, inſtead of being vertical, or placed in the bottom of the veſſel or reſervoir, is horizontal, or placed in the ſide, it will afford the ſame quantity of water, provided that it is of the ſame Jength, and that the exterior aperture is placed at the ſame diſtance below the ſurface of the water in the reſervorr. If the additional pipe, inſtead of being cylindrical, is conical, having iĩts largeſt baſe attached to the ſide of the reſervoir, it will produce a much greater quantity of water. The moſt advantageous form, indecd, for procuring the greateſt quantity of water in a given time through a certain aperture, is that which the ſtream itſelf naturally aſſumes in coming out of an aperture in a thin ſubſtance; that is, the form given to the pipe ſhould be that of a truncated cone, the diameter of the ſmaller baſe of which ſhould be the ſame as that of the aperture through which the water is to flow. It is neceſſary alſo, that the area of the ſmaller baſe ſnhould be to the area of the greater as ten to ſixteen; and the diſtance between the two baſes ſhould be nearly equal to half the diameter of the greater baſe. The remainder of the length of the pipe may be either cylindrical or priſmaticc. The diſcharge will then be equally abundant with that which would take place through an aperture equal to the ſmaller baſe made in a thin partition, and in which the ſtream ſuffered no contraction. This form may be applied to practice whenever it is required to draw a certain quantity of water from a river by an aqueduct, &c. through a canal or lateral pipe. If we compare the different quantities of water diſcharged through additional pipes of different diameters with different altitudes of the water in the reſervoirs, we ſhall have the reſults ſtated in the following table, the additional pipes being ſuppoſed to be two inches long, and vertical, or placed in the bottom of the reſervoir. The conſtant height Thæe diameter of the addi-] No. of cubic of the water above tional pipes in twelfths of] inches diſthe aperture, an inch (lines.) charged in | one minute. Ex. I. 6&] The water running I ,689. through a full pipe. 2. 552 IO g P1p 4,703. 3. lines 6 4 I0 lowing the ſides. 3,598. I,222. through a full pipe. 3,402 The water not fol- l 293. j l The water running O 6 IO The water not filling 935the tube. 2,603. The firſt inference from theſe experiments is, that the quantity of water diſcharged by diſfferent additional pipes, under the ſame height of water in the reſervoir, is proportional to the areas of the apertures, or to the ſquares of their diameters. Secondly, it appears that the quantities of water diſcharged through additional pipes of the ſame diameter, under different altitudes oſ water in the reſervoir, are proportional to the ſquare root of the altitude. Thirdly, that in general the quantities of water diſcharged in the ſame ſpace of time through diſferent additional pipes, under diſferent heights of water in the reſervoir, are to each other nearly as the product of the ſquare of the dĩameters of the pipes by the ſquare root of the altitude of the reſervoirs. The efflux of water, therefore, through additional pipes, ſollows the ſame laws as water when diſcharged through apertures made in thin ſubſtances. On theſe experiments the following table was formed, of the quantities of water diſcharged through a given aperture made in a thin ſubſtance, ſuppoſing the ſtream to ſuffer no contraction, or through the ſame aperture with a contraction of the ſtream, or through the ſame aperture Conſtant height ofſ Cubie inches of C hes of Cubie inches the water] water diſcharg- uble inches of or ater diſin the re- ed in one mi-] vater diſcharg- charged i in one ſervoir ſ nute through an ed in one mi- ſſu through nute throcgh an additional pipe of one inch diaar aperture of above the ſ aperture of one ore inch diaaperture, inch diameter expreſſed without any ꝗ meter with a in contraction of ;nũ a two contracted French) the ſtream. Inches long. ſtream. feet. I 4381 3539 2722 2 6169 5000 53846 3 7589 6126 4710 4 8763 7970 5436 5 9797 7900 6075 6 10732 8654 6654 7 I592 9340 7183 8 12392 9975 7672 9 I3144 Io579 8i35 IO 13855 IIi5 8574 1I I4530 11693 8990 I2 15180 I2205 9384 13 15797 12699 9764 14 16393 13197 IOI30 I5 16968 153620 10472 III. There is no application of the doctrines of hydraulics more ſurpriſing, or more gratiſying to the eye, than that which is ſeen in the variety of artificial fountains, or jets deau, which the ingenuity of man has been able to conſtruct for ornament in general, and for uſe in ſome inſtances, particularly in warm climates. The principles on which theſe are conſtructed it ill not be diſficult, aſter what has been ſtated, ſully to comprehend. Whatever may be the direction of the jet or founfain, the quantity of water expended will be. the ſame, provided that the ajutage *, and the height of the reſervoir above the ajutage, is the ſame. This is a neceſſary conſequence of the equal preſſure of fluids in all directions. Water, when diſcharged through an ajutage, however ſmall it may be, has a velocity ſufficient to raiſe ĩt to the height of the ſurface of the water contained in the reſervoir; ſo that a vertical jet deau throws up the water as high as the reſervoir whence it proceeds, if nothing obſtructs it. There are, however, many cauſes which contribute to diminiſh the elevation of water by jets eau. Firſt, the friction in the pipes from the reſervoir to the ajutage; ſecondly, the friction againſt the circumference of the aperture; thirdly, the reſiſtance of the air to the motion of the column; fourthly, the gravity oſ the particles of water themſelves, which, in riſing, loſe ſome of their velocity, and recoil upon thoſe which ſucceed them. Thus by inclining the pipe a little, we find that the water will riſe higher than when it is exactly vertical; but in this caſe, the effect is not ſo agreeable to the eye oſ the ſpectator, as vhen the water which riſes above the pipe into the air falls perpendicularly, in a manner, back upon itſelf. When the ajutage is placed in an oblique direction to the horizon, the force of the projection and the gravity of the water cauſe the ſtream which aſcends into the air to ſorm a parabola, the amplitude of which is in proportion to the height of the reſervoir. VWhen the ajutage is placed horizontally, the vater forms a ſemi-parabola. Fountains elevate the water in proportion as the aperture of their ajutages is large; becauſe, firſt, of  A tube which ĩs fitted to the mouth of the veſſel through which the fountain is played. two jets deaux proceeding from the ſame reſervoir, and flowing from their ajutages with an equal degree of velocity, the greater will, in the firſt place, experience leſs friction; and ſecondly, it has a greater maſs, and conſequently more power to overcome the obſtacles which may oppoſe it. But, though large jets deau elevate water higher than ſmall ones, they do not expend a greater quantity in proportion; for the quantity of water diſcharged is as the product of the aperture of the ajutage by the degree of velocity at the time of the diſcharge; and this velocity is the ſame in both, no allowance being made for the friction. In order to make large fountains elevate water higher than ſmall ones, it is evidently neceſſary that the conducting pipes ſhould be ſufficiently large to furniſh water in abundance; for if they are ſmall, experience proves that the ſmall fountains in that caſe vill elevate water higher than larger ones; it follows, then, that the diameter of the pipe, which conveys the water, ſnould be in proportion to that of the ajutage, in order to elevate the water to the greateſt poſſible height. If we compare two diſferent jets deau, and are deſirous that each ſhould elevate vater to the greateſt poſſible height, it is neceſſary that the ſquare of the diameters of the conduit pipes ſhould be in proportion to each other in the compound ratio of the diameters of the ajutages and the ſquare root of the altitudes of the reſervoirss. Thus, if it is known by experiment what the diameter oſ a conduit pipe ſhould be, to ſupply an ajutage f given dimenſions, it may be eaſily determined what the diameter of another pipe ſhould be to furniſh another ajutage of a determinate ſize, the height of the reſervoir being alſo given. It has been proved by experiments, that when the diameter oſ the ajutage is half an inch, and the height oſ the reſervoir fifty-two feet, the diameter of the pipe which conducts the water ought to be three inches and a quarter; and that for an ajutage of half an inch diameter, the height of the reſervoir being ſixteen feet, the diameter of the pipe ought to be about two inches and one- third. There is no inconvenience in making the conduit pipe of a greater diameter than is required by this rule; but on the contrary, there would be an inconvenience in making it of a ſmaller diameter. Sometimes the ajutage is made in the form of a cone, and ſometimes in that of a cylinder; but thoſe who conceive that it is indiſferent in which of thoſe ſorms it is made are miſtaken, for the cylindrical form is by far the moſt diſadvantageous. BYy comparing many experiments made upon artificial fountains, it has been determined, that the differences between the altitudes of vertical jets and the height of their reſervoirs, are to each other as the ſquare of the altitudes of the former. If then it is known what quantity of water a jet elevates at a certain height of the reſervoir, the quantity which any other jet of a given height will elevate, compared vith the height of its reſervoir, may be eaſily found by the rule of ſingle proportion. When it is neceſſary to bend the conducting pipes, the utmoſt care ſould be taken to avold bẽnding them at right angles, for the ſtriking of the current againſt theſe angles very conſiderably diminiſhes the velocity. The following table will greatly facilitate the application of theſe principles The heights of jets, and the correſpondent heights of reſervoirs, are found in the two firſt columns. The third column contains in (Paris) pints, of which thirtyſix make a cubic foot, the quantities of water diſcharged in one minute through an ajutuge of half an inch diameter, relatively to the heights in the ſecond column. The quantity diſcharged through an ajutage of half an inch diameter being known, the quantity vhich will be diſcharged by any other ajutage, under the ſame height of the reſervoir, may be found by ſingle proportion; for it has already been proved, that the quantities of water diſcharged are to each other as the areas of the ajutages, or as the ſquares of their diameters. In the fourth column are found the diameters for the conducting pipes of an ajutage of half an inch diameter, according to the heights in the ſecond column. The diameters of pipes for other ajutages, and other heights of the reſervoir, are found by following the preceding rule. Fractions are not obſerved in the calculations for Quantities of wa; ter diſcharged in The heights The heights of of jets, ex- eſervoirs, in feet ręn .u preſſed in and inches. tage of half an feet. inch diameter, in p nts. Feet. Feet. Inches. Pinis. 5 5 I 32 10 IoO4 45 15 15 9 56 20 20 4 65 25 27 I 73 30 333 O 81 35 39 I 3S 40 45 4 95 45 5 9 IOI 50 58 4 108 55 65 I 114 60 72 O I20 65 79 I 125 70 86 4 131 75 93 9 136 80 IoO 4 142 85 109 I 147 90 1I1I7 O 152 95 12 I 158 100 133 4 163 [Book VII, Diameters of the pipes, according to the 2d and 5d columns, in lines. IV. From objects of mere pleaſure and ornament, our attention is next ſolicited to an invention of eminent utility, and of ancient date, though the modern improvements are very conſiderable even in this branch of mechanics. Pumps are hydraulic engines, deſigned for the purpoſe of elevating water; they are compoſed of hollow cylinders A B (Plate VII. fig. 3.) or E F (Plate VIII. fig. I.) of an equal diameter throughout their whole length, which is called rhe body of the pump, and in which a kind of ſtopple I, called the piſion, is made to nide, or move up and down. The piſton is put in motion by means of a rod of metal X æ, at the extremity of which X the handle is placed, and elevated by the lever XY, or by ſome other contrivance; to this is annexed a pipe AT (Plate VII. fig. 3.) to conduct the water to the height required; and, laſtly, the ſuckers S s. There are ſeveral kinds of pumps; ſome are called ſucking pumps and others forcing pumps, and there are others which are at the ſame time both ſucking and forcing pumps. The raiſing pump is compoſed of the bedy of the pump A B, (Plate VII. fig. 3.) to the lower part of which is affixed the end of a pipe BN, open at the bottom, or (which is ſtill better) pierced with holes its whole length, in ſuch a manner that large piecẽs of dirt and rubbiſh may be prevented from entering the body of the pump. At the union of this end of the pipe with the body of the pump is placed a valve or ſucker s, which, when raiſed up by the preſſure of the water beneath, permits the ſluid to aſcend into the body of the pump, but which, by being preſſed down again by the action of the pump, prevents efſectually the efflux of the water by the ſame aperture. In the body of the pump there is a box or piſton I, pierced quite through, furniſhed at the upper end with a ſucker S, and joined at æ, by the aſſiſtance of a head ſomewhat in the form of that of a pair of compaſſes, to the rod x X, which enables it to act by the aid of a Iever XZ Y. At the upper part A of the body of the pump is placed the raiſing pipe AT, which has its ſpout at T. This pump ought to be placed in a well or baſon, in ſuch a manner that the body of the pumn A B ſhould be entirely under the ſurface of the wrtæ? AA. Nov if the piſton Iis riſed by lowering the extremity Y of the lever YZX, o that the lever may aſſume the poſition y Z u, the piſton will riſe in the body oſ the pump, where it will create an imperſect vacuum equal to the diſtance X æ, and conſequently the water beneath will raiſe the ſucker s5, and will paſs out of the baſon into the pump. When the piſton is lowered again, this preſſure cauſes the ſucker s to cloſe, and the ſucker S to riſe up; hence the water which was below the piſton is then above it. By a ſecond exertion of the piſton, this quantity of water is elevated, and by the ſame mechaniſm a freſh quantity is permitted to paſs into the pump, and aſterwards to riſe above the piſton, in the ſame manner as the firſt portion was raiſtd; ſo that by a certain number of exertions of the piſton, the raiſing pipe AT is filledl. When this is accompliſhed, at every exertion or ſtroke of the piſton there is ejected at the ſpout or diſcharging pipe T a maſs of water equal to a cylinder, the baſe of which is equal to the width of the piſton, and of a height equal to the ſpace through which the piſton paſſes in the body of the pump. This ſpace is commonly called the play of the piſton. It is not difficult to eſtimate the weight of the column of water with which the piſton is charged, when the raiſing pipe is full, and conſequently the force vhich is neceſſary to be exerted at Y in order to vork the pump. It has been obſerved beſore, that fluids preſs in proportion to their perpendicular height, and the width of the baſe which oppoſes their deſcent. In a pump, this baſe is the piſton, and the perpendicular m - C iii . cular height is that of the raiſing pipe above the ſurface of the water; ſo that when the raiſing pipe is full, the charge upon the piſton is equal to the weight of a cylinder of water, the diameter of which is equal to that of the piſton, and the height equal to that of the raiſing pipe above the ſurface of the water, whatever may be the diameter of the mounting pipe; and this charge or weight upon the piſton is eaſily calculated, when it is known that a cylinder of water of one foot diameter and one foot high weighs about fiſty-five (French) pounds. It follows, therefore, that the weight of a column of water is not diminiſhed by diminiſhing the diameter of the raiſing pipe; but that, on the contrary, the reſiſtance which ought to be overcome is even augmented on account of the increaſe of the friction, which is more conſiderable in ſmall pipes than in large ones, becauſe the relative ſurfaces augment as the diameters diminiſh. Thus, only for the expence, it would be wrong to make, as is commonly done, the raiſing pipe ſmaller than the body of the pump; on the contrary, it would be better to conſtruct it of a diameter greater than that of the body of the pump, as the friction would be proportionably diminiſhed. The forcing pump is compoſed of the body of the pump CD, (Plate VII Fig. 4.) ſtopped cloſe at the bottom, but entirely open above, and in which is a piſton X, which only differs from that of the pump already deſcribed in this, that its ſucker S is placed at the bottom inſtead of the top. This piſton, like that of the pump juſt mentioned, is put in action by means of the lever YX Z, which has its point of ſupport in Z. The railing pipe A O is placed at the ſide of the body of the pump, with which it communicates, and is furniſed with a ſucker 5 in its lower part, and with a ſpout O at ĩts upper extremity. Ihis pump, as well as the preceding, ought to be immerſed in a well or baſon in ſuch a manner that the body of the pump CD ſhould be entirely under the ſurface of the water A A. The vater ſills the body oſ the; pump by falling through the aperture C, and by paſſing over the piſton X, the ſucker of it S, conſidering its poſition, will naturælly open. If the piſton K is lowered, by placing the lever YX Z in the poſition y u Z, the reſiſtance oſ the water againſt the ſucker S will cloſe it immediately. This water then, being incapable oſ repaſſing above the piſton, is forced up the pipe A O, by raiſing up the ſucker s. As ſoon as the piſton is raiſed again, the ſucker s is cloſed by the preſure of the water which is above, and the ſucker S is opened by its own weight. A new maſs of water then paſſes below the piſton, which by a ſecond depreſſion of the piſton, is forced to paſę, like the firſt, into the pipe AO; ſo that by a certain number of ſtrokes of the piſton, that pipe becomes full of water, which is then diſcharged at the ſpout O as in the pump already deſcribed. If the piſtons in both oſ them are of the ſame diameter, and the raiſing pipes of the ſame perpcndicular height, the weight of the two columns of water will be equal, and the two pumps will require the ſame power to work them; for in that caſe it requires the ſame power to elevate the piſton charged vith a column of water as it does to force the column of water by means of the piſton. The ſuclinę pump Plate VIII. Fig. 1.) is compoſed of the body of the pump E F, open above, and æ So callæd, becauſeit was originally ſuppoſed, but erroneouſiy, io ct by ſution. Chap- 3. ] 7° h u ing Pump⸗ 451 with a pipe oſ aſpiration or ſucking pipe F FPo adapted to the lower part. At the union oſ tl his pipe with the hody of the pump is a ſucker s, deſigned to permit the water, while the piſton is raiſed, to enter through the pipe of aſpiration P F into the body of the pump F E, and to prevent it, while the piſton is lowering, from being diſcharged the ſame way. In the body of the pump is a piſton L, made like that at Iin PlatevII. Fig. 3. and which it put in action in the ſame manner by the aſſiſtaice of the lever X ZY. This pump ſould be placed i in ſuch manner as ſo have only the lower extremity of the aſpiration Pipe FP plunged into the water. While the pump remains inactive, the two ſuckens s and 5 are naturally cloſed from their own weight. If the piſton L is raiſed up by means of putting the lever X ZY in the ſituation à Z5, the columnof air which reſts above is elevated, and the air Whichis cloſed up in the aſpiration pipe, ſrom the ſurface of the water æ to the piſton, having then more ſpace to occupy, becomes more rariied than the external air. This laſt then prèſſes more forcibly upon the ſurface of the water 4, and cauſes it to riſe in the aſpiration pipe, till the interior air has regained ĩts former denſity by occupying leſs ſpace. Thus, aſter ſeveral ſtrokes of the piſton, the water reaches the body of the pump, and paſſes over the piſton, by raiſing up the ſuckers s and S, one aſter another, and the piſton, by its ſubſequent elevation, forces the water o eſcape at the ſpout E. As it is the preſſure of the air which cauſes the water to riſe in this pump, and as this preſſure can ſuſtain only a column of water of about thirty-two feet, It is clear that the aſpiration or ſucking pipe ſhould not exceed that length. In common practice it is indeed ſeldom made ſo long as thirty-two feet. In order that the preſſure of the atmoſphere may be ſuch as to ſuſtain a column of water of that height, it is neceſſary, firt, that the ſucking pump ſhould be made with the greateſt exactneſs, and that it ſhould continue in'a perfect ſtate; ſecondly, that it ſhould be placed upon the level of the ſea, or very near it, becauſe it is there that the preſſure of the atmoſphere is moſt forcible; thirdly, that the preſſure of the air ſhould not vary; but in general all theſe circumſtances are not requiredl. Mechanics are ſatisfied, in general, with making the aſpiration pipe twenty-three or tentyfour feet long. Ifit is neceſſary to elevate water to a greater height, the forcing pump is more commodious for that purpoſe. The latter, ĩt is true, is ſubject to ſeveral inconveniences. It is neceſſary to place the body of the pump eiĩther in wells or in a baſon; and when it ĩs required to repair it, which often happens, one of two things is neceſſary, eſther to empty the well or the baſon, or to draw up the body of the pump, which is extremely troubleſome and expenſive. To remedy theſe inconveniencies, the beſt and moſt uſual mode is, when water is to be elevated from a great depth, to make the pum) at once both a forcing ænd ſucking pump, in the manner which I ſhall preſently explain. In the year 1766 it was reported, through the chanrel of the public papers, that at Seville, in Spain, a ſimple ſucking pump had been conſtructed, which eſevated water to the height of ſixty feet, and ĩt was conſcquentlv concluded, thet the world had till then been rotoriouſly impoſed upon by the current mexim, that the preſſure of the aſr conld ræiſe a column of water only to the height of thirty-two feet. M. Briſion has careſully examined into the fact, and his explanation is curious and Intereſting. An ignorant tinman, at Seville, had made a ſucking pump ſixty feet long, becauſe he had occaſion to elevate the water to that heightt. When the pump was fixed in its place, and put in action, he was unable to make the water riſe into the body of the pump. Enraged at this diſappointment, he gave it a blow with his hammer, which produced a ſmall aperture in the aſpiration pipe at about ten feet above the ſurface of the water in the baſon. Immediately a ſmall portion of water arrived at the body of the pump. Aſter this proceſs it was reported, that a ſucking pump had been conſtructed, which elevated water to the height of ſixty feet; but the reader will be enabled to judge of the truth of this aſertion from the following obſervations: Let us ſuppoſe that the aſpiration pipe, P F (Plate VIII. Fig. 1.) had from a, the ſurface of the water of the baſon, to F, a diſtance of ſixty feet, and that after a certain number of ſtrokes oſ the piſton, the vater riſes to f, thirty-two feet high; if then a ſmall hole is made at b, ten feet above the ſurface of the vater, the air which enters at this hole, and preſſes in all directions, will cauſe the column of water of ten feet, which is below b, to fall into the baſon, and the preſſure of the air upwards at b has only a column of water of twenty- two feet to ſupport. But that preſſure is capable not only of raiſing that column to the height of ſixty feet, but even to the height of eight thouſand feet; for air, near the ſurface of the earth, is eight hundred times leſs denſe than water, and ſuppoſing (Which is not the caſe) it was not diminiſhed in elevating, then the ten fcet of water, cut off by the preſſure of the air at b, downwards, would be more than equivalent to eight thouſand feet of ai. The column oſ air, thereſore, which preſſes at b, will be too ſtrong for more than eight thouſand feet; thus the twenty- two feet of water remaeining above will not be in equilibrium with the column of alr till after it has riſen higher than cight thouſand feet. In order to have a ſecond portion of water with a pump oſ this conſtruction, ĩt is in the firſt place neceſſary to ſtop the aperture which was made at b, then to give ſeveral ſtrokes with the piſton to elevate the water as high as c; and laſtly, to open again the orifice at /. Obſerve the ſimplicity of this proceſ for raiſing ſo ſmall a quantity of water for ĩt is neceſſary that the aſpiration pipe ſhould be of a very ſmall diameter, otherwiſe the column of water would brealę, and the air would paſ's through, and not one drop of water could be raiſed into the body of the pump. Thin fact (edds M. Briſon) may ſerve to convince thoſe who are fond of novelty, that beſore an opinion generællv received is pronounced to be falſe, it is neceſſary to think twice at the leaſt. A ſhort time oſter the conſtructing loſ this pump at Seville, M. Eellangẽ, a goldſmith in Paris, made one in imitation of it, to which he gave the additional property of throwing water ſiſty five feet high, by means of a continncũ jet or eſecting pipe, though the machine was⸗ only a - ſucking pump. To a ſmall bodied pump of two inches and onetwelfth in the interior diameter, the piſton of which had eſoht inches plæy, he adopted an aſpiratinn pipe of ten-twelſths of an inch diameter, and fifty- ſix feet long; this pipe was furniſhed with a ſucker at its junction vith the body oſ the pump, and with arother at its lower extremity. This extremity was plunged into a tun full of water. M. Bellangẽ had made. a ſmall perforation in this pipe oſ about one twentyfourth of an inch diameter, at twelve or fifteen inches above the ſurface of the water in the tun. The apparatus being diſpoſed of in this manner, he moved the piſton gently, but the water did not riſe; the ſmall hole furniſned a ſuſficient quantity of air to fill the aſpiration pipe. He then moved the piſton with great velocity; ; the ſmall hole could not, in ſo ſhort a ſpace of time, furniſh a ſufficient quantity of air to fill the pipe; a little water roſe and mixed iĩtſelf with the air, ſo that the column became compoſed of ſmall cylinders, alternately of air and water, and though it vas fifty-five feet high, it was much ſfiort of the veight of a column of water thirty-two feet high. If we calculate, therefore, according to the diameter of the body of the pump, and the extent in which the piſton played, what quantity of water this pump would have furniſhed if the air had not entered, and then compare this quentity with that which it really furniſhed, ve ſhall find that the latter is greatly inferior; for in ſix minutes five hundred and thirty ſtrokes of the piſton may be given, which would furniſh only thirty-ſix pints of water; this pump, therefore, would not furniſh the eighth part of the water which ĩt ought to do upon, the common principles of the ſucking pump; ſo that though the conſtruction might appear to be more ingenious, it was not in reality to be preferred to that of Seville. The compeund ſn creing pump is compoſed of the body of the pump G H, (Plate VIII. Fig. 2.) open above, and the aſpiration pipe H V adapted to the lower end. At the union of this pipe vith the body of the pump is a ſucker S, deſigned ſor the ſame ufe as in the ſimple ſucking pump. In the body of the pump is a piſton M, not pierced as the preceding, but ſolid, and put in action by the aid of the rod æ X, and of the lever Y X Z, which has its point of ſupport, or fulcrum, at Z. At the ſide of the pump, and towards the bottom of ĩts body, is adapted a raiſing pipe H R, furniſhed with a ſucker 5 near its baſe, and with a ſpout R near its ſuperior extremity. This pump ought to be placed in ſuch a manner that the lower extremity only of the aſpiration pipe H V ſhould be immerſed under water. l 1It is eaſy to perceive that the firſt action of this pump vill be the ſame as that of the ſucking pump, which has been deſcribed; for if the piſton M is raiſed by putting the lever YX Z in the ſituation 5 u Z, the column of air which reſts above will be elevated; the air which is in the aſpiration- pipe will become, by that means, rarer than the exterior air. The latter then preſſes more forcibly upon the ſurface of the water A A, and carries it, aſter ſome ſtrokes of the piſton, into the body of the pump; When it is arrived there, if the piſton M is lowered, the ſucker S vill cloſe, and the water is forced along the raiſingpipe H R, by the riſing of the ſucker s, which, as ſoon as the preſſure ceaſes, falls again from its own weight and that of the water above it. This pump is very convenient, on account of its body being placed out of water, which affords an opportunity of making the neceſſary repairs with facility, and alſo on account of its being capable of carrying water to any height which may be required: in order to effect this, all that is neceſſary ĩs, to lengthen the raiſing-pipe, and to augment the power which puts the pump in action. I believe this is at preſent the moſt uſual form of what are called forcing pumps in this country. The fire engine isan hydraulic engine, which may be claſſed with the pump that I have now deſcribed. It is at once a ſucking and forcing pump, but has a continued jet, or jecting pipe, though it has only one body. The eſſential parts of this pump are compoſed, like the compound pump, (Plate VIII. Fig. 2.) with this difference, that its aſpiration pipe is much ſhorter, and that inſtead of a ſolid raiſing pipe it has a leathern tube of a convenient length. This pump (Plate IX. Fig. 1.) is then compoſed of the body of the pump A H, open above, and to the lower part is adapted the aſpiration pipe H T. At the union of this pipe with the body of thæ pump is placed a ſucker S, deſigned to prevent the water, v hich has once paſſed into the body of the pump, ſrom returning into the baſon. In the body of the pump is a piſton M, not pierced but ſolid, and which is put in motion by the aid of a metal rod æ X, and of a lever YX Z, æhich has its fulcrum or point of ſupport at Z. Towards the bottom of the pump, in the ſide, is an aperture C, which ĩs covered again by means of a valve c/, of which the tail ſis a Ipring, and which is fixed on with a ſmall ſcrev. This valve is deſigned to prevent the water, which is expelled from the body of the pump, from entering again when the piſton M is raiſed. The body of the pump is ſurrounded with a pipe A B D E, about two or three inches more in diameter than the body of the pump, and the intermediate ſpace between them is filled with air. To the lower part of this pipe, and upon the ſide, is adapted another ſmall crooked pipe ER, furniſhed at the end R with a ſucker s, and with a ſcrew ferule, intended to receive a nut, by means of vhich the Ieathern pipe is joined to this end of the engine, and which ſerves inſtead of the raiſing pipe in the common forcirg pump. All this apparatus is placed (as may be ſeen i in. Plate IX. Fig. 2.) upon a box or caſe N O Iined with lead, which contains the water. The croſs bar Qſupports the upper end F Fig. I. ) of the body of the pump, which, for that purpeſe, is of a ſmaller diameter than the reſt; and the lid L (Fig. 2.) of the box has an aperture in the middſe, to admit the aſplration pipe H T to paſs through i it. From this ex planation it vil be evident, that ĩF the piſton M is raiſed up by putting the lever YX Z in the ſituationyæ Z, the ſucker s and the valve c, Placed at C, will be cloſed by the preſiure of the exterior air. This ſame preſſure, exerciſing ſts force upon the ſurſace of the water VV, obliges i it to paſs into the body of the pump by raiſing up the ſucker S. It then acts as a ſucking pump; but when the piſton M is lowered, jts preſſure cloſes the ſucker S, and opens the valve which is at C; the water then paſſes, not only into the leathern pipe a b d, (Fig. æ.) by raiſing up the ſucker s (Fig. 1.) but alſo into the ſpace between the body of the pump and the pipe which incloſes it, by riſing towards IK, and compreſſes the air which is confined therè Immediately aſter the piſton M is raiſed again, that air, being no longer compreſſeq, unfolds ite If by ĩts elaſticity, acts upon the water which is between the: body of the pump and the pipe which incloſed it, and forces it alſo into the leathern pipe, ſo that when the piſton is lowered, the water is forced by the piſton itſelf, and when it is raiſed, the water is ſorcéd by the elaſticity of the air, which furnies a continued ſtream, though the pump h has only one body or principal tube, It is evident that theſe fire engines ſhould be able to furniſh a continued ſtream, and this can only be effected by employing the elaſticity of the air, while the piſton is riſing; but in order to effect this, a double force is required to put the pump in motion; in other words, a force capable of expelling the column of water, and an equal force to compreſs the air. But this is not an inconvenience, for, in caſe of fire, it _ ſeldom happens that hands are wanting to aſſiſt; the contr ary, it frequently happens that the -— of people is rather too numerous. Such is the engine which M. Briſſon has deſcribed, and iĩt is, I preſume, that which is in common uſe in France. Its ſimplicity is admirable; yet I apprehend that our Engliſh fire engines are more powerſul, and furniſh a more uninterrupted ſtream or current of wawater through the leathern pipe. In Fig. 3. is a repreſentation of our. improved fire engine. This, the reader will ſee, is wrought by two forcing pumps, which act alternately; and the ſtream is made continual from the ſpring of air confined in a ſtrong metal veſſel CC, in the fire engine AB, fixed between the two forcing pumps D and E, wrought with a common double lever F G moving on the center H. The piſtons in D and E both ſuck and force alternately, and are here repreſented in their diſferent actions, as are alſa the reſpective valves at I and LM. The vater to ſupply this engine, if there is no opportunity of putting the end of a ſucking pipe, occaſionally to be ſcrewed on, into a moat or canal (which would ſpare much hurry and Iabour in caſe of fire) is poured into the veſſel A B; and being ſtrained through the wire grate Nis, by the preſſure of the atmoſphere, raiſed hrough the valves K and M into the the barrels of D or E, vhen either of their forcers aſcend; whence again, upon their deſcent, it will be powerſully propelled into the air-veſſel C C, through the valves I and L by turns: the common air then between the ater and the top of the air-veſel CC vill from time to time be forcibly crowded into leſ™ room, and much compreſſed; and the air being in that condenſed ſtate poſeſſed of a ſtrong and lively ſpring, 2nd always endeavouring to dilate itſelf every way equally in ſuch à2 circumſtance, bears ſtrongly both àgainſt the ſides of the veſſel herein it is confined, and the ſurface oſ the water thus injected; ænd thus produces a conſtant regular ſtream, which riſes through the metal pipe P into the leather one Q, and this latter being perſectly flexible, may be led about into rooms and entries, as the caſe may require. Should the air contæined in this veſſel be compreſed into half the ſpace ĩt too upin ĩts natural ſtate, the ſpring of it will be nearly doubled; and as before it equalled and was able to ſuſtain the preſſure of the atmoſphere, fince it has now a double force, by the power of that ſpring alone it will throw water into air of the common degree of denſity about thirty feet high. And ſhould this compreſſure be ſtill augmented, and the quantity of air, which at firſt filled the whole veſſel, be reduced into one-third of that ſpace, its Ipring will be then able to reſiſt, and conſequently to raĩſe the weight of a. treble atmoſphere; in which caſe it will throw up a jet of water ſixty feet high. And ſhould ſo much water again be forced into the veſſel as to fill three parts of the capacity, ĩt will be able to throw it up about ninety feet high: and whereever the ſervice ſtall require a ſtill greater riſe of water, more water muſt be forced into this veſſel; the æir therein being thus driven by force into a ſtill narll VOL. Ví. æ N Y m — _ — m l l Plote 9. r. 3 m , u i q n ũ . 5 rower compaſs, at each exploſion, its gractual reſtitution to its firſt dimenſions is what regularly carries on the ſtream between the ſtrokes, and renders it continual during the operation of the machine. Various agents are employed to put pumps in action, ſuch as men, horſes, ſtreams of water, vapour, wind, &c. Small pumps, ſuch as thoſe in common ells, or fire engines, are generally wrought by men. When a conſiderable quantity of water is required to be raiſed, the moving power muſt be increaſed; and in order that a regular effort may be employed, or very nearly ſo, ſeveral additions are occaſionally made to the mechaniſm of pumps, ſo that when ore ſet of piſtons deſcend another ſet may be made to riſe by the ſame fſorce. The great engine at Marli is wrought by an apparatus of this kind. The action of theſe engines depends upon the regularity of the alternate motion of the ſuckers or valves. It follows then, that theſe ſould be ſo conſtructed and diſpoſed as perfectly to retain the water when they are cloſed, and to open eaſily when the action of the machine is directed to that object. V. Of the motion of water in conduit pipes. When it is required to conduct vater from one place to another, it is very ciear that the conducting pipes muſt be longer than the ſpace through which it is to be conveyed. In treating of the diſcharge of water through additional pipes, I have talen but a curſory notice of the reſiſtance by ſriction, becauſe there it is ſcarcely perceptible; but it is not the ſame with reſpect to pipes of conſiderable extent; the friction of the water againſt ing water, as has been oved by experiments. I ſhall firſt ſpeak of rectilinear pipes. In the following experiments two pipes were employed, one of an inch and a quarter diameter, and the other of two inches. The two pipes were ſucceſſively lengthened from thirty feet to one hundred ard eighty; and the conſtant height of the water in the reſervoir, above the pipes, was ſometimes one foot, and ſometimes two. The ſollowing table ſhews the reſults of theſe experiments: The number of cubic inches of water furniſhed The conſtant height of the] The diſtance to ThEe number of cubic inches of water in the vhich the in one minute, by water furniſlied reſervoir woater was con- a pipe or an inch in one minute by ] above the veycò, ex preſſed a quarter a pige of twn Pipè, in inches. in feet. diameter. inches diameter. I 2 78 7680 I | 60 1I957 5564 l I | ꝗ 1587 4534 I IZ0O l I 35 ſI 344 I 150 1178 a486 I 180 IO52 3S1I™9 2 30 4066 II219 l 2 c0 2888 81950 ⸗ ꝗ0 2352 6812 2 I20 20II 5885 2 I50 175 5232 2 180 | ſ53 47 10 If, by the aid oſ the table of additional pipes, which has been before inſerted, we ſould iſh to find the quantity oſ water diſcharged by two additional pipes of one inch and one-third and two inches diaimeter, undier the ſame height of the reſervoir, and without having any regard to ſriction, but only to the arcas of ã the orifices of the pipes, it will be founc, that during one minute, I. The height of the reſervoir being one foot, the pipe of one inch and one-third diamerer, in this caſe Ihere will be diſcharged ſix thouſend two hundred and ninet; tæo cubic inches of water. . The Height of the reſervoir being two eet, the a pipe vwill ſumim eight thouſand eight hundred and ninety-three cubic inches of water. itll 3. The height of the reſervoir being one ſoot, anũ the pipe two inches in diameter, there vill be diſcharged fourteen thouſand cne hundred and fifty ſix cubic inches of water. 4. The height of the reſervoir being two er the ſame pipe will Turniſ tventy thouſand and eight cubic inches of vater. It is eaſy to perceive, that theſe quanti ties of water are much greater than the correſponding quantities in the above able; and that the quantity furniſhed by each pipe diminiſhes, in fact, in proportion to its length, becauſe there is then a greater ſurface of ſriction. But it muſt be remerked, that the diminution of the quantity of water diſcharged is not exactly in proportion to the length of the pipe: The diſcharge is indeed diminiſhed as the pipe is made longer; but this diminution decreaſes (if I may uſe the expreſſion) in the progreſs of the current; for the firſt thirty feet the diſcharge is diminiſhed much more than in the ſecond thirty feet; and the third augmentation of thirty feet to the length diminiſhes the diſcherge ſtill leſs than the ſecond; and ſo of the reſt. The reſult of all this is, that in common practice, here great preciſion is not required, it may be laid down as a rule, that the quantities of water diſcharged in equal times, through the ſervoir, and at different diſtances from the ſource or reſervoir, are to each other nearly in an inverſe proportion of the ſquare roots of theſe diſtances. It may be obſerved from the preceding table, that a pipe of one inch and one- third diameter furniſhes Ieſs Water in proportion than one of two inches diameter, under the ſame height of the reſervoir, and of the ſame lIength. The reaſon of this is, becauſe there is, relatively to the quantities of water which theſe pipes will contain, more ſurface of friction in the ſmall pipe than in the larger one. If the ſame pipe was curvilinear inſtead of being ſtrait, the diſcharge would ſtill be diminiſhed from this circumſtance, though not in any conſiderable degree; but the diminution would be ſtill greater if the curvilinear pipe was placed in a vertical inſtead of a horizontal poſition. The diminution (ſmall as it is) is produced by the reſiſtance which the water meets in running againſt the angles of the pipe, which deprive ĩt of a part of its velocity. But if the pipe, inſtead oſ being curvilinear, was angular in ſeveral points, the diminution would be greater, and the more ſo in proportion as thoſe angles ſnould be more acute, becauſe then the reſiſtance to the water would be more directt. When the pipes are curved, and their curvature vertical, as in Plate X. Fig. I. there are then declivities and aſcents in which the air will lodge, and reſiſt or even impede the courſe of the water. For example, let ABCD E FG be a pipe, the upper extremity of which A anſwers to a reſervoir which ſupplies it with water, and the extremity G gees to furniſh a fountain. The pipe being filled with nothing but air, and water being made to run from A, this water will drive the air before it, and fill the portion  of the pipe AB more than the portion B C; the water having arrived at the bending C, will ſlow down the lower part of this bending, and vill proceed to fill the bending D, leaving behind it the coIumn of air CD, which cannot eſcape. The vater, continuing to run, will riſe from D to E, and having arrived there, it will ſtill flow down the lower pert oſ this declivity to fill the bent F, leaving behind it a ſecond column of air EF, which will remain confined there, notwithſtanding the preſſure of the column A B; for the column of air CD cannot counterbalance the preſſure of the column of water DE, any more than the column of air EF is capable of counterbalancing the column of water FI; ſo that though the water in the pipe A B is conſiderably above the level G, the wvater can only riſe towards I, and there ceaſes to flow. The only remedy is, to let out the two columns of air CD and EF, by placing at the elbow of the bendings two ſmall pipes C and E, through which the air may eſcape, and when the courſe of the water is well arl . a . : ranged the apertures may be cloſed with bungs. VI. Of the oſcillatory motion of water in a ſiphon. It is well known that the duration of the oſcillations of two pendulums of unequal lengths are to each other as the ſquare roots of thoſe lengths. The oſcillatory motion of water in a ſiphon is of the ſame nature. : Suppoſe a ſiphon (Fig. 2.) compoſed of three branches, two vertical I n, m o, and one horizontal n o; ſuproſe that the interior diameter of the ſiphon ĩs equal through its whole extent; that in this ſiphon, the fluid, in a ſtate of reſt, occupies the ſpace a nod; then the two ſurfaces a b, c d, are upon a level. Suppoſe then, that, by ſome cauſe, the liquid is forced to deſcend to g⸗, in the branch me, and conſequently to ęlevate itſelf to e f, in the branch In; as ſoon as this cauſe ceaſes to act, the fluid will be operated upon merely by the common laws of gravitation and motion. The exceſs of the length of the column æ n, above that of the column b o, will force the fluid to deſcend, and that even below the level of the other, on account of the acceleration of ĩts deſcent, which will cauſe the fluid in the other branch m o to riſe; the ſluid will then deſcend and aſcend alternately, or in oſcillations ſimilar to thoſe of a pendulum; and the deviation of each of theſe oſcillations will be preciſely the ſame as that of the oſcillations of a pendulum half as long as the length 2q of the column of the fluid. Since the oſcillations of water ſollow the ſame law as thoſe of a pendulum, it follows, that if the length of the column of water is augmented or diminiſhed, the duration of each oſcillation will be augmented or diminiſhed. VII. The oſcillatory motion of water in waves has been compared by Sir Iſ=aac Newton * to the oſcillatory motion of water in a ſiphon. Let ABCDEF (Fig. 3.) be ſuppoſed a ſheet of water, the ſurface of which riſes and falls in ſucceſſive vaves; let A CE be the tops of theſe waves, and BDF the intermediate hollows or concavities, which ſeparate them. As the waves are formed by the ſucceſſive aſcent and deſcent of the water in ſuch a manner that the higher parts become the lower, and ſo alternately and ſucceſſively, and as the weight of the elevated water is the moving power which cauſes the loweſt parts to aſcend and the higheſt to deſcend, theſe alternate riſings and fallings are conſidered as anaæ Principia, lib. 2. prop. 46. logous to the oſcillatory motion of water in a ſiphon, and they obſerve the ſame laws relative to their duration. If there is then a pendulum, the length of which is equal to half the tranſverſal diſtance that exiſts between the top or apex of a wave A (for example) and the cavity B, that is equal to half A4, the higheſt parts will become the loweſt in the ſame ſpace o time in which this pendulum vibrates, and in the ſpace of another oſcillation they will again become the higheſt. Each of theſe waves then vil roll its whole courſe during the time which the pendulum takes in perſorming two oſcillations; and as a pendulum four times the length of the preceding, that is, the length of which is equal to the width of the wave A C, will make only one oſcillation, while the firſt makes two, it fſollows, that the waves perform their oſcillations in the ſame ſpace of time a5 a pendulum equal in length to the width of the ſame waves would perform its oſcilla ations. What is meant by the width of waves, is the tranſverſal ſpæce A C, hich is between their greateſt elevations, or the ſpace BB D, which is between their greateſt concavities. It follows ſfrom theſe premiſes, that waves, which are about three feet and three quarters of an inch vide, roll their whole width during a ſecond of time, and conſequently they roll one hundred and eighty-three feet ſix inches and five-ſixths in a minute, and in an hour eleven thouſand and fourteen feet two inches; waves four times as wide will roll this ſpace in twice the time; it follows then, that the wider or more expanded the waves are, the greater will be the ſpace which they roll over in a given time. But what has now been ſtated reſpecting the motion of waves, ĩs founded upon this hypotheſis, that all the parts of the water riſe and fall in right lines; yet it muſt. be obſerved, that both their riſe and fall are more frequently made in curved lines than in ſtrait ones; ſo that the determination given above reſpecting the ſpace which waves roll over in a given time may be regarded only as an approximation to the truth. VIII. The motion of wheels acted upon by the fall or force of water, though ſtrictly a branch oſ mechanics, is yet intimately connected with the ſcience of hydraulics. The wheels of ſome water-mills are furniſhed with vings, float-boards, or ſhelves, at their circumference, vith very little or no concavity; others are furniſhed with a kind of ladles or boxes, whicli will contain a conſiderable quantity of water. In the firſt caſe, the water acts upon the wheels principally by its ſiock or fall; in the ſecond, by its weight. I ſhall firſt ſpeck of wheels moved by the ſhock of the water. It has been proved by experience, that the more numerous the wings or float-boards are in proportion to the diameter oſ the wheel, the faſtter it moves. To vheels of twenty feet diameter, there are commonly placed about forty float-boards; but a greater number, as for example forty-eight, weuld be ſtill more advantageous. To the wheels oſ thoſe mills which æare raiſed upon boats or rafts in rivers, there are uſually only eight or ten floats; but theſe wheels would havæe more eſfect if they had fifteen or ſixteen. When a wheel with wings or float- boards turns in a kind of frame or caſe, ſo as to prevent the water from falling immediately into the general current, the impulſe which it receives ſrom the water is about one- fifth greater in proportion to the velocity oſ the fluid, than it would receive in an unconſfined ſtream, becauſe in the latter caſe the water which abounds is turned behind the float, and reſiſts it; on the contrary, when the wheel moves in a frame, there is only a ſmall quantity of water, which moves with as much velocity, or with rather more, than the float-board. It has been proved by experience, that when this caſe or frame is but juſt wide and deep enough to admit the wheel to move freely, and the water has an opportunity of running out after having given its ſhock or impulſe, the direct and perpendicular force againſt the floats of the wheel is about twice the force vhich the float would receive if it was plunged to the ſame depth in an unconfined current. When a wheel furnifhed with forty-eight floats turns in a caſe or frame, and it is not plungeũ very deep in the water, its circumference will have about two-fiſths of the velocity of the current, in which caſe the machine will produce the greateſt effect. It appears that float-boards are the moſt advantageous when they are placed in a direct ſine towards the center of the wheel; becauſe but few of them would be required, ſince they would then be ſtruck perpendiculerly by the water, which produces the moſt powerſul effect, When they incline, the ſhock is oblique, which diminiſhes the effort; yet a certain degree oſ inclination cauſes the water to riſe the length of the ſloat, and to remain there a certain time; jt then acts by its gravity aſter having acted by its ſock or fall, and the effect which reſults from this arrangement more than compenſates for the diminution which the ſiock ſuffered from the obliquity with which the force was applied in the firſt inſtance. In general, t the wheels placed in frames which have a cerH tain declivity ſhould have their floats or buckets inclined ſo much towards the radius as to cauſe them to be ſtruck in a more perpendicular direction, that they may reccive an augmentation of force from the veight of the waterr. The moſt advantageous inclination of the floats towards the radius appears by experience to be between twenty and thirty degrees. A wheel placed near a reſervoir turns ſwiſter than in any other place, becauſe then the whole ſorce of the deſcending fluid is effectually applied; but if there is a neceſſity for placing it at the end of the watercourſe, at a certain diſtance from the reſervoir, the channel of the water- courſe or frame ſhould incline about the tenth part of ĩts Iength, ſo that the ſloping may give to the water that degree of velocity which would otherwiſe be ceſtroyed by friction; the wheel vill then receive the ſame impulſe as if it was placed cloſe to the reſervoir. Water acting by its weight produces a much greater eſfect than when it acts by its ſicck in falling. M. Parent, in the year 1704, and M. Pitot, in 1725, indeed demonſtrated, that a wheel (ſuppoſed to be without friction) moved by a current of water, and deſigned to elevate a portion of that water to the height of that which puts it in motion, is incapable of elevating it higher than  or4 nearly; whereas the water acting upon the wheel by its own weight would be capable of elevating to the height from which it deſcended half of the water which deſcended. Vhaen, therefore, we have only a ſmall quantity of water, and are obliged to huſband it well (which oſten happens, becauſe there are more ſmall ſtreams than large rivers) we ſhould contrive to make this water act by its weight rather than by its ſhock or impulſe; for this purpoſe, inſtead of having wheels with plain float-boards, they ſhould be furniſhed with concave or hollow ones reſembling buckets, whenever we can have a ſall of more than four feet, and eſpecially where there is not the neceſſary quantity of water to turn a mill with wheels, furniſned with plain floatboards. M. Deparcieux, in the Memoirs oſ the French Academy of Sciences*, has proved, that the ſlower vheels with buckets move, the more will be their effect with an equal expence of vater. He made a ſmall wheel of twenty inches diameter, the circumference of which was furniſhed with forty-eight buckets. Upon the axis of this wheel were placed ſour cylinders of diſferent ſizes; the leaſt was one inch in diameter, the next two inches, the third three inches, and the fourth was four inches in diameter. Theſe cylinders were different axes, about which a cord, which elevated a weight by means oſ a returning pully placed above the machine, wrapped itſelf. The axis of the wheel was ſupported at each end by two rollers eaſily put in motion; this was to diminiſh the frictionn. To the fore part of the wheel, and a little higher than its axis, was attached a ſmall ſhelf, upon which was placed a veſſel with a hole pierced in it on that ſide towards the wheel, which was filled with water. Above this veſſel was placed aæ large bottle full of water inverted, and the neck of it was plunged a few lines in the water of the veſſel, in order that the bottle ſhould only empty itſclf in proportion as the water in the veſſel ran through the aperture. The water in flowing fell into a channel which carried it into the buckets of the wheel. By this means he made ſure of employing, at each experiment, always the ſeme quantity of water.  For the year 1754, page 6o3 and 671. The fſollowing table contains the reſults of the experiments made by M. Deparcieux. He ſometimes elevated weights of twelve ounces, and ſometimes of twenty-four ounces: the heavieſt, reſiſting the moſt, compelled the wheel to turn ſlower. He wrapped the cords which ſupported the weights ſucceſſively round the different cylinders, and found that the ſame weight reſiſted more in proportion as its cord was wrapped round a larger cylinder. Elevation of a lameter of - i ight Diamete the cy-  Elevation of a weight veight of 24 linders. of 12 ounces. - ounces. I Inches. 69; Inches. 40 2 802 43: 3 852 441 4 87 455 When the cord was wrapped round a larger cylinder, or the elevated weight was more conſiderable, the wheel turned ſlower. It appears from theſe reſults, that the ſame weight was carried ſo much higher according as its cord was wrapped round a larger cylinder. It appears alſo, that double the weight, which retarded the rotation ſtill more, vas carried to more than half of the height to which the ſingle weight was carried; in that caſe, thereſore, the efect was greater. It may be laid down as a principle, that water acts by its weight much more forcibly from the ſame height or ſall, than by its impulſe; and that the ſlower wheels vith buckets move, the greater, with the ſame expence of vater, will be their effect. This augmentation of effect is cauſed by the ſame quantity of water acting CH a r. V. OF THE OCEAN. Salineſi of the OceanDifferent Opinions as to the CauſeProbable Reaſtus why the Sea has been alvays ſaltTenperature of the Sea at different Depths. Medes of rendering Sea-ater freſb. F7VH LE greateſt quantities of water with which we ſ are acquainted are by no means pure, but united with ſaline matter. The ocean is ſalt in all parts of the world; but the degree of ſaeltneſs differs much in different climates, and is almoſt univerſally found to be greater ĩn proportion as the water is taken up nearer the equator, where the heat of the ſun is greateſt, and the evaporation of the watery particles conſequently more conſiderablee When treating oſ ſea ſalt, the reſult of various obſervations relating to this ſubject were detailed. The cauſe of the ſaltneſs of the ocean has been a ſubject of inveſtigation among philoſophers in almoſt all ages, but it ſtill remains ĩn great obſcurity. There can be little doubt, that a large quantity of ſaline matter exiſted in this globe from the creation; and, at this day, we find immenſe beds of ſal gem, or common ſalt, buried in the earth, particularly near Cracow; but whether theſe collections have been derived from the ocean, and depoſited i in conſequence of the evaporation of its waters in certain circumſtances, or whether the ocean was itſelf originally freſh, and recelved its ſelt from collections of ſaline matter ſituated at its bottom, or from that brought by the influx of rivers, cannot now be aſcertained. No accurate obſervations on the degree of ſaltneſ of the ocean in particular latitudes were made till the preſent century, and it is not poſſible, therefore, to aſcertain what was the ſtate of the ſea at any conſiderable diſtance of time, nor, conſequently, whether its degree of ſaltneſs increaſes, decreaſes, or Is ſtationary. From differences among aquatic animals, however, ſome of which ſeem adapted to ſalt water, and ſome to freſh, it is probable, that both theſe ſtates of water exiſted from the creation of the world. We know it is true, that ſome kinds of fiſh, as ſalmon, are capable of exiſting both in freſh and in ſalt water, and that habit has a powerful influence over all animals; but this is not ſuſficient to refute the main fact, that ſome kinds of fiſh thrive only in ſalt water, others in freſh; ſome in ſtanding pools, and others in rapid currents. That excellent philoſopher and chemiſt, to whoſe labours I am indebted for ſome of the moſt valuable parts oſ theſe volumes, the biſhop of Landaff, has recommended a moſt ſimple and eaſy mode oſ aſcertaining the ſaltneſs of the ſea in any latitude; and as the language, in point of perſpicuity and correctneſs, cannot be improved, I ſhall take the liberty of inſerting it in his own words.  As it is not every perſan vho can make himſelf expert in the uſe of the common means of eſtimating the quantity of ſalt contained in ſea water, I will mention a method oſ doing it, which is ſo eaſy and ſimple, that every common ſailor may underſtand and practiſe it, and which at the ſame time, from the trials I have made of it, ſeems to be as exact a method as any that has yet been thought of. Take æ clean towel or any other piece of cloth, dry it well in the ſun or before the fire, then weigh it accurately, and note down ĩts weight; dip ĩit in the ſea water, and, vhen taken out, wring it a little till it will not drip, when hung up to dry; weigh ĩt in this wet ſtate, then dry it either in the ſun or at the fire, and, when it is perſectly dry, weigh it againn. The exceſs of the weight of the wetted cloth above its original weight, is the weight oſ the ſea water imbibed by the cleth; and the exceſs of the weight of the cloth, after being dried, above its original weight, is the weight of the ſult retained by the cloth; and by comparing this weight with the weight of the ſea water imbibed by the cloth, we obtain the proportion of ſalt contained in that ſpecies of ſea water.  Whoever undertakes to aſcertain the quantity of ſalt, contained in ſea water, eſther by this or any other method, would do well to obſerve the ſtate oſ the weather preceding the time when the ſea water ĩs taen out of the ſen, for the quantity of ſalt contained in th water near the ſurface may be influenced both by the antecedent moiſture and the antecedent heat of the atmoſphere *. Wheiher the ſea is ſelter or not at diſferent depths hos not yet been aſcertained; but that its temperature varies conſiderably in proportion to the depth we have deciſive proof.  With reſpect to the temperature, ſays biſhop Watſon, c of the ſea at diſferent depths, it ſeems reaſonable enough to ſuppoſe, that in ſummer time it will be hotter at the ſurface than at any conſiderable depth below it, and that in winter it will be colder. Suppoſe a ciſtern, twelve feet in depth, to be filled with ſpring vater of 48 degrees warmth, to the height of eleven fcet; then, if we fill up the ciſtern to its top, by gently pouring water heated to 100 degrees upon the ſurface æ Watſon's Chemical Eſays, vol. ii. p. 116. of the ſpring water, it may readily be underſtood, that the heat of this water will not be inſtantaneouſy communicated through the whole maſs of water in the ciſtern, but that the water will deereaſe in heat from the ſurface to the bottom of the ciſtern. On the other hand, if on the 11 feet of ſpring water heated to 48 degrees, we pour a foot of water heated only to 33 degrees, it may be expected, that the ſpring water, which js nearcſt to the cold water, will be ſconer cooled by it than that which is at a greater diſtance; and on this account the water at the bottom of the ciſtern will be warmer than that in the middle or at the top. It muſt be obſerved, however, that cold water being, bulk for bulk, heavier than hot water, the water which has only 35 degrees of heat will deſcend, by its ſuperior weight, into the maſs of water contained in the ciſtern, nd thus the water in the ciſtern will be cocled, not only by the bare communication of cold from the upper water, but by the actual mixture of that water with the reſt, ſo that the diſſerence between the heat of the water at the bottom and top will not be ſo great as it would have been if the cold water had rot mixed itſelf with the reſt. Theſe ſuppoſitions oſ hot and cold water incumbent on the ſpring water in the ciſtern, are analogous to the action of the ſummer and wirter atpſpheres incumbent on the ſurface of the ſea. No perſon, who has bathed in dẽep ſtanding water in ſummer time, can have failed to obſerve, that the water grew colder and colder, according to the depth to vhich he deſcended. I have frequently obſerveq, thaet the ſurface of a pool of water of two feet in depth, has in a ſunny day, even in winter, been five degrees hotter than the vater at ĩts bottom.  Mr. Wales deſcribes the inſtrument he made uſe of for trying the temperature of the ſea at different depths, in the ſollowing terms:  Thæ apparatus ſor trying the heat of the ſea water at different depths conſiſted of a ſquare wooden tube cf about 18 inches long and three inches ſquare externally. It was ſitted vith a valve at the bottom, and another at the top, and had a contrivance for ſuſpending the thermometer exactly in the middle of it. When it was uſed it vas faſtened to the deep ſea line, juſt above the lead, ſo that all the way as it deſcended the water had a free paſoge through it, by means of the valves which were then both open; but the inſtant it began to be drawn up, both the valves cloſed by the preſſure of the water, and of courſe the thermometer was brought up in æ body of water of the ſame temperature vith that it was let down to ?. With this inſtrument, which is much the ſame vith one formerly deſcribed by Mr. t in his obſervations about the ſaltneſs of the ſe⸗œ, ater was fetched up from different depths, and its mpersture accurately noticed, in different ſeaſons and latitude c Auguſt 27, 1772, ſouth latitude 240. 49. The heat of the air was 723,of the water at the ſurſace 70,of water from the depth of 80 fathoms 68 t.  December 7, 1772, ſouth latitude 55°. 27. The heat of the air was 31, he veter at the ſurface 32,of water from the depth of 160 fathoms 333-  In the vorage to the high northern latitudes before mentioned, they made uſe of a bottle to bring up vater from the botom, vhich is thus deſcribæd. æ See Altvonomical Obſervations made in a Veoyage towards the South Pole, &c. in 1772, 1773, &c. by W. Wales. Introduction, p. 53. + Walæs Oſer. ꝑ. 2c6. I Ibid. p. acs. e The bottle had a coating of wool, three inches thick, which was wrapped up in an oiled ſkin, and let into a leather purſe, and the whole incloſed in a wellpitched canvas bag, firmly tied to the mouth of the bottle, ſo that not a drop of water could penetrate to its ſurfacee A bit of lead ſhaped like a cone, with ĩts baſe downwards, and a cord fixed to its ſmall end, was put into the bottle; and a piece of valve leather, with half a dozen ſips of thin bladder, were ſtrung on the cord, which, when pulled, eſſectually corked the bottle on the inſide? I have here put down two of the experiments which were made during that voyage.  Auguſt 4, 1773, north latitude 89. 35. The heat of the ãir was 32,of the water at the ſurface 36, aof water fetched up from the depth of 6o fathoms under the ice 39*. c September 4, 1773, north latitude 65. The heat of the æir vas 66:,of the water at the ſurface 55,of water from the depth of 685 fathoms 40.  It appears from all theſe experiments that, when the atmoſphere was hotter than the ſurface 6f the ſea, the ſuperficial water was hotter than that at a great depth; and when the atmoſphere was colder than the ſurface of the ſea, it is evident that the ſuperficial water was ſomewhat colder than that at a conſiderable diſtance below it: and I doubt not that this will generally be the caſe, though ſudden changes in the temperature of the tmoſher which cannot be initantly communicated to the ſca, may occaſion particular exceptions.  In the year 1779, ſeveral experiments were made, vith great accuracy, in order to inveſtigate the tembs perature of the lake of Geneva, and of other lekes in Switzerland, at diſferent depths; we learn from them, that in winter time there is very little difference between the heat of the water at the ſurface, and at a great depth below it; but that in ſummer, the ſuperficial water is conſiderably warmer than that which is at a great diſtance from the ſurface. The experiments were made with a thermometer graduated aſter Reaumurs ſcale; ſome of them, reduced to Fahrenheit's ſcale, are expreſſed below. c Temperature of the lake of Geneva at different depths, in the beginning of February 1779, aſter a month's uninterrupted froſt. -  Heat of the open air variable from 37 to 40 degrees. c Water at the ſurface of the Lke - 42; Depth 100 feet - - 42; Depth 250 feet - - 42 Depth 950 feet, bottom - 412 e In another part of the lake, open air from 37 to 40. Surface - - -u343 Depth 350 feet - - 425 Depth 620 feet, bottom - 4152  Temperature of the lake of Neuchãtel, July 17, 1779Air - - - 755 Surface - - - 53 Depth 225 feet, bottom - 41 Sea water may be rendered ſreſh by freezing, which excludes or precipitates the-ſaline particles, or by diſtillation, which leaves the ſalt in a maſi at the bottom  VWatſon's Chemical Eſſays, vol. il. ꝑ. 129. of the veſſel. Upon theſe principles, a mode of obtaining a ſupply of freſh water at ſea was recommended ſome years ago to the Admiralty, by Dr. Irving. It conſiſted in only adapting a tin tube of ſuitable dimenſions to the lid of the common ſhip’s kettle, and condenſing the ſteam in a hogſhead which ſerved as a receiver. By this mode a ſupply of twenty- five gallons of freſh water per hour might be obtained from the kettle of one of our fhips of war. I have not underſtood, however, that the plan has been as yet introduced ZCuar. v... OF B AIN. Recap tulation of Doũtrines nlatime to ſpontaneous EvaporatiionrVapour by ſome ſuppoſed to conſiſt of hollow vV eſi ĩclesRain. Diferent Gheories of Rain. Snow.Hail. Rain avhich froæe in coming in conta? vith the Earth. Large Hail-ſtones.,Fogs.Dew.Hoa? PFroſtInſtances of partial freexing when the general Tenperaiure is above the freexing Point. , 7 N a preceding volume, when treating of the eſfects of heat or fire, and particularly of vapour, it was neceſſary to introduce a few obſervations relative to ſpontaneous evaporation. It is proper, however, to repeat, in this place, that philoſophers are by no means agreed with reſpect to the cauſe of this phenomenon. BY ſome it has been attributed to a ſolution of water in air ſimilar to that of ſaline ſubſtances in water; by others, to the action of the electric fluid. The firſt of theſe opinions had till lately obtained almoſt univerſal aſſent, but is now rellnquiſhed, ſince iĩt is found that evaporation proceeds, as well in the exhauſted receiver of the air pump, as when air is preſent. Electricity has been found to promote evaporation, and clouds are almoſt univerſally electrical; but evaporation is carried on continually where there is no reaſon to ſuppoſe the preſence of the electric fluid, at leaſt vhere its operation cannot be diſcovered by any known teſt. It ĩs at preſent commonly ſuppoſed, that redundant heat is the general cauſe of the evaporation of water, and that it elways proceeds in proportion to its 484 Vapour compoſed of Book VII. temperature, compared with that of the ſurrounding medium. There is one circumſtance very much in favour of the opinion, that the emiſſion of heat is the chief cauſe of evaporation, which is, that every liquor cools when it evaporates, becauſe the portion of the fluid which diſappears carries away a quantity of caloric from the liquor, which becomes latent in the vapour. A doubt has ariſen among philoſophers, whether water, as it exiſts in a tranſparent ſtate in the atmoſphere, is in particles of an uniform denſity, or aſſumes the ſorm of hollow veſicles. When there is a tendency to rain or ſnow, ĩt is known to exiſt in the ſtate of minute drops and icicles; but the ſolution is then not perſect, its tranſparency is impaired, and clouds are produced. The exiſtence of hollow ſpheres is ſaid to have been actually obſerved by ſeveral perſons; but as a microſcope of conſiderable magnifying power muſt be employed, this may have been a ſource of error, and may have produced deluſive appearances. The ſimpleſt and moſt inſtructive menner of obſerving them is to expoſe a cup of ſome warm aqueous fluid, of a dark coloũr, as coſfee, or water mixed with ink, to the rays of the ſun in a fine day, when the air ĩs very calm; a cloud will riſe ſfrom the fluid to a certain height, and then diſappear. An attentive eye will ſoon diſcover that this cloud conſiſts of ſmall round grains, of a whitiſh colour, and detached one from the other. To acquire a more diſtinct idea of their form, they may be obſerved, as they riſe from the ſurface of the liquor, vith a lens of about one inch and an half focus, being careful, however, to eep the lens out of the vapours, that they may not deprive it of tranſparency. Chap. 3. bholli Veſiiles. 3iIS3 Spherical -alls of different ſizes may in this manner. be obſerved broceeding from the ſurface with more or leſs rapidity. The more delicateriſe ſwiſtly, and ſoon traverſe the field of the Iens; the larger fall back into the cup, and, without mixing with the fluid, roll upon its furface like a light poder, which obeys every impulſe of the air. The lightneſ of theſe ſmall ſpheres, their whiteneſs, &c. give them an appearance altogether diſferent ſrom ſolid globules; their perfect reſemblance to the larger balls, that are ſeen floating on the ſurface of the liquid, can leave no doubt of their nature: it iĩs ſuſficient to ſee them to be convinced that they are hollow bubbles, like thoſe blown from water and ſoap. M. Kratzenſtein endeavoured to eſtimate their ſie, by comparing them with a hair, and ſound that they were twelve times ſmaller than the hair, the diameter of which was the three hundredth part oſ æn inch, and conſequently one of theſe was only the three thouſand ſix hundredih part of the ſame meaſure. Theſe bubbles may even be ſometimes,i it is nid obſerved in a fog, or in a cloud, when the obſerver is Etuated on à ill. To this end M. de Sauſſure uſed a lens of one and an half or two inches focus, which he held near his eye with one hand, in the other he held any ſmooth, fiat, and poliſhed ſurface, of a black colour, ã⸗ the botrom of a tortoiſe ſh]ll box, bringing this towards the lens till it was very near the focal, diſtance; he then waited till the agitation of the air brought ſome particles of the cloud into the focus of the ſens; vhen the cloud was thick this ſoon happened, and he perceived round and white particles; ſome paſſing with the ?apidity of lightning, others moving ſlowly; ſome rolling on the ſurface of the tonoe ſhell, others ſtriking sgnt it obliquely, and Ii rebounding » rebounding like a ball from a wall, and others fixing themſelves to it. Small drops of water might alſo be ſeen to ſertle on the tortoĩſe ſhell, but they were eaſily diſtinguiſhed from the hollow ſpherules, by their tranſparency, their gravity, and their pace. Further, clouds do not form a rainbow; it is produced by ſolid drops; when a cloud is not in an actual ſtate of reſoIution, it does not change the form of the ſtars which are ſeen through it; for infinitely thin meniſcuſſes do not ſenſibly change the courſe of the rays oflight; but as ſoon as the cloud begins to reſolve itſelf into ſolid drops, or even without clouds, when ſolid drops begin to be formed in the air, the ſtars ſeen through them are all defined, ſurrounded with a diffuſe light, circles, and halos; hence, theſe meteors are the forerunners of rain, for rain is nothing more than theſe drops augmented or unitedl. When the veſicular vapours are condenſed by cold, the water which formed the bubble cryſtallizes, ſometimes into hoar froſt, ſometimes into ſnow; when it does not freeze, they unite in dew, or deſcend in rain. Many other curious properties concerning the veſicular and concrete vapours are related in M. de Sauſſure's Eſſai ſur  Hygrometrie* The precipitation of water from the atmoſphere in rain has given riſe to as much ſpeculation as evaporation; nd it muſt be confeſſed, that the cauſe of neither has yet been very clearly aſcertained. By ſome it is ſuppoſed, that the capacity of the air for ſuſpending agueous vapour is in proportion to its heat, and therefore that any circumſtance which cocls the atmoſphere vill produce rain. If, therefore, according to this theory, a ſtratum of cold air meets with a warmer ſtraæ See Adamss Letures on Natural Philoſophy. tum, a fall of rain is occaſioned, becauie tuc vær/er ſtratum is cooled. To this it has been replied, that by this mixture the colder ſtratum muſt be as much warmed as the warmer Is cooled, and, therefore, that no precipitation ought to take place: In order to obviate this difficulty, Dr. Hutton ſuppoſes that heat enahles the atmoſphere to ſuſpend water in an increaſing ratio, according to the quantity of it. Thus, if two degrees oſ heat enable a certain quantity of air to ſuſpend two given meaſures of water, three degrees of heat will enable the ſame quantity of air to ſuſpend more than three ſuch meaſures. Upon this ſuppoſition, if two ſtrata of air, each of which is charged with as much water as its temperature enables ĩt to ſuſpend, meet together, and are reduced to a mean temperature, they vill not be able to ſuſpend as much water as in their ſeparate ſtate, and a precipitation of part of the water ill conſequently be produced * Others conſider ran as an electrical phenomenonV, and it is very generally allowed, that electricity at Ieat concurs with other cauſes in producing it. Bodies charged with the ſame electricſty, whether it is negative or poſitive, always repel each other, and the aqueous particles which compoſe clouds, being acted on in this way, will be prevented from uniting into drops ſuſficiently large to fall to the earth. The rapidity with which rain falls aſter a diſcharge of lightning ſfrom a cloud, tends much to confirm this opinion. Rain alſo falls heavieſt from the center of a  That heat has a conſiderable influence in ſuſperding aquecns vapour, appears from the phenomenon of dew; which, the reader will remember, is part of the water tuken up by the air during the day time, but which is agnin depoſited during the coolneſs of the night. 1 See Book IV. chap. 6. cloud, where the electric matter has been found by experiment to be generally in equilibrium; while very little is diſcharged from the edges, vhich are uſually found to be electrified either poſitively or negatively. The wind has been ſuppoſed to have an effect in producing rain, by driving the aqueous particles into contact, and thus cauſing them to unite into drops. But, by experience, wind ſeems to have the direct contrary influence, and frequently prevents rain. Beſides rain, many other phenomena are produced by the capacity which air has in different circumſtances of taking up, ſuſpending, and depoſiting water; the chief of theſe are ſnow, hail, ſogs, clouds, dew, and hoar ſroſt. The cold of the higher regions of the atmoſphere is ſometimes ſo great, as to ſreeze the aqueous particles which form clouds. If the particles become frozen beſore they have had time to unite into drops, many of the ſmall icicles which are produced, uniting together, and being connected only at a ſew points, form flocculent maſſes, which are called ſnov. The order and arrangement of the icicles is not always the ſame; they vary greatly, and this produces the variety which is obſerved in ſov. It is remarkable, that though ſnow varies at different times, yet what falls together is always the ſame; that ĩs, the ſnow which ſalls at a particular time, conſiſts of flakes, which vary only in ſize, but are all ſormed of particles diſpoſed in a ſimilar manner. We are not ſuſficiently acquainted vith the Iaws by which the concretion or eryſtallization of bodies are regulated, to explain the cauſe of theſe phenemena. On account of the ſmall quantity of matter contained in ſnow, in proportion to the ſurfaces expoſed, it meets with great reſiſtance in paſing through the atmoſphere, and conſequertly fals very ſlovly. Its great ſurface alſo renders it very ſuſceptible of evaporation, which conſiderably diminiſhes its weight even in the coldeſt weather. If the cold is ſo moderate, as to allow the particles of water to unite into drops before congelation takes place, particles of ice are produced, which are called hail. The ſame thing may be ſuppoſed to happen when the lower regions of the atmoſphere are colder than the upper, which, though contrary to the general courſe of things, ſometimes happens. In ſuch a caſe, the aqueous particles, aſter having united above into rain, are congealed in their deſcent, and are converted into hail. In the year 1775 or 1776, rain fell at Liverpool, which became ſolid as ſoon as it reached the ſurface oſ the earth, in ſuch a manner as 1 give a covering of ice to whatever was wet with it, and even to form icicles on the dreſs oſ perſons expoſed to it. This phenomenon I have alſo witneſſed elſewhere. ] Hail, when firſt ſormed, muſt be perſectly round, becauſe formed from a ſluid; and all fluids, when placed in ſuch ſituations as to receive an equal preſſure in every direction from the medium which ſurrounds them, naturally aſſume a ſpherical ſform. Hail, however, when it arrives at the earth is often angulor; this muſt be explæined, either by ſuppoſing that the particles have begun to diſſolve, or that they were ſuſficiently cold to congeal and attach to their ſurface, the aqueous particles with which they came into contact in their fal. Hail, when firſt ſormed, is never larger than the drops of water which fall in rain; but ſrom the cuſe juſt mentioned, hail-ſtones have ſometimes been known to ſall as large as nuts, or even as hens eggs. In order to convince ourſelves, that ſuch hail-ſtones owe their extraordinary ſize to the additions which they seceive in falling, it is only neceſſary to examint: them: they will almoſt uniformly be found to be angular, and never to have an uniform denſity from the circumference to the center, which clearly proves, that they are compoſed of different particles of ice connected together. In confirmation of the ſame opinion, it is obſerved, that the hail which falls on mountains, is ſmaller than that which deſcends in the neighbouring vallies. The ſame obſervation has been repeatedly made with reſpect to rain, by perſons in the habit of aſcending mountains, for the purpoſe of philoſophical experiment, It ſometimes happens from the ſtate of the atmoſphere, or a concurrence of circumſtances not eaſily to be aſcertained, that a great quantity of aqueous particles are raiſed in the atmoſphere, vhere, being incompletely diſſolved, they form a thick vapour, hich extends ĩtſelf in the lower part of the atmoſphere; theſe particles, deſtroying the tranſparency of the atmoſphere, form fogs. Fogs are more frequent in low, wet, and marſhy ſituations, near rivers and ponds, than in ſuch parts of a country as are elevated and dry. It ſometimes happens, that certain exhalations are mixed with fogs, which are perceived by their unpleaſant ſmell, and by an acute ſenſation which is felt by the throat and eyes. Fogs are much more frequent in cold ſeaſons, and in cold climates, than in ſuch as are warm, becauſe in the former, the a aqueous particles being condenſed almoſt as ſoon as they proceed from the ſurface of the earth, are incapable of riſing into the higher perts of the atmoſphere. If the cold ĩs atgmenteq, the fog freezes and attaches itſelſ in ſmall icickes to the branches of trees, to he hair and clothes of perſons expoſed to , to th e blades of graſs, &ce. li When When ſogs riſe to a conſiderable height in the atmoſphere, and are collected in a denſe ſtate, whether this happens from any action of the air or from other cauſes, they form clouds, which float in different regions of the atmoſphere according to their ſpecific gravity; ſince they neceſſarily riſe or fall, till they arrive at that part of the atmoſphere which is in equilibrium with themſelves. As the atmoſphere is heavieſt belov, denſe and thick clouds, which are at the point of uniting into rain, float near the ſurface of the earth, while the fleecy and thin clouds ſoor alofti. We oſten obſerve both kinds at different heights in the atmoſphere at the ſame time. As clouds are formed of water, they are moſt copiouſly produced where the air has moſt opportunity of acting on that fluid. Conſequently winds which blow from the veſt and ſouth weſt, from the Atlantic ocean, bring more clouds to this country than eaſterly winds, which only aſs over a narrow channel of the ſea. During the day time the ſun heats the earth, water, air, and every thing which is expoſed to its rays. The heat communicated to all theſe bodies is diminiſhed after ſun ſet, but the air is more ſuddenly cooled than the more ſolid bodiess. Heat, thereſore, which has always a diſpoſition to diſtribute itſelf equally, paſſes ſrom the ſurface of vater and earth into the air, and carries with it fome aqueous particles, which are ſuſpended near the ſurfacee When the cold increaſes during the night, theſe vapours are condenſed, arnd occaſion that dampneſs which is felt on the clothes of perſons expoſed to the night air, and fſorm that dew which is ſo refreſhing to vegetables ſcorched during the day time by the ſummers ſun. In cold weather the dew becomes frozen into hoar ſroſt, for the formaetion of which it is not neceſſary ihat the earth, or even the: as to occaſion the congelatio fact can only be explained, ſmall drops of water expoſe tion of the air; and by this powerfully produces cold, is reaſon clothes hung out to ſtiff, when no ice is formed ſame degree of cold, but in C ”H A P. VI. OF SPRINGS AND RIVERS. Origin ef SpringsDigęing ef WellsNature of SpringsDMarſves. Cheay and ea’s Mode of draining them. Intermiiting Springs/ Riæer s.T beir Source, &e. \ r7HE water which falls on the ſurface of the earth, in rain, ſnow, &c. penetrates its ſubſtance till ĩt meets vith a ſtratum of clay, ſtone, or ſome other matter vhich ſtops its deſcent; it then glides laterally on the ſtratum which ſuſtains it, and in the direction to which ĩt leans, till meeting with an "pem⸗; it appears on the ſurface of the earth in the form of a ſpring As water always has a tendency to deſcend, ſprings are always lower than the ſource from which they are ſupplied; ſprings are moſt common on the ſides and at the bottom of mountains; they are ſeldom found quite at the ſummit of a mountain, and are rare where a country is every where level to a conſiderable diſtance, becauſe there the ſtrata are parallel, and do not conduct the water to any particular point. In order to obtain water, therefore, in flat countries, it is in general neceſſary to dig into the earth, when it is ſfound to flow copiouſly from the ſides of the opening, at no great diſtance from the ſurface. When wells are dug in elevated ſituations, water is ſeldom met vith tl we have dug to a conſiderable depth, and got below the general level of the country. A curious circumſtance occurs in the making of vells at Modena and Stiria in Italy. The workmen begin by digging through ſeveral ſtrata or ſuils, til they come to a very hard kind of earth much reſenibling chalk; here they begin their maſon-work, and build a well, which they carry on at their leiſure till they have finiſhed, without being interrupted with cne drop of water, and without any apprehenſion of nct finding it when they come to male the experiment. The well being finiſhed, they bore throngh the hard bed of chalk, upon which the well is built, with a long auger, but take care to get out of the vell before they draw it out again; which when they have done, the vater ſprings up into the well, and in a little time 1iſes to the brim, nay ſometimes overſlows ihe neighbouring grounds. Now there can be little doubt, that theſe waters ſ=low from reſervoirs which are collected vithin the Appennine mountains, not far from Modena, and taking their courſe through ſubterraneous paſſages, endeavour to force their aſcent to the ſame height from which they deſcend, wherever they can find a vent. As all the water which falls in rain has undergone a natural diſtillation, ĩt is much more pure when it ſirſt falls, than aſter it has paka through different ſtrata of the earth and riſes in ſprings. Spring water ĩs always ſound to contain ſome ſor admixture; if this ſhould be only an earthy ſalt, the water is called hard; if ĩt contains other ſubſtances, it then receives the denomination of mineral water; but theſe will require to be rreated of in a diſtinct chępter. The water which lies upon marſhes and ſwampy grounds, has generally ĩts ſource in ſome ſpring, which is placed above the level of the marſa. The ſoil, itherefore, in thoſe places, being generally of a ſpongy texture imbibes the water, and permits it to diſperſe through its whole maſs, rather than force its way ilirough a certein aperture; and as marſh lands are Chup. 6 ] Cheap Mode of draining ræp Lands. 493 commonly Ievel, the vater vill be more eaſily diffuſed through the ſoil, than it can be upon the declivity of a hill. The great art, therefore, in the draining oſ marſhes is to diſcover the ſource, which may be looked for on the brow of ſome eminence which overhængs them; and it may. generally be found by oberving vwhere the boggy part grows narrow and angular, and points as to an apex, which is the ſpring whence all the miſchief proceeds. When the ſource is once diſcovered, the water may be eaſily drawn off by drains, aqueducts, or pipes; according to the circumſtances of the cale. The common mode of draining land by cutting deep trenches, or drains, through the morſh itſelf, to ſerve as reſervoirs for the water, is much more laborious, and expenſive, and indeed ſeldom anſwers the end propoſed; for as ſoon as the trenches ſill, the ground is rendered as ſwampy as ever; and even where drains are made on the principle of an inclined plane to draw off the water, they are ſrequently ſtopped by the mud of the marſh, and the leaſt ſtoppage expoſes the land again to at leaſt a panl overſiov. lllt There are ſome ſprings vhich exhibit a very curious phenomenon, a kind of tide or intermiſſion, by which the water at certain periods appears to riſe to a conũiderable height, and gradually to ſubſidee Theſe are called intermitting ſprings. It was long imagined, that theſe fountæins were repleniſhed by ſome connection with the ſea; that the water was ſreſhened by its progreſs through ſand and earth, and that their riſing and falling depended on tſe tide. It as, howeven, found, that the periods of the water riſing and falling in theſe ſprings, did not correſpond in point of time with the tides of the adjacent ſeas, and that the periods gular riſing and falling of tides in the ocean. The phenomenon has ſince been very ſatisſactorily explained, and upon a very ſimple and obvious principle. It has been already ſhewn, that when a ſiphon is inſerted in a veſſel containing water, iſ the air is drawn out of the ſiphon, or by any means the water is made to flow over the bent of the tube, which lies above the brim of the veſiel, the water will continue to flow over the brim through the ſiphon til the whole is exhauſted. To account, therefore, for the intermitting ſpring, we have only to ſuppoſe, that a cavity or receptacle is formed in the bowels of the hill or mountain, where the ſpring is ſituated, which gradu⸗lty fills with water like other reſervoirs; by the interpoſition of ſome ſtratum of ſtone or rock, the tube or cavity which conveys the water from this receptacle to the ſpring or mouth vhere it iſſues, is bent in the form of a ſiphon, the bent of which is conſiderably higher than the bottom of the reſervoir. Whenever, therefore, the reſervolr or receptacle is filled as high as the bent of the tube, the water will riſe in it to ĩts level, and begin to flow into the ſpring, which will continue till the receptacle is exhauſted. While this proceſs is going on the water in the ſprin⸗ will riſe; and as ſoon as the receptacle is exhauſted, the water, being drawn off by a ſtream or rivulet, will appear to ſall in the well of the ſpring, and will continue to fall till the receptacle is again ſupplied to the height of the ſiphon or tube, when the proceſs of filling will be again renewed. To render the matter perſectly plain, let ABC (Plate X. fig. 4.) repreſent the cavity or receptacle, from the bottom of which C proceeds the tube or ſiphon D E. When the water riſes in the receptacle to the level of E in the tube, it will begin to flow into the ſpring at D, on the principle explained in the preceding paragraph, and the whole phenomenon vill be eaſily accounted for. With any perſon who has carefully obſerved the courſe of rivers, and traced them to their ſources, there can be little doubt that they are formed by the confluence of ſprings, or of the little ſtreams or rivulets that iſſue ſrom them; vith perhaps the exception of thoſe rivers which proceed from -lakes, where the reſervoir is ready formed, and gencrally by the ſame means. In the beginning of the preſent century, the philoſophical world was agitated by a debate concerning the origin of thoſe waters which are neceſſary for the ſupply of rivers, &c. one party contended ſtrongly for the exiſtence of a large maſs of water within the bowels of the earth, which ſupplied not only the rivers but the ocean itſelf; at the head of theſe we may place the ingenious but fanciſul Burnet. The French philoſophers, un the contrary, aſſerted, that the waters of the ocean were conveyed back by ſome ſubterraneous paſſages to tie Iand, and being filtratæd in their paſſage, returned again to the ſea in the courſe of the rivers; but this opinion appears contrary to all the nown principle of hydroſtatics. In oppoſition to theſe hypotheſes, our illuſtrious countryman Halley contended that the proceſs of evaporation, and the immenſc depoſition of water in conſequence oſ it, was fully adequate to the whole ſupply. I?, indeed, we conſider the immenſe quantity of water vhich is continually carried up into the atmoſphere by evaporation, as ſtated in a former chapter, and conſider that this is a proceſs which is continually going on, not only from the ocean but ſfrom the rivers themſelves, and from the whole ſurface of the earth, ve ſhall ſee but little reaſon to doubt of Dr. Halley s hypotheſis, but may reaſonably conclude, that this kind of circulation is carried on through all nature, and that the ſea receives back again through the chanrel of the rivers, that water hich it parts win to the atmoſphere. Ali rivers have their ſource either in mountains, or elevated lakes; and it is in. their deſcent from theſe, thatthey acquire that velocity which maintains their future current. At firſt their courſe is generally rapid and headlong; but it is retarded in ĩts journey by the continual friction againt its banks, by the many obſtacles it meets to divert its ſtream, and by the plains generally becoming more level as it pproaches towards the ſeæ. i f Riyers, as every body has ſeen, are always broadeſt at the mouth; and grow narrower towards their ſource. But what is Ieſ known, and probably more deſerving curioſity, is, that they run in a more direct channel as they immediately leave their ſources; and that theſr ſinuoſities and turnings become more numerous as they proceed. It is a certain ſign among the ſavages of North America, that they are near the ſea, when-they ſind the rivers winding, and every now and then changing their direction. And this is even now become an indication to the Europeans themſelves, in their journies through thoſe trackleſ foreſts. As thoſe ſinuoſities, therefore, increaſe as the river approaches the ſea, it is not o be wondered at, that they ſometimes divide, and thus diſembogue by different channels. The Danube diſembogues into the Euxine by ſeven mouths; the Nile, by the ſame number; and the Wolga, by ſeventy. e The largeſt rivers of Europe a are, firſt, the Wolga, uhichi is abou ſix hundred and fifty leagues in length, exterding from Reſchow to Aſtrachan. It is remarkble of this river, that it abounds with water during the ſummer months of May and June; but all the reſt of the year is ſo ſhallow as ſcarcely to cover its bottom, or allow a paſſage for loaded veſſels that træde up its ſtream. The next in order is the Danube. The courſe of this is about four hundred and fiſty leagues, from the mountains of Switzerland to the Black Sea. The Don, or Tanais, which is four hundred leagues from the ſource of that branch of it called the Soſtna, to its mouth in the Euxine Sea. In one part of its courſe ĩt approaches near the Wolga; and Peter the Great had actually begun a canal, by which he intended joining thoſe two rivers; but this he did not live to fini©. The Nieper, or Boryſthenes, riſes in the middie of Muſcovy, and runs the courſe of three hundred and fifty leagues, to empty itſelf into the Black Sea. The Old Coſſacks inhabit the banks and iſlands of this river; and frequently croſs the Black Sea, to plunder the maritime places on the coaſts of Turkey. The Dwina takes its riſe in a province of the ſame name in Ruſſia, runs a courſe of three hundred Ieagues, and diſembogues into the White Sea, a little below Archangel. The largeſt rivers of Aſia are, the Hoharho, in China, which is eight hundred and fiſty leagues in length, computed from its ſource at Rajæ Ribron, to its mouth in the Gulph of Changi. The Jeniſca of Tartary, about eight hundred leagues in length, from the Lake Selinga to the Icy Sea. This river is, by ſome, ſuppoſed to ſupply moſt of that great quantity of drift wood æhich is ſeen ſtoating in the ſeas, near the Arctic circlee The Oby, of five hundred leagues, running ſfrom the lale of Xila into the Northern Stæ. The Amour, in Eaſtern Tartary, whoſe courſe is about five hundred and ſeventy five leagues, from its ſource to its entance into the ſea of Kamtſchatka. The Kiam, in China, five hundred and ſiſty leagues in length. The Ganges, one of the moſt noted rivers in the worid, is about as long as the ſormer. It riſes in the mountains which ſeparate India from Tartary; and running through the dominions of the Great Mogul, diſcharges itſelf by ſeveral mouths into the bay of Bengal. It is not only eſteemed by the Indians for the depth, and pureneſs of its ſtream, but for a ſuppoſed ſanctity which they believe to be in its waters. It ĩs viſited annually by ſeveral hundred thouſand pilgrims, who pay their devotions to the river as to a god; for ſavage ſimplicity is always known to miſtake the bleſſings of the deity for the deity himſell. They carry their dying friends, from diſtant countries, to expire on its banks; and to be buried in its ſtream. The water is loveſt in April or May; but the rains beginning to fall ſoon aſter, the flat country is overflowed for ſeveral miles, till about the end of September; the waters then begin to retire, leaving a prolific ſedirfent behind, that enriches the ſoil, and, in a few days time, gives a luxuriance to vegetation, beyond what can be conceived by an European. Next to this may be reckoned the ſtill more celebrated river Euphrates. This riſes from two ſources, northward of the city Erzerum, in Turcumania; and unites about three days journey below it, whence, aſter performing a courſe of five hundred leagues, it falls into the Gulph of Perſia, fifty miles below the city of Baſſora in Arabia. The river Indus is extended, from ĩts ſource to its diſcharge into the Arabian ſea, four hundred leagues. lll The largeſt rivers oſ Aſrica are, the Senegal, which runs a courſe of not leſs than eleven hundred leagues, comprehending the Niger, which ſeme have ſuppoſed to fall into it. Later accounts, however, ſeem to aſfirm that the Niger is loſt in the ſands, about three hundred miles up from the weſtern coaſts of Africa. Be this as it may, the Senegal is well known to be navigable for more than three hundred leagues up the country; and how much higher it may reach ĩs not yet diſcovered, as the dreadful fatality of the inland parts of Africa, not only deter curioſity, but even avarice, which is a much ſtronger paſſion. The celebrated river Nile is ſaid to be nine hundred and ſeventy leagues, from its ſource among the mountains of the Moon, in Upper Ethiopia, to its opening into the Mediterranean Sea. Upon its arrival in the kingdom of Upper gypt, it runs through a rocky channel, which ſome late travellers have miſtaken for its cataracts. In the beginning of ĩts courſe, it receives many leſer rivers into it; and Pliny was miſtaken, in ſaying that it received none. In the beginning alſo of ĩts courſe, it has many windings; but, for above three hundred leagues from the ſea, runs in a direct line. Its annual overſlowings ariſe from a very obvious cauſe, which is almoſt univerſal with the great rivers that take their ſource near the line. The rainy ſeaſon, which ĩs periodical in thoſe climates, floods the rivers; and as this always happens in our ſummer, ſo the Nile is at that time overſlown. From theſe inundations, the inhabitants of Fgypt derive happineſs and plenty; and, when the river does not arrive to its accuſtomed heights, they prepære for an indifferent harveſt. It begins to overſ=low about the 17th of June; it generally continues to augment for forty days, and decreaſes in about as many more. The time of increaſe and decreaſe, however, ĩs much more inconſiderable now than it was among the ancients. Iercdotus informs us, that it was an hundred days riſing, and as many falling; which ſhews that the inundation was much greater at that time than at preſent. M. Buſfon * has aſcribed the preſent diminution, as vell to the leſſening of the mountains of the Moon, by their ſubſtance having ſo long been wahed down with the ſtream, as to the riſing of the earth in Egypt, that has for ſo many ages received this extraneous ſupply. But we do not find, by the buildings that have remained ſince the times of the ancients, that the earth is much raiſed ſince then. Beſides the Nile in Aſrica, ve may reckon Zara, and the Coanza, from the greatneſs of whoſe openings into the ſea, and the rapidity of whoſe ſtreams, we form an eſtimate of the great diſtance whence they come. Their courſes, however, are ſpent in watering deſerts and ſavage countries, whoſe poverty or fierceneſs have kept ſtrangers away. But of all parts of the world, America, as it exhibits the moſt lofty mountains, ſo allo it ſupplies the largeſt rivers. The principal of theſe is the grea river. Amazons, which, from its ſource in the Iake of Iauricocha, to its diſcharge into the Weſtern Ocean, performs a courſe of more than twelve hundred leagues ?l. The breadth and depth of this river is anſwerable to its vaſt length; and, where its width iĩs moſt contracted, its depth ĩis augmented in proportion. So great is the body of its waters, that other rivers, though before the objects of admiration, are loſt in its boſom. It proceeds after their junction, with ĩts uſual appearance, without any viſible change in its breadth  Buffon, vol. il. p. 82. + Ulloa, vol. i. p. 388. or rapidity; and, if we may ſo expreſs it, remains great without oſtentation. In ſome places it diſplays its whole magniſicence, dividing into ſeveral large branches, and encompaſſing a multitude oſ iſlands; and at length, diſcherging Ttſelſ into the ocean, by a channel of an hundred and fifty miles broad. Another river, that may almoſt rival the former, is the St. Lawrence, in Canada, which riſing in the lake Aſſiniboils, paſies from one lake to another, from Chriſtinaux to Alempigo; and thence to lake Superior; thence to the lake Hurons; to lake Erie; to lake Ontario; and, at aſt, aſter a courſe of nine hundred Ieagues, pours their collected waters into the Atlantic ocean. The river Miſſiſſippi is more than ſeven hundred leagues in length, beginning at its ſource near the lake Aſiniboils, and ending at ĩts opening into the Gulph of Mexicoo. The river Plata runs a length of more than eight hundred leagues from its ſource in the river Parana, to its mouth. The river Orooncko is ſeven hundred and fiſty leagues in length, from its ſource near Paſto, to its diſcharge into the Atlantic ocean. Such is the amazing length of the greateſt rivers; and even in ſome of theſe, the moſt remote ſources very probably yet continue unknown. In fact, if we conſider the number of rivers which they receive, and the little acquaintance we have with the regions through which they run, it is not to be wondered at that geographers are divided concerning the ſources of moſt of them. As among a number of roots by which nouriſhment is conveyed to a ſtately tree, it is difficult to determine preciſely that by which the tree is chieſly ſupplied; ſo among the many branches oſ a great river, it is equally difficult to tell which is the origina. Hence it may eaſily happen, that a ſmaller branch is taken for the capital ſtream; and its windK ings aere purſued, and delineated, in pręjudice of ſome other branch that better deſerved the name and the ceſeription. In this manner*, in Europe, the Danube is known to receive thirty leſſer rivers; the Wolga thirty-two or thirty-three. In Aſia, the Hohanno receives thirty-five; the Jeniſca above ſixty; the Oby as many; the Amour about forty; the Nanquin receives thirty rivers; the Ganges twenty; and the Euphrates about eleven. In Africa, the Senegal receives more then twenty rivers; the Nile receives not one for five hundred leagues upwards, and then only twelve or thirteen. In America, the river Amazons receives above ſixty, and thoſe very conſiderable; the river St. Lawrence about forty, counting thoſe vhich ſall into ĩts lakes; the Miſſiſſippi receives forty; and the river Plata above fiſty. The inundations of the Ganges and the Nile have heen already mentioned, and it might be added, that almoſt æll great rivers have their periodical inundations from ſirnilar cauſes. The author already quoted obſerves, that, beſides theſe annually periodical inundations, there are many rivers that overſſ=ow at much ſnorter intervals. Thus moſt of thoſe in Peru and Chili have ſcarce any motion by night; but upon the appearance oſ the morning ſun they reſume their former rapidity: this proceeds from the mountain ſnows, which, melting with the heat, encreaſe the ſtream, and continue to drive on the current while the ſun continues to diſiolve them +. There are ſome rivers which are ſaid to loſe themſelves in chaſms under the earth, and to flow for ſeveral miles in ſecret and undiſcovered channels. On æ Buſſon, vol. il. p. 74. 1 Goldſmiths Earth, p. Zeo. ſ 1ii- 7 ræi this circumſtance is founded one of the moſt beautiful fables of antiquity, relative to the fountain of Arethuſa, in Sicily. The ſame thing is aſfirmed of the Rhine, and even of the river Mole, in Surrey, which, from this circumſtance, derives its name. Vith reſpect to the two latter rivers, however, ſome doubts are entertained of the fact, but theſe are rather a ſubject of inquiry to the geographer than to the natural hiſtorĩan. C H A P. VII. H OT S ?P RINGS S. Proalle Cauſes of theſe Phensmena.Abound moſt in vileanic RegivnsIlot Springs in Iceland, near Mount Hecla —At Ge; ſer In the Iſland of IſebiacAt Viterbo.Extlanation of theſe PhenomenaLBuruing Well in LancaſvireExplained. i PHERE are few objects in natural hiſtory, 2l which preſent themſelves to our conſideration, accompanied with greater difficulties than thoſe tepid ſprings, which exiſt in different parts of the world, of diſſerent degrees of temperature, and exhibiting a variety of the moſt curious phenomena. Many of theſe have exiſted as long as the earlieſt records, and for whole centuries have exhibited little variation in their temperature. i If any circumſtance could ſerve to ſupport the very dubious hypotheſis of an immenſe reſervoir of fire in the center of the earth, it would be theſe phenomena; yet there is but little reaſon to ſuppoſe that the origin of theſe tepid ſprings lies at any vaſt depth beneath the ſurſace; and, indeed, if we admit the notion of a central fire, ĩts effect ought to be more general than ĩt ĩs found to bee. The moſt probable hypotheſis is, thereſore, that the ſame cauſes operate to produce theſe, which produce volcanoes; and the only inference to be drawn from their permanent temperature is, that the maſſes of matter, which produce volcanic eruptions, may exiſt for a long ſeries of time, even in a ſtate of inflammation, without burſting thoſe bandages with which nature has confined them; and that heat may long be continued to a conſiderable degree in the earth, without exhibiting to our afſrighted ſenſes the formidable phenomenon of a volcanic fire. It is, however, in volcanic regions, that tepid vaters are found in the greatet quantity; ænd it is in theſe that they diſplay he moſt ſtriking plienomena. At Laugervarm, a ſmall lake, two days j Journey from Mount Flecla, in Iceland, there are hot ſpouting ſprings, one of which throws up a column of water to the height of twenty-four feet. A piece of mutton and ſome Talmon trout were almoſt boiled ſ pieces, in ſix minutes, in one of theſe ſprings. At Geyſer, in the ſame iſland, there are forty or fifty ſpouting ſprings within the compaſs of three miles; in ſome the water is impregnated with clay, and white in its appearance; in ſome, where it paſſes through a fine ochre, it is red as ſcarlet; in ſome it ſpouts forth in a continued ſtream; in others, at intervals, like an artificial jet deau The largeſt which Von Troll obſerved had an aperture nineteen feet in diameter, through which the water ſpouted, at intervals, nine or ten times a day; round the top of it is a baſon, which, together with the pipe, is in the form of a caldron; the margin of the baſon is nine feet higher than the conduit, and its diameter fifty-ſix feet. The water was thrown up in an immenſe column, at different times, to the height of from thirty to ſixty feet, and at one time to the height of ninety-two feet. Previous to this exploſion the earth began to tremble in three different places, and a noiſe was heard like a battery of cannon *. Another writer ſtates, that at Geyſer, i in Iceland, there ſprings up a hot water, which upon cooling, 3 Von Trols Letters on Iceland. depoſits ſiliceous earth; and that of this very matter it has ormed ſor itſelfſ a crater, in which columns of water, of a ſtupendous bulk, after they have been thrown to the neight of ninety feet and upwards, ſall, and are again receivedl. The heat of the water during the exploſion cannot be meaſured; but aſter it has riſen and fallen through a ſtratum of air ninety feet thick, it raiſes the thermometer to 212°, which evinces that the heat in the bowels of the earth muſt be much more intenſe; and at this we ſhall ceaſe to nonder when we conſider, that in this caſe the ſubterraneous fire acts upon the water in caverns, cloſed un by very thick ſtrata of ſtones, an apparatus far more effective than Papin's digeſter. The crater was at firſt undoubtedly formed, and is daily ſtrengthened by ſiliceous earth, which quits the menſtruum on its being cooled, falls down, and, being in ſomehat like a ſoſt ſtate, concretes * About ſixty vards from the ſhore of the iſland of Iſchia, at a place called St. Angelo, a column of boiling water bubbles on the ſurface of the ſea with great Torce, and commuricates ſts heat to the ater oſ the ſea near it. It boils winter and ſummer, and is of great uſe to the inhabitants in bending their planks for ſhip-building, &c. The fiſhermen alſo ſrequently employ this curious caldron to boil their fiTn. Near the ſhore of this iſland Sir William Haemilton found, when bathing in the ſea, many ſpots vhere the ſand was ſo intenſely hot under his feet as to oblige him haſtily to retire. There is alſo a boiling ſpring near Viterbo, in the Roman ſtate, called the Bullicame. It is a circular pool of about ſixty feet in diameter, and ex* Dergman's Diſert. 13. ceedingly deep, the water of which is conſtantly boiling. It is ſituated in a plain ſurrounded by volcanic mountains. A ſtony concretion floats on the ſurfſace of the pool, which, being carried off by the ſuperfluous water, is depoſited, and ĩs conſlantly forming a labes or tufa, of which the ſoll all around the pool is compoſed. Theſe fountains are beſt accounted ſor by ſuppoſing the pipe or conduit to communicate with a large reſervoir of water, which, being ſubject to the heat of a volcanic fire, the ſteam generated ; in the reſervoir by the boiling of the water atts forcibly on the water in the ſhaſt or pipe, and ejects it by its elaſtic force in the form of a fountain, which will act with more or leſs vigour according to the degree of heat, and according to the reſiſtance which the water encounters in its paſſage. The moſt ſingular circumſtance is the number of theſe ſprings which are found in almoſt every country; and even in thoſe countries which have long ceaſed to be volcanic. England itſelf has its tepid ſprings, and thoſe of Bath, Buxton, &c. are well nown. Cambden mentions a well, near Wigan, in Lancaſhire, which was called the burning well. If a candle was applied to its ſurface, he ſays, a flame vas excited like that of ardent ſpirits ſet on fire, and the heat and inflammation thus excited would continue ſometimes for the ſpace of a whole day, and was ſuſficient to boil eggs, and even meat. As I recollect, Cambden mentions the well as having loſt its inflammable property in his time; but he notices two others oſ a ſimilar deſcription, one in the ſame neighbourhood, and another in Shropſhire. I have never myſelf witneſſed a ſimilar phenomenon, nor do I know of any ſuch that exiſts at preſent, at leat in Britain. Should, however, the fact be as it is related by Cambden, the reader, aſter what has been ſtated in a preceding chapter, will not find ĩt difficult to explain the cauſe. The country where the well is, or was ſituated, abounds in coals. The well is therefore impregnated with naphta, or ſome bituminous vapour; this, upon the application of an ignited body, is capable of inflammation, and can even communicate a conſiderable portion of heat to the water of the well itſell. There is no proof, however, that the Bath or Buxton waters are impregnated with any bituminous matter, though coals are plentiful in the neighbourhood; and as theſe waters contain a ſmall portion of iron, there is reaſon to ſuppoſe them connected with beds of pyrites, or poſſibly with a latent ſubterraneous fire. On the whole, we are not ſufficiently acquainted vith the internal parts of the earth to account ſatisfactorily for theſe and other phenomena of a ſimilar kind, ænd whatever is advanced in the way of theory on theſe topics ſhould be advanced with becoming diffidence, and rather with a view of exciting the attention and curioſity of others, than for the purpoſe of eſtabliſning a ſyſtem unſanctioned by experiment, or C 1n a rp. VIII. MINE RAL WATERS. Capacity of Water as a SoluentSubjtances commonly feund in Mineral IVaters.Fixed Adir.Mineral Acids4æalloline julisNeutral SalisEarthy Subjtunces. SulphurMetals  ſode of examining and anolyæing Mineral WatersChemical Teſts.naluſi f the noſi celebrated Mineral or Spa VaetersAiæla Chopelle. Dath2BriſtolBuxtcnCheltenbai: Epſoemterrcvgate. Matloct.Pyrmont. Scarborough.StaReſectious cn the Use of Mi cral Water in general. H E capecity which water has of helding a variety of ſubſtances in ſolution has been ſrequently mentioned in the courſe of theſe volumes, and indeed is a ſact ſo well known and underſtood, that to inſiſt much upon ĩit would be uſeleſs and even impertinent. It was alſo intimated, that the water of ſprings receives the name of mineral water ſrom the foreign ſubſtances which are contained in it. Theſe ſubſtances are various, and more than one is commonly found in mineral waters; but in general they may be referred to the following heads: I. Fixed air, or carbonic acid gas. This ingredient occaſions an appearance of briſkneſ™ in water, ſimilar to that of fermenting liquors, which is chieſly obſervable when the water is poured from one veſſel into ancther. It ĩs very volatile, and ſoon eſcapes on the water being expoſed to the air. This ingredient frequently occaſions giddineſs in perſons who are not accuſtomed to it. An artificial water of this kind may be prepared at any time by impregnating water vith ſixed air. 2. The vitriclic, nitrous, and muriatic acids. One or other of theſe acids exiſt in almoſt all mineral waters: they are uſually combined with earthy or metallic baſes, but ſometimes, eſpecially the vitriolic, exiſt in a ſeparate ſtate, ſo as to occaſion a ſenſible acidity. 3. An alkaline ſalt is found in many waters in Hungary, Tripoli, and other countries. It is uſually the foſſil alkali which is combined with fixed air in the Seltzer waters, and with the mineral acids in a great variety of others. The vegetable and volatile alkalies rarely or never are ingredients in mineral vaters. 4. Neutral ſalts are not uncommon in ſprings. Common ſalt, nitre, and vitriolated magneſia, are the the moſt uſual; the latter is very abundant in a ſpring at Epſom in Surrey, and has therefore obtained the name of Epſom ſalt. Sal ammoniac has alſo been found in ſome ſprings in the neighbourhood of volcanoes and burning coal mines. 5. Earthy ſubſtances. Of theſe the calcareous is ſometimes found to abourd ſo much, as to be depoſited on ſuch ſubſtances as it comes in contact with, and occaſion petrifaction. In this caſe the ſuſpenſion of the calcareons earth ſeems to depend on the preſence of fixed air, which, making its eſcape when the water iſſues into the open air, ſuſfers the calcareous carth to ſeparate. The calcareous earth of waters is very commonly united with the vitriolic acid, and exiſts in the form of gypſum, which is only ſoluble in water in the proportion of one part in ſeven or eight hundred. Calcareous nitre and muriated calcareous earth are allo occaſonaelly found in ſprings. 6. Sulphur. Many waters ſeem by their offenſive ſmell to contain ſulphur, though very few of them, upon more accurate examination, are ſound to aſford it. The waters generally called ſulphureous or hepatic, are only impregneted with ſulphureous or heporic gas, which is a ſolution of ſulphur in in=lammable air. This is the ſame gas which riſes from liver of ſulphur, and liver of ſulphur itſelf has been detected in a very minute quantity in mineral waters. Sometimes bitumens are met with in mineral waters, and commonly make their appearance on the ſurface. 7. Metals. Of theſe iron is moſt frequently ſound in water, ſometimes copper, and more rarely Zinc. Waters which contain iron are called chalybeates, and are very common. It was ſormerly imagined that iron as ſuſpended in mineral waters by means of the vitriolic acid; but M. Monnet has aſcertained, that very few of them contain vitriolic acid, and that the carbonic acid, or fixed air, is 2lmoſt the only medium by which the iron is ſuſpended. The carbonic acid is ſometimes in exceſs, ſo as to render the chalybeate water acidulous, in other inſtances it ſuſpends the iron without being in exceſs. Chalybeates may, in general, be. known by the yellow ochry ſediment depoſited ] in their courſe, and alſo by ſtriking a purple colour with decoction of galls. In examining any mineral waters, the firſt obje: of attention ĩs, to have the water as freſh as poſiible, ſince, if it contains any volaetile matters, they will ſoon ſly oſf. A great number of trials are thereſore to be made on the ſpor. The contents of the neighbouring ſtrata, particularly of any high ground, from which the water ſeems to proceed, are alſo to be regarded, a they oſten ſerve to account for the properties of mineral vaters. tended to is the degree of the heat of the water, and for this purpoſe it is neceſſary to be provided with an accurate thermorneter. There are many ſprings which have a temperatere a litile above the medium temperature of the atmoſphere, though this may not be ſo remarkable as to have obtained them the name of hot ſpiings. The middle temperature of theſe ſprings is found to be about ſorty-eight degrees, but on elevated ſituations ĩt is leſs, in proportion to their height above the ſca. It may alſo be proper to compare the temperature of there mineral ſprings with that of ſome common ſprings in the neighbourhood. The ſenſible qualities, as the colour, taſte, and ſmell, are to be obſerved. In order to diſcover whether æny elaſtic fiuid eſcapes ſfrom it, and oſ what nature ĩt ĩs, let ſome of the water be put into a bottle, and a bladder tied about its necl. The air which eſcapes may be ſubmitted to examination. In order to obtain it, it is only neceſſary to tie another ſtring above the bottle, and then to cut between them, ſo as to ſeparate the bladder, which may be plunged in water or mercury, and its contents received in the pneumatic apparatus. In order to ſeparate all the air from water, it muſt be heated nearly to ĩts boiling point, which may eaſily be done by immerſing it in a veſſel of boiling water, while it is contained in the bottle to which the bladder is annexed. The elaſtic fluids, which may be ſeporated from mineral aters, are chieſiy two, carbonic acid gas, and ſulphureous gas. It is proper to obſerve the changes which are ſpontaneouſly produced on mineral waters by diſferent degrees of heat. If any matter is depoſited during the evaporation of the mineral water, it muſt be collected for further examinationn. With reſpect to the addition of certain foreign ſublt ſtances called re-ægents, to diſcover the contents of mineral waters, it may in general be remarked, that this mode is leſs certain than evaporation; the larter method, however, is not free from objections, as the application of heat to any body not unfrequertly deranges the previous ſtate of combination among ĩts component principles. The chemical teſts beſt adapted to the diſcovery oſ the contents of mineral waters are the following: lime, volatile alkali, fixed allalics, vitriolic acid, tincture of turnſole, muriãted barytes, acid of ſugar, arſenic, Pruſian alkali, and the nitrous ſolutions of ſilver and mercury. When it is propoſed to diſcover the contents oſ a mineral vater, it is beſt to begin with ſuch teſts as are leaſt capable of altering it, and afterwards, having obſerved their eſſœcts, to proceed to complete the analyſis by teſts which have a more extenſive influence. Lime water ſeizes the carbonic acid, and forms a precipitate of chelk; it alſo precipitates ſalts with the baſis of clay and magneſia, as well as the metallic ſalts. If aſter mixing an equal quantity of lime water with a mineral water, no precipitation takes place in twenty-four hours, it may be concluded, that it contains neither carbonic acid at Iliberty, nor a combiration of that acid with fixed alkali, nor earthy ſalts with the baſis of aluminous earth or magneſia, nor any metallic ſalt. But if a precipitation takes place on the addition of lime water, the next ſtep is to examine the properties of the precipitated matter; if it has the properties of chalk, ſuch as inſipidity, the producing of an eſferveſcence with vitriolic acid, and forming with it a compound nearly inſoluble in ater, that is gypſum, it muſt be concluded that the water contained carbonic acid, which, uniting with the Iime of the lime water, produced chalk. If, on the conVou. trary, the precipitated matter is ſmall in quantity, and ſubſides very ſlowly; if it does not efferveſce, and affords with the vitriolic acid a ſtyptic ſalt, it may be concluded that it is alum, and that the mineral water contained clay: If a bitter and very ſoluble ſalt is formed on the addition of the vitriolic acid, it is the Epſom ſalt, and the water contained the earth of magneſia. If the addition of vitriolic acid to the precipitate produces ſal martis, the water held iron in ſolution. The addition of cauſtic volatile alkali will act like lime water, except that it will not produce a precipitation from the preſence of uncombined carbonic acid in the water; the compound formed by volatile alkali with that acid not being inſcluble, like the chalk formed by the union of carbonic acid with lime. But beſides the aluminous, the magneſian, and the metallic ſalts, the cauſtic volatile alkali will decompoſe thoſe which have lime for their baſis, and thus we advance one ſtep further in the analyſis of the water. The Pruſian alkali precipitates the combinations of carbonic and vitriolic acid with chalk. The nitrous ſolutions of ſilver and mercury decompoſe all the muriatic and vitriolic ſalts, whiclh may be various both in quantity and in kind. In theſc caſes the muriatic or vitriolic acid contained in the mineral water, ſeizes the ſilvẽr or the mercury, and forming with it an inſoluble compound, falls to the bottom in a thick cloud, while the nitrous acid unites with the baſis which is deſerted by one or both of the other acids. It is not neceſſary in this place to enter into a minute detail of the methods of diſtinguiſhing the difference of the precipitates, according as the muriatic or vitriolic acid vas concerned in their production, but I ſhall refer the reader for information on this point to what was ſtated when treating of the combinations of ſilver and mercury with the different mineral acids. By tincture of turnſole the predominance either oſ an alkali or an acid is diſcovered: as vegetable blues are turned red by acids, and green by alkalies. Acid of ſugar is a very ſenſible teſt of lime, when combined with the ſparry or acetous acids. A ſolution of arſenic in the marine acid will precipitate ſulphur from water, in which it is held diſſolved by means of carbonic acid. It may be added, that white arſenic becomes yvellow if immerſed in water containing hepatic gas; and a piece of poliſhed iron will receive a coppercolour from water in which copper is diſſolved. Ifa mineral water is found to contain a fixed alkali, it may be determined whether it is the vegetable or mineral alkali by means of vinegar. With vegetable alkali vinegar yields a deliqueſcent ſalt; with the mineral, foliated cryſtals. It may be proper brieſly to notice the compoſition and obvious properties of ſome of the moſt celebrated mineral waters, and the diſorders in which they are ſuppoſed to have moſt efficacy.  Arx-LA-CHAPELLEThis place has long been famous for its hot ſulphureous waters and baths. They ariſe ſfrom ſeveral ſources, which ſupply eight baths conſtructed in different parts of the town. Theſe waters near the ſources are clear and pellucid, and have a ſtrong ſulphureous ſmell reſembling the waſhings of a foul gun; but they loſe this ſmell by expoſure to air. Their taſte is ſaline, bitter, and urinous. They do not contain iron. They are alſo neutral near the fountain, but aſterwards are manifeſtly, and pretty ſtrongly alkaline, inſomuch that cloaths may be 516 Aix-la-Chapells. [Book VII. waſhed with them without ſoap. The gallon contains about two ſcruples of ſea ſalt, the ſame quantity of chalk, and a dram and half of foſſil alkali. They are at firſt nauſeous and harſh, but by habit become familier and agreeable. Atfirſt drinking alſo they generally affect the head. Their general operation is cathartic and diuretic, without griping or diminution of ſtrength; and they alſo promote perſpiration. The quantity to be drunk æs an alterative, is to be vaiied according to the conſtitution, and other chicumſances oſ the potient. In general, it is beſt to begin with a quarter, or half a pint in the morning, and increaſe the deſe aſterwards to pints, as may be found convenient. The water is beſt drunk at the fountaino. When iĩt is required to purge, it ſould be drunk in large and oſten repeated draughts? The heat o the diſſerent baths of the Aix-laChapelle waters varies from one hundred and ſix of Farenhei?s thermometer to one hundred and thirty. In bathing ĩt is proper to begin with the moſt temFerate. c BaTu has long been ſamous ſor its warm chaelybeate waters. There are ſeveral ſprings, but their waters are all of the ſame nature. There are ſix baths; but the principal are the Xings bath, the Queews bath, and the Cręſs bath. The others are only appendages to theſe The two former raiſe the thermometer to 1169, the latter to 112°. The water when viewed in the baths has a greeniſh, or ſea colour: but in a phial it appears quite tranſparent and colourleſs, and it ſparkles in the glaſs. It has a very ſlight ſaline, bitteriſh, and chalybeate taſte, which is not diſagreeable, and ſometimes ſomewhat of a ſulphu-  Elliot on Min. Watær], ꝑ. 119, &c. reous ſmell; but this Iatter is not uſually perceptible, except when the baths are fillingg The gallon of Bath water contains twenty-three grains of chalk, the ſame quantity of muriat of magneſia, thirty eight of ſea ſal], and 8.1 oſ aerated iron. As it riſes from the pump, it contẽins ſixed air, or other volatile acid, in a ſuicien quættity to curdle milk and act upon iron. The Barh water opcrates powerfully as a dinretic, and promates perſpiration. If drunk quickly, in large draughts, it ſometimes purges; but if taen ſlowly and in ſmall ꝗuantity, ĩt rather has the contrary effect. An heavineſs of the head, and inclination to ſleep, are oſten felt on ſirſt drinking it?. This water when taken inwardly is ſaid to give a ſtimulus and vigour to the whole conſtitution, it therefore proves uſeful in old rheumatic complaeints, and in caſes ot gout connected with much debility. During the uſe of the Bath water, and ſome time previous to it, the patient ſhould live on a light diet, eaſy of digeſtionn. The courſe ſhould be continued for a month or ſix weeks. In local complaints, as in ſtiff joints and chronic pains, the application of the water by pumping is more efficacious than bathing the whole body. BRISTOL. The ſprings are known by the name of the Hot IVells. The water at its origin is warm, clear, pellucid and ſparkling; and if let ſtand in a glaſs, covers its inſide with ſmall air- bubbles. It has no ſmell, and is ſoſt and agreeable to the taſte. It raiſes the thermometer from about ſeventy to eighty degrees. It contains 123 &rains of chalk, 55 of muriat oſ magneſia, and 63 oſ ſca ſalt in the gallon . * Llliot on Min. Waters, p. 134, &c. 4 Ibid. p. 145. &c. The Briſtol waters are particularly recommended in pulmonary complaints; the fame, however, of Briſtol has probably been more owing to the mildneſs oſ the air in that part of Englend, than to the virtues of its waters. BuxroN. This is a hot water, reſembling that of Briſtol. It raiſes the thermometer to 81° or 82°. It has a ſweet and pleaſant taſte. It contains a little calcareous earth, together with a ſmall quantity of ſea ſalt, and an inconſiderable portion of a cathartic ſult. Iron has been diſcovered in it, but in ſo extremely ſmall a quantity as not to deſerve notice: and even that perhaps owing to accident. This water taken inwardly is eſteemed gocd in the diabetes; in bloody urine; in the bilious cholic; in loſs of appetite, and coldneſs of the ſtomach; in inward bleedings; in atrophy; in contraction of the veſſels and limbs, eſpecially from age; in cramps and convulſions; in the dry aſthma without a fever; and alſo in barrenneſs. Inwardly and outwardly it is ſaid to be good in rheumatic and ſcorbutic complaints; in the gout; in inflammation of the liver and idnies, and in conſumptions of the lungs; alſo in old ſtrains; in hard callous tumours; in vithered and contracted limbs; in the itch, ſcabs, nodes, chalky ſ7ellings, ring-worms, and other ſimilar complaints. Beſides the hot water, there is alſo a cold chalybeate water, with a rough iron taſte. It reſembles the Cawtborp water*.  CHELTENIIAM, in Giouceſterſbire, is one of the beſt and moſt noted cathartic chalybeate waters in England, though it is not ſo much frequented as formerly. The gallon contains eight drams of a cathartic ſalt, partly vitriolatæd natron, partly vitriolated magneſia; twentyæ Elliot on Min. Waters, p: I1, &c. five grains of magneſia, part of which is united with marine, part with aerial acid; and nearly five grains of iron combined with aerial acid. It alſo yielded thirty- two ounce meaſures oſ air, twenty-four oſ which were fixed air, the reſt azotic with a portion of hepatic air. The doſe is from one pint to three or four. It operates with great eaſe, and is never attended with gripings, teneſmus, &c. It is beſt taken æ little warm. It alſo creates an appetite; is thougtt excellent in ſcorbutic complaints, and has been uſcd with ſucceſs in the gravel. As the ſpring has been calculated to yield only thirty- five pints of water æn hour, without frugal management there would not be enough to ſupęl ly the demands of the drinkers. The Walton water has lately been recommended as a ſubſtitute to obviate this inconvenience. Eprsom, in SurryThe water has a night ſaline taſte, is clear, and without ſmell. But if it is kept in covered veſſels for ſome weeks in the ſummer it will ſtink, and acquire a nauſeous and ſaltiſh bitter taſte. This was the firſt water from which the ſalt thence called Epſom ſalt was obtained. But the ſalt uſually ſold by that name is different from that yvielded by the Epſom water, though perhaps not inferior in virtue. It is made from the bittern leſt aſter the cryſtallization of common ſalt from ſea waterr. The Epſom vater is cathartic; for which purpoſe it muſt be drunk to the quantity of two or three pints, It is alſo diuretic. HarRowo arE There are four ſprings at this place, but the waters of all of them are nearly alike, except in the quantity of the ſaline matter they contain. Of the three old ſprings, the higheſt gave three ounces of ſolid matter; the loweſt, an ounce and an half; and the middle one, only half an ounce, Of the latter one huhdred and ſorty grains were carth. The woter as it ſprings up is clear and ſparkling, and throws up a quantity of air-bubbles. It has a ſtrong ſmell of ſulphur, and is ſuppoſed to be the ſtrongeſt ſulphureous vater in England. It has a ſalt taſte, as it contæinz a conſiderable quantity of ſea ſalt, together Vvith a little marine ſalt of megneſia, and calcareous earth*. Harrougate vãter is cathartic when taken in doſes of ſeveral pints. When uſæd externally as a fomentation, it is ſaid to bæe uſeful in ſome diſorders of the ſkin; and by ſome phyſiclans it is conſidered as eſficacious in deſtroying worms. MarLocę. At this place (which] is perſectly romantic) are ſeveral ſprings of warm water, which appear to be of the nature of the Briſiol water, except that it is very ſlightly impregnated with iron. Its heat is about 69, and its virtues are ſimilar to thoſe of the Briſiol and Buxton waterss. The baths are recommended in rheumatic complaints, in cutaneous diſorders, and in other caſes where warm bathing is ſerviceable. There are great numbers of petrifactions in the courſe of this water . PYRMONT, in Weſiphalia This is a very briſ chelybeate, abounding in fixed air; and when taken up from the ſountain, ſparkles like the briſeſt Champaign wine. It has a fine, pleaſant, vinous taſte, and a ſomewhat ſulphureous ſmell. It is perfectly clear, and bears carriage better than the Spa vater. A gallon of it contains 46 grains of chalk, 15.6 of magneſia, 30 of vitriolated magneſia, 10 of ſea ſalt, and 2.6 of aerated iron ſ. Perſons who drink it at the well, are  Elliot, p. 177 and 184. + Ibid. p. 210.  Dr. Marcard, in his Doſription of Pyracut, on the authority of M. Weſtrumb of Hammeln, eſtimates the ron at ſomewhat moze than eight grains to the gallon. affected with a kind of giddineſs or intoxication; owing, it may be ſuppoſed, to the quantity of fixed air with which the water abounds. The common operation of this water is diuretic; but it is alſo gently ſudorific; and if taken in large quantity proves catharticc. When, however, it is required to have thi latrer eſfect, it is uſeſul to mix ſome ſalts with the firſt glaſes. It ĩs drunk by glaſęfuls in the morring, to the quantity of ſrom one to five or ſix pints, according to circumſtances, wallking about between each glaſs, Pyrmont waters are recommended ĩn debilitated and relaxed conſtitutions, attended with indigeſtion, low ſpirits, and want of appetite. SCARBOROUGH, in Yorkſbire.f The waters of this place are chalybeate and cathartic; and they are more frequented and uſed than any other water of this claſ in England. There are two vells; the one more cathartic, the other a ſtronger chalybeate. Hence the latter (which is neareſt the town) has been called the ghalybeate ſpring, the other the purging; though they are both impregnated with the ſame principhs, but in different proportions. The purging is the moſt famed, and is that which is uſually called the Scarborough water. This contains fiſty-two grains of calcareous earth, two of ochre, and two hundred and ſixty- ſix of vitriolated magneſia, in the gallon: the chalybeate, ſeventy grains of calcareous earth, one hundred and thirty-nine of vitriolated magneſia, and eleven of ſea ſaltl. When theſe waters are poured out of one glaſs into another, they throw up a number oſ air-bubbles; and if ſhaken for a while in a cloſe ſtont phial, and the phial is ſuddenly opened before the æ Elliot, p. 226. commotion ceaſes, they diſplode æn elaſtic vapour vith an audible noiſe, which ſiows that they abound in fixed air. At the fountain they both have a briſ, pungent, chalybeate taſte; but the cathartic water taſtes bitteriſh, which is not uſually the caſe with the ebalybeate. They loſe their ehalybeate virtues by expoſure, and alſo by keeping; but the cathartic water iooneſt. They both putrify by keeping; but in time recover their ſæWeetneſs æ The properties of the cathartic and of the chalybeate ſpring are, as might naturally be ſuppoſed, very difſerent. The former is uſeful in caſes oſ habitual coſtiveneſs; the latter in diſorders of relaxation and debiity. SPa, in the biſhopric of Liege. In and about this town there are ſeveral ſprings, which afford excell-rchalybeate waters: and in Great Britain they are: moſt in uſe of any foreign mineral waters.  The principal ſprings are, 1. The Pſh4, hen, ſituated in the middle of the vit niere, about a mile and an half eaſt from :: beeck, near to the Sauviniere;4. Tounelee,, the leſt oſ the road to the Sauviniere; 53. acæ), near to the Tonnelet;6. Geronſtere, tvo mile: ſouth oſ the Spa;V7. Sarts, or Niverſet, in the diſtrict of Sarts;38. Chevron, or Bru, in the principality of Stavelot;v. Couve,i10. Beverſee11 I. dige12. Geromont, all near Malmdy. s The Pouhou is a ſlow deep ſpring, and is more or leſs ſtrong or gaſeous according to the ſtate of the atmoſphere. The gallon contains ten grains of chalk, thirty of magneſia, ten of mineral alkali, and five of aerated iron, It yvields of fixed air one hundrèd and thirtytwo ounce meaſures. It contains more iron than any æ Elliot, p. 234: of the other ſprings, and does not ſo ſoon loſ its gas. It ĩis in its moſt perfect and natural ſtate in cold, dry weather. It then appears colourleſs, tranſparent, and without ſmell, and has a ſubacid chalybeate taſte, with an agreeable ſmartneſs: at ſuch times, if it is taken out oſ the well in a glaſs, it does not ſparkle; but after ſtanding a while, covers the glaſs on the inſide with ſmall air bubbles; but if it is Thaken, or poured out of one glaſs into another, ĩt then ſparkles, and diſcherges a great number of air- bubbles at the ſurface. n warm, moiſt weather, it loſes its tranſparency, appears turbid or wheyiſh, contains leſs fixed air, and is pertly decompoſed. A murmuring noiſe alſo is ſometimes heard in the well. It is colder than the heat of the atmoſphere by many degrees. It is ſuppoſed to contain the greateſt quantity of fixed air of a2lmoſt any acidulous water; and conſequently has a remarkable ſprightlineſs and vinoſity, and boils by mere warmth. This, however, ſoon ſlies off, if the water is leſt expoſed; though in well cõrked bottles it is in a great meaſure preſerved. It ĩs capable of diſſolving more iron than it naturally contains, and thus becoming a ſtronger chal; ybeate. This is owing to the great quantity Of fixed air hich it contains. For the ſame reaſon an ebullition is raiſed in this water on the addition of acids, as they diſengage ĩts fixed aĩr. It mixes ſmoothly with milk, whether it is cold or of a boiling heat. c Of the Sauvinicre water, a gallon yields 6. 5 grains of chalk, 4.5 of magneſia, two of mineral alkæli, 3.5 of kali, 2.2 ofaerated iron, and 108 ounce meaſures of fi ned air. At the well it has ſomewhat a ſmell of ſulphu  Groiſbeeck. The water is oſ the ſame nature à⸗ the Sauvintere, but contains a ſomewhat larger proportion of the ſeveral ingredients. It has a vitriolic taſte, and ſomewhat of a ſlphureous ſmell.  Tonnelet. This is one of the moſt ſprightly waters in the world. It ĩs much colder than either of the other Spa waters; has no ſmell; is bright, tranſparent, and colourleſs; and from the rapiity of ĩts motion does not foul its baſon. It has a ſmart, ſubacid, ſprightly taſte, not unlike the briſeſt Champeign wine. From a number of experiments it appears, that this ater is more ſtrongly charged than any of the others with fixed air, on which the energy of all aters of this kind principally depends, but it parts with it more readily. It contains more iron than any of the ſprings, except the Pouhon.  Watrox. qts ſituation is loweſt oſ any o the ſprings about Spa, and it is more apt to be foul: but when the well is cleaned out, and the water pure, it is found to be of the fame nature as that of Pouhon. It is not cathartic, as ſome have aſſerted. ll E¢ Geronſtere.This water has much leſs fixed air than the Pouhon. It has a ſulphureous ſmell at the fountain, which it loſes by being carried to a diſtance. This ſmell is ſtrongeſt in warm moiſt weather. The air, or vapour, of this water aſfects the heads of ſome who drink it, occãfioning a giddineſs or kind of intoxication; which goes off in a quarter or half an hour. The Pyrmont, and ſeveral other briſk chalybeate waters, are fourd to have the ſame effect. It is colder than any of the ſprings, the Tonnelet excepted.  Sarts, or Niverſet. It reſembles the Tonnelet water, but is rather leſs briſk and gaſcous. It is however more acid and ſtyptic. t EBru or Chevron. The phyſicians at Liege have artfully decried this water, becauſe it is not in the principality of Liege. But by every trial ĩt appears not much inſerior to any of the Spa aters. In the quantity of fixed air and of i iron it contains, it approaches- the Pouhon, s c uve e Couve and Beverſee. The Couve nearly reſembles the Tonnelet water; or rather, may be placed in a medium between that and the Watroz. It hardly equals the tranſparency, ſmartneſs, and generous vinous taſte of the firſt, but it greatly ſurpaſts the latter. The Beverſee agrees with this, only that it does not retain its ſmartneſ ſo well by keeping. La Sige has ſome of the general properties of the Spa waters, but in other reſpects it is different It is moderately ſubacid, ſmart and grateful, but has no ſenſible chalybeate taſte. It ſparkles like Champaign when poured from one glaſs to another. Upon ſtanding it loſes its fixed air, and thros up a thick mother-oſpearl coloured pellicle. It is mueh more Ioaded with earthy matters, and leſs impregnated with iron and fixed air, than the other Spa waters. : Geromont. As a chalybeate and acidulous water this ſeèms to be nearly of the ſame itrength with La Sige but ĩt contains a greater quantity of natron, toether with a mixture of ſea ſalt. The earthy matters, however, are leſs. / It appears, that theſe waters are compounde d of nearly the ſame principles, though in different proportions. All of them 2bound with ſued air. They contain more or leſs iron, alkali, and calcareous and ſelenitical earths; together with a ſmall portion of ſea ſalt. Theſe are all kept ſuſpended, and in à neutral ſtate, by means of the æerial æcid, or fixed air. From a review of the contents of theſe waters, it cannot be imagined that their virtues principally depend on the ſmall quantity of ſolid matters which they contain. They muſt therefore depend moſtly on their fired air. And they are probably rendered more active and penetrating both in the firſt paſſages, and alſo when they enter the circulation by means of that ſmall portion of iron, earth, ſalt, &c. with which they are impregnated *. Aſter all that has been alleged in favour of mineral waters, it muſt be conſeſſed that their medical virtues are at beſt rather dubious. With reſpect to the metallic ſalts which they may contain, the quantity is too minute to be very eſficacious in obſtinate complaints; and the warm baths have probably no other effect than a quantity of common water heated to the ſame temperature would have, if applied by means of an artificial bath at home. Where good eſfects have been wrought upon a patient's reſorting to a mineral water, phyſicians have not always conſidered thæ excellent conſequences hich in the common courſe of things might be expected from the exerciſe of the journey, the change of air, and change of ſcene; from cheerful company, and, though laſt, not leaſt, perbaps, f from the imagination of the patient. æ See Elliot, p. 249, &c. ll ll 5 ] AP ? E N D IE. TABLE OF SPECIFIC GRAVITIES. Magneſian earth Barytic earth Siliceous eãrth Bottle glaſs Flint glaſs VW hite glaſs China ditto Lime ſtones, from Muſcovy talte Calcareous ſpar Fluor ſpar White marble Diamond Ruby Topaæ Emerald -Hyacinth Garret Tourmaline Opal Cat's eye Onyx CarnelionCommon ſint Jaſper Quartæ Agat Gold Platina Mercury Lead Bilver / Argillaceous earth to Common ſate Seves porcelain. ISTILLED water Calcareous earth / - r ; ::;: 1000 2723 2155 3973 1669 2650 2732 2892 3329 2I45 2384 1586 2390 æ 2792 2715  3180 Z716 3445 4213 3460 3600 3764 3978 3050 2764 2240 2600 2704 2700 2778 Và Tallom - 2654 2590 19540 22000 13568 IIz52 t Copper Iron--- Tinn Biſmuth Nicke Arſenic -Zinc- Antimony Manganeſe Cobat -Tungſtein- Molybdena. Vitriolic acid Nitrous acidcMuriatic acid Fluor acid Oil of olivesLinſeed oil Burgundy wine Bourdeæ ux dittoMalmſey madeira Cyder Womans milkMares mil0P? Cows milkGoat's milk Ewe's milk Elaſtic gumNaptha Camphor Spermaceti Vitriolic æther Nitrous æther Muriatic ætherAcetous ætherPureſt ſpirit of wine 8878 7788 7299 9823 8660 5763 7191 1038 1018 1020 1034 1032 1034 1040 933 989 943 942 739 EE 730 866 820 of the weights of the diſſerent gaſſes at 29. 84. inches, barometrical preſſure, and at 54. 50 of temperat cording to Fahrenheit's thermometes, ex preſſed in Engli ſure, and Engliſh troy weight. From Lavoiſiers Chen The weight of the five firſt were aſcertæined by M. I himſelf; the laſ three were inſerted by M. Lavoiſier on thority of Mr. Kirwan. Weight of a Weight of a Names of gaſſes. cubical inch. cubical fot. œ. dr. grs. Atmoſpheric air- -321I2 II I5 Azotic gas - -30064 O 3-” Oxygen gas - 34211 II Hydrogen ga8 -- 2594 o o 41 Carbonic acid gas -- 44108 I4 4I Nitrous gas- -37000 Im2 35 Ammoniacal gass - I8;13 o 53 I9 Sulphureous acid gas -71580 24 38 