ter, duſt, &c. in ſuch proportions as to be ſeen, ſmelled, or taſted. D IVIS IONII. FACTITIOUS AIR. Air which ĩs made, or generatod, by the action of bodies upon each other. S U BD IVI S. I. NOXIOUS FACTITIOUS AIR. Factitious air vhich, when perfect in its kind, is fatal to animal life, to vegetable life, and to flame. Genus I. VITRIOLIC AIE. Air made by joining ſtrong vitriolic acid to oils, copper, ſilver, lead, iron, æinc. It is readily abſorbed by water: is heavier than common air; and precipitates the calcareous earth of lime-water. It diſſolves ice, is abſorbed by charcoal, diſſolves camphor, does not act upon iron, nitre, common ſalt, or ſal ammoniac, and forms a white cloud wvhen joined to the vapour of volatile alkali. Genus 2. NITROUS AIR Is generated by diſſolving in the nitrous acid iron, copper, tin, mercury, ſilver, biſmuth, or nickel; and by diſſolving gold, or regulus of antimony, in aqua regia. When it is mixed with common air, the mixture becomes red; heat is produvod, and the bulk of 4he mixturæ is leſs than that  of the two ſluids which compoſe it; but when ſaturated with common air, any further addition produces neither heat nor redneſs, and makes an equal addition to the bulk of the mixture. When it is mixed with factitious air, there is no diminution of its bulk; and when with common air, the diminution is in proportion to the ſalutary quality of the common air. It is diminiſhed a fourth part of its bulk by electric matter, and by expoſure to iron-filings and ſulphur. It is copiouſy abſorbed by ſpirit of nitre; the colour of which is changed to a deep orange, and then to a green. It is abſorbed in a ſmall quantity by water, oil of vitriol, ſpirit of ſalt, vegetable acids, &c. Genus 3. MURIATIC AIR. That air which is diſengaged during the diſtillation of ſpirit of ſalt, by means of oil of vitriol. When mixed with common air, it gives to flame a green or a bluiſh colour. It is diminiſhed in bulk by electric matter: difſolves ice as quickly as a hot fire: acts upon many inflammable and metallic bodies; and is thereby changed into Genus II. Genus 4. ALEALINE AIR. By the application of fire to volatile alkali, this air is produced. It is abſorbed by water, diſſolved by ice, unitos with moſt of the factitious airs, is increaſed in bulk by eloctric matter; and, when - is ſaturated vith it, the reſiduum is ĩnſflammable. Genus 5. VINOUS AIR Is got from vegetable ſubſtances while they undergo the vinous fermentation. 42 cuhic inches of beer yield 639 inches of this air: 26 cubie inches of bruiſed apples, 968; and the different wines vield it in various proportions. It diminiſhes common air, is abſorbed by water, makes a precipitation in lime-water, and makes cauſtic alkali mild. Genus 6. APOSEPTIC AIR Eſcapes from animal and vegetable ſubſtances when undergoing the putrefactive fermentation. It conſiſts of two kinds mixed together. One of theſe renders cauſtic alkalis mild, and makes a precipitation in Iime-water. The other has the properties of Genus II. Genus 7. STILLATITIOUS AIR. This air is produced by the diſtillation of animal and vegetable ſubſtances, and it has the general properties of Genus I. A cubic inch of hog's blood yields 33 inches of this air: half a cubic inch of deers horn, 117: half a cubic inch of oak, 108: 388 grains of Indian wheat, 270: one cubic inch of peas, 396: one cubic inch of muſtard-ſeed, 270: half a cubic inch of dry tobacco, 153: a cubic inch of coarſe ſugar, 126: a quarter of a cubic inch of human calculus, 516: and 62 pounds of good charcoal, õI.  Genus 8. CALCAREOUS AIR. Air got from calcareous bodies by fire or by acids. One dram of chalk diſſolved in two ounces of vinegar produces I 50 cubic inches of this air in vacuo: two drams of red coral in one ounce of the muriatic acid, 52 inches. Limeſtone, marble, and magneſia contain this air from a third to a hal? of their weights. It is from a fourth to a third heavier than common air. Calcareous bodies are converted into quicklime by being deprived of it; and alkalis become more cauſtic, more powerful ſolvents, and do not efferveſce with acids. It may be combined with metallic precipitants: is abſorbed by water, expreſſed oils, and ſpirit of vine; and when united with water, diſſolves calcareous earth, magneſia, and iron. Genus 9. MEPHITIC AIR Is generated by nature in caverns, mines, vells, and pits; and by art, as mentioned under Genus 8, &c. It is heavier than common air. Genus IO. a SPA-AWATER AIR May be obtained in large quantities from all the waters called mineral; and in ſmall quantities from many of the waters of common wells. A confiderable quantity of common air is uſually mixed with it. Tho at firſt it precipitates the calcareous earth  of lime-water, yet it aſterwards diſſolves that earth; and tho, by means of ĩt iron is diſſolved in many waters, yet it is precipitated when expoſed to the common air. Genus II. INFLAMMABLE AIR Is generated by nature in mines where it ſometimes takes fire, and explodes with deſtruction to the miners and their works. It may be produced by art by diſſolving iron, zinc, or tin in the vitriolic acid or muriatic acid, vhen mixed with water. Inflammable air may likewiſe be produced by diſtilling wax, pitch, ſhells, peas, amber, coals: by placing in vacuo filings of iron, zinc, braſs, or tin, and throwing the ſun's rays upon them by a burning-glaſs: by the putrefaction of animal and vegetable bodies: by adding an acid to liver of ſulphur: by ſaturating common air with volatile alEkali, or with the effluvia of ſome reſins: by making electric matter paſs thro oil, ether, ſpirit of wine, or ſpirit of ſal amoniac. It is much lighter than common air, ſo that it is eaſily diſtinguiſhed from Genus 9. When at reſt over water, it is not abſorbed by it. The contact of common air is neceſſary to ĩts inflammation. Genus I2. FULMINATING AIR, This air is produced by the deflagration of nitre vwith inſ=lammable ſubſtances, by applying ſire to metallic precipitants, and by the trituration of  mercurial precipitants. It has the properties of Genus 235 or of ſome of the other genera in various proportions. Genus IJ: CALCES AIR: This air is obtained by the applicatlon of fire to Iead and minium: by the revival of the calx of lead by electric matter: by putting minium and charcoal in the focus of a burning-glaſs. It has in general the character of the calcareous, but contains a larger portion of common air. Noxious factitiòus air may be obtained from many other bodies. The different kinds are often mixed with, and may be converted into, each other. In general they have the properties of the bodies from which they are obtained; but ſometimes acquire new ones. Genus I4PULMONIC AIR Is generated by reſpiration; that is, common air is converted into this àir by paſing thro the Iungs of animals in breathing. It is leſs in bulk than common air: makes a precipitation in Iimewater; and has the general properties of the calcareous. Genus I3. ADUST AIR. Common air is converted into this air by paſſing thro fire, tho there ſhould be no noxious matter, as commonly reckoned noxious, in the fuI el, or in the veſſel in which it is contained. It is leſs in bulk than common air: ſuffers only a limited diminution of its bulk: makes a precipitation in lime-water, &c. S U BD I VI S5. II. SALUTARY FACTITIOUS AIR. Factitious air, which, when pure in its kind, ĩs fit for the ſupport of animal life, and vegetable life, and ſlame. Genus I. SALPE TROUS AIR. Air with the properties of common air obtained by the application of fire to ſaltpetre. Genus 2. SEDATIVE AIR Is air with the properties of common air got from ſedative ſalt by fire. Genus 3. VITRIOLCUPREOUS AIR. When fire is applied to the vitriolie acid and copper, this air may be produced; which has the properties of common air. Genus 4. SOLMINIUM AIE. This air has the properties of common air, nd is produced by the application of the ſun's rays in the focus of a burning-glaſs to minium or red lead.  am;mæm: mſmumsmuiumiu2. æitilliiiiiſiũ  Genus j5. MERCURIAL AIR. Of the ſame nature with the laſt, and produced, in the ſame manner, from mercury that has been calcined. Genus 6. VITRIOLMINIUM AIR Is obtained by the application of pure vitriolic acid, and fire, to good minium; from 48 pennyweight of which, 36 cubic inehes of this air may be obtained; the weight of which is about the hundredth part of the weight of the minium. The ſalutary quality of this air is four or five times greatcr than that of common air of the ſame bulk. Genus 7. NITRO-IGNEOUS AIR. Air produced by the application of ſpirit of nitre and fire to minium, flowers of zinc, chalk, clay, gypſum, magneſin, vood-aſhes, flints, Muſcovy-tall. From about one cubic inch of flowers of Zinc moiſtened with ſpirit of nitre, and to which a very gentle fire is applied, about throe Engliſh pints of this air may be obtained. The ſalutary quality of this air is five or ſix times greater than that of common air. There are other methods of producing ſalutary air beſide thoſe enumerated. The othèr propertiea Of air are explained in pneumaties. I⸗  C L AS S VII. F IR E. Particles of matter extremely ſubtile which give the ſenſations of heat, and light, ſeparately, or in conjunction; which ſometimes are in a fixed, and ſometimes in a moving, ſtate; and the effects of vhich are different according to the nature of the bodies in which they are fixed, and by which they are ſurrounded when decompoſed. OF THE KINGDOMS OF NATURE,. Beſides the above arrangement, all terreſtrial bodies are divided into foſſils, vegetables, and animals which are conſidered as three kingdoms in the material empire of God. Foſſils are bodies which have not organized parts properly ſo called; which are not produced by ſeeds;3 which are without nerves and without ſenſation; which are commonly found on the external, or internal parts of the earth; and which are compoſed of certain ſecondary particles according to their claſſes, orders, diviſions, ſub-diviſions, genera, and ſpecies. Vegetables are bodies which have organized parts; which propogate their kinds; which grow to maturity; decline; and rot; which have no nerves, and give no marks of ſenſation; which are compoſed of the vegetable particles above deſceribed; and which are commonly found on the ſurface of the earth, or in the waters, lll  Animals are bodies which have organied parts, which have nerves, and give marks of ſenſation; vhich almoſt always have a loco-motive power; which propagate their kinds;3 which paſs thro infancy, maturity, old age, and die; which are found on the earth, in the air, or in the water: and the particles of which are diſtinguiſhed by certain characters from the other two kingdoms. S E CT. VIII. OF CORPUSCULAR ATTRACTION. P R OP. I There is an attraction among the particles of the ſame fluid as among the particles of water, of oil, of quickſilver, of melted lead, &c. P R OP. II. There is an attraction among the particles of the ſame ſolid, as among the particles of lead, of marble, of wood, &c. P R O P. III. There is an attraction between the particles of ſome ſolid and fluid, and of ſome hard and ſoft bodies; as between water and wood, water and ęarth, water and ſponge, oil and glaſs, water and glaſs, &c. P R OP. V. In capillary tubes the height to which the ſame fluid will riſe, and be ſuſpended, is reciprocally as the diameters of the tubes. P R O P. V. If a veſſcl of any ſhape or ſize has its upper part  drawn into a capillary tube; if ĩt is filled with vater, and inverted in a baſon of water placed in the air, or in vacuo, the whole quantity of water inverted will be ſuſpended in the veſſel and tube, provided the height of both does not exceed the height from the ſurface of the water in the baſon, to which a capillary of the ſame diameter would raiſe it. P R OP. VI. Corpuſcular attraction is mutual among the attracting particles. It reaches only to a ſmall diſtance. It acts according to the ſurfaces of cohering bodies, and not according to their quantities Of matter. And it ſeems to decreaſe in more than a duplicate ratio of the increaſe of the diſtance; but in many caſes it is diſficult to aſcertain the lIav of this attraction. S E C T. IX. OF ELECTIVE ATTRACTION. P R O P. I There is an elective attraction, or corpuſcular affinity, among the particles of matter; either abſolute, vhen a given body is attracted by ſome bodies, and not at all by others; or in degree only, vhen a given body ĩs attracted by ſeveral others, but more readily and more ſtrongly by one than by another. P R O P:. II. IF two bodies attract each other they will unite, and together form a mixt or compound.  DPROP. IiI When a given body is attracted hy feveral bodies, without any difference among them in degree, any number of ſuch may he united with iĩt at the ſame time; but in many caſes, tho a body may be united with ſeveral others, it can he united but with one of them at the ſame time. PPR OP. V. Two bodies vhich do not attract each other, may he united together by the interpoſition of a third body which attracts them hoth. P R OP. V. Bodies which unite together lofe, by their union, moſt of the properties they had when ſeparate; and the compounds formed, have rather new properties, than thoſe of the bodies which are their principles. P R O P. VI. If a mixt conſiſts of two parts, and a third body is applied to it, which attracts one of its parts ànd not the other; and at the ſame time attracts that part more ſirongly than they do each other, a decompoſition will enſue, the parts of the mixt will be ſeparated from each other, and one of them vill form a new mixt with the body applied: or if a mixt conſiſts of two parts, and a third body is applied to it, which, tho it may he united with either of the parts, is however more ſtrongly attracted by one of them than by the other, while at the ſame time it attracts that part more ſtrongIy than the parts do each other; in this caſe too, if the condition in Prop. III. takes place, a decom-  poſition of the mixt will enſue, and a new compound vill be formed of one part of the mixt, and of the body applied. P R O P. VII. A body which of itſelf cannot decompoſe a mixt conſiſting of two ſubſtances, becauſe of the ſtronger attraction between them, may become capable of ſeparating them, if when it is applied to them, it is itſelf combined with another body, having a force of attraction towards one part of the mixt ſufficient to compenſate its own want thereof towards the other. : In ſuch caſes, a double decompoſition, and a double combination, enſue. S E CT. X. OF THE COHESION OF BODIES. P R OP. I. The coheſion of fluids, rain-water being the ſftandard, and 56 the degree of heat, is, at a medium, as follows. Alcohol. 16 Cows milE. 38 Oil of Olives. 20 Rain-water. 50 Oill of Saſſafras. 21 Sea-water. 56 Oil of Vitrio. 34 Quickſilver. c4 Ale. 36 c. P R OP. II. The abſolute coheſion of flexible cylindric ſo-  lids of one tenth of an inch in diameter is, at a medium, as follows. mn b Raw Lint. 37 Raw Hemp. 46 Horſe-hair. 43 Raw Silk. 5535 &c. P R O P. III. The abſolute coheſion of cylindric pieces of wood of one tenth of an inch in diameter is, at a medium, as follows. b ”’ Elm. 38 Beech. 50 Alder. 40 Aſh. 50, &c: P R O P. IV. The abſolute coheſion of cylindric pieces of metal of one tenth of an inch in diameter is, at a medium, as follows. m n Zinc mixed 18 Braſs 360 Lead 29% Silver 370 Tin 40% Iron 4505 Copper 299 Gold 500 Of the uſefulneſs of ſuch experiments; and of the variations which take place in making them. K  S E C T. XI. OF COREUSGULAR REPULSION. P R OP. I. There is a repulſion betwęen the particles of certain different fluids; as hetween water and oil, water and mętals in fuſion, &⸗. P R O P. II There is. a repulſion between the particles of certain different ſolids; as between the ſurfaces of poliſhed pieces of ſteel; or between the ſurfaces of convex glaſſes, &. P R OP. III. There is a repulſion between the particles of certain ſolids and fluids; as hętween camẽls hair and water; poliſh]d ſtecl and water, &-. P R O P. IV. There is a repulſion amongi the particles of the ſame fluid; as among the particles of common air; or among the particles of;water; or of mercury; when in a certain temperature. P R O P. V, There is a repulſion among the particles of the ſame ſolid; as among the particles of metal whon heated; and among the internal particles of glaſitears, or Prince Rupert's drops, &c. P R O P. VI. Corpuſeular repulſionſ ſeem to take place as ſoon as the particles are without the ſphere of their mutual attraction: to reach only to a ſmall  diſtance: and to decreaſe in mmòre than a duplicate ratio of their diſtance from the limits of that attraction. Of the theories of corpuſcular attraction; elective attraction, coheſion, and corpuſcular repulſion. S E CT. XiI.  F F I R E. OF THE SENSA TEONS PRODUCED BY FIEE. P R O P. I. The action of fire; When in a certain quantity,; excites the ſenſation of heat; and the diminution of that action, thẽ Tenſatiòn 6F cold. By increaſing or diminiſiing the quantity, theſe ſenſations hay bè increaſed or diminiſhed in various degrees; to denote which, different words are uſed. P R OP. II In eſtimating heãt and cold by the feeling, the judgment is according to the temperature of the parts of the humãn body which are applied; but if the ſame part is applied, or different parti when of the ſame temperãturè, the juſtgment is accordirig to the denſities of the hodies tò which they are applied, all circuriſtances being equal: lli P R O P: III. When firée moves in ftræight linds inm à certãin quãntity, and is modified in a particular mannet, it gives the ſenſation of light: And as there may E 2  be heat and no ſenſible light, ſo thar may be light and no ſenſible heat. OF THE ATTRACTION OF FIRE. P R O P. IV. Bodies expoſed to heating and cooling mediums gain or loſe, in equal times, quantities of fire proportioned to the temperature in the hotter body. Cor. 1. When the exceſs is conſtant, equal quantities are gained or loſt in equal times. CORr. 2. There is, after a certain time, the ſame heat; that is, power of exciting heat, in an air-pump vacuum, and in the adjoining air, water, wood, and metals. P R O P. V. DThe more remote a cold body is from a hot one, the leſs it is heated; and that in the duplicate ratio of the diſtance. P R O P. VI. Bodies of the ſame kind of matter receive fire, or are heated, in proportion to their ſurfaces, all circumſtances being equal; and they retain it, or cool, in proportion to their quantities of matter. P R O P. VII. Metallic bodies, by being reduced to'a calx by fire, are increaſed in their weight. In an open veſſel, one hundred pounds of lead, when calcined in a furnace, is increaſed to an hundred and ten pounds. One pound of Zinc acquires two drams and an half. Biſmuth is increaſed one fortieth and eight part. And tin, one twelſth.  In a cloſe veſſel, an ounce of tin calcined in the furnace acquires four grains and an half: an ounce of copper, forty-nine grains: and an ounce of antimony, two drams. In the focus of a burning-glaſs, one pound of regulus of antimony, when calcined, acquires a tenth part more; and a ſimilar effect is produced upon many other metallic bodies. P R O P. VIII. If a metal is diſſolved in an acid, the mixture is heavier than the ſum of the weights of the metal and acid. Or if a metal is diſſolved in an acid, and precipitated by a cauſtic fixed alkali, the calx is heavier than the metal. OF THE ELECTIVE ATTRACTION OF FIRE. P R O P. IX. Many bodies, tho of the ſame temperature, of the ſame bulk, of the ſame ſhape, and equally expoſed to the ſame degree of fire, do not attract equal quantities of it in the ſame time: as, for inſtance, the different kinds of woods: and metals compared to wood, and to one another. The celerity with which the following fluids attract fire is according to this order: air, mercury, petroleum, oil of turpentine, alcohol, ſpirit of vine, vinegar, oil of viriol, water, animal juice, white wine, milk, ſalt-water, aqua fortis, lintſeed nil, olive oil. P R O P. X. All circumſtances being equal, this is the order  in which the following bodies arè deprived of their fire, or cool: ũir, morcury, alcohol, oil of turpeatine, water, petroleum, oil of vitriol. P R O P. XiI. Bodies of the ſame kind, but of different coIours, attract different degrees of fire in the ſame time, and in this ordtr: black, purple, blue, green; yellow, red, white; the firſt being moſt heated. Cor. Hence the eſfect of cõlour in utenſils, cloaths, and garden-walis. P R O P. XII. iæ a porcelain cú be filled with water, and fixed in the mouth of a metallic veſſel, which ĩis likeviſe filled with water, and mude to boil upon th fire; the heat of the water in the veſſel will be greater than that in the cup. If; inſtead of the porcelain cup, different metallic ones are uſed, the heat of the water in the cups will ſtill be leſs than that in the veſſel, tho not in the ſamè proportion. CoR. Hence various methods of preventing the communication of fire to adjoining veſiels and of regulating its temperature. P R O P. XXIII. The ſuns rays, collected in a great quantity, vill inflame combuſtible matter placed in water, while the water will acquire a ſmall degio⸗ of heat. N2mnP R O P. xv. . If maſſes of metals, earths, woods, or fluids in veſſels, are encloſed in wrappers of. wool, cloth, ſxins, hair, or feathers, their heat will be preſerved much longer than if they were encloſed by àit, or water, to the ſame extent with theſe wrapptrs.  Coꝶ. Hence the effect of covering up ſnow, ice, plants; and of cloathing of different kinds to aimal bodies. : P R O P. XV. Eot. water cools ſooner in vacuo. than in the air,. hot iron more ſlowly. Chalk: is: ſom in heating, and, loſes, its heat: very ſoon. E R. OB. XVI. A body which attracts fire ſlowly, or ina ſmallquantity, may he: made to attract it: quickly, and in a large quantity, by its union with ai third body. OF THE REPULSION OF FIRE. P R O Pi. XVII. Fine is repelled by certain bodies; by ſuch, for inſtance, as are very white, and by poliſhed: metals and it ſometimes has fits: of attraction and repulſion among the particles of the ſame body. OF THE EXPANS ION OF FLUIDS BY FIRE. P R O P. XVIII All ſluids, are- dilated: hy fire, hutthe dilatatiom is; not according to their denſities: or cohęſionsPerhaps it: is. in a ratio compoundsd: of both, and of- their elective. attractions. The following fluids dilate, and: contract with different degrees: of celeritꝶ, according to the order in which they ſtand: Air, mercury, alcohol, oil of turpentine; vater petroleum, oil of vitriol.  VU2LP R O P. XIX. As ſoon as a fluid is made to boill, it is, if in the open air, in the ſtate of its greateſt expanſion. P R OP. Bodies; when in a fluid ſtate, are in general, Ieſs denſe than when in a ſolid. But frozen water is not commonly ſo, on account of the air with which it is mixed. The force with which it expands is ſo prodigious, as to overcome the coheſion of the ſtrongeſt iron veſſels; and to raiſe up the greateſt maſs of building. Cor. Hence the deſtructive effects of water lodged in trees, walls, or rocks, during a great froſt, even in temperate climates. P R O P. XXXI. From the degree of heat at which water freezes, to the degree at which it boils, the following bodies are increaſed in bulk in this proportion: lintſeed oil, ſeventy-two parts of a thouſand; ſpirit of vine, eighty-ſeven; and mercury, fourteen. P R O P. XXII. Water increaſes in bulk one eighty-fifth part, from the degree of heat at which it freezes, to the degree of heat at which it boils. Alcohol increaſes one ninth part from the degree of heat at which water frezees, to the degree of heat at which alcohol boils. Mercury increaſes four parts of fifty-one from the degree of heat at which water freezes, to the degree of heat at which mercury boils. And mercury is leſſened in bulk one tenth part from its boiling to its freezing point.  OF THE EXPANSION OF SOLIDS BY FIRE: P R O P. XXIII. Solid bodies are dilated by fire, and not in the direct ratio of their denſities, nor the inverſe of their coheſions. CoRr. Hence, and from Prop. IV. if a fluid is put into a glaſs tube, the fluid will ſink vhen the tube is firſt immerſed in hot water-. A Table of the expanſion of ſome metals, ſhewing how much a foot in length in each, grows Ionger by an increaſe of heat correſponding to I80°, expreſſed in parts, the unit of which is equal to the 10,000th part of an inch. Barometer Tube 100 Braſs wire 232 Hard Steel 147 Speculum metal 2532 Iron 151 Fine pewter 274 Biſmuth i67 Zinc hamimered 323 Copper hammered 204 Lead 344 Caſt Braſs 225 Zinc or Spelter 3513 Of the variations in making ſuch experiments, owing to the different degrees of purity, or to the hammering of the metals. P R O P. XX. Foſſil bodies, upon the firſt application of firæ dilate with fits of ſlowneſs and quickneſs; but afæ terwards more and more ſlowly, till they arrive ar the higheſt degree of expanſion.   P R O P. XXV. Vegetable bodies are contracted by fire, in various degrees, according to the water, or reſins, which they contain. Some contract very little if cut longitudinally; but are apt to warp, unleſs in large maſſes, or ſecured from moiſture. P R O P. XXVI. Some animal ſubſtances are contracted by firę; but others, ſuch as ivory, whalebone, hartſhorn; oxhorn, cat-gut, ſilk-ſtrings, dilate, or contract, and unequally, according to a variety of circumſtances. OF the cracking or ſplitting of bodies by fire. P R O P. XXVII. Common iron, but not fine ſteel, when fully liquified, is more denſe than when ſolid; as ſoon, however, as it is ſolid, it decreaſes in denſity, till it is cold. OF THERMOMETERS. Of the conſtruction, advantages, and diſadvantages of the air-thermometer; of the thermometer made by the Florentine Academy; by the Royal Society; by the Academy of Sciences; by Newton; by Fahrenheit; by Reaumur; by De L'Iſle; and by others. P R O P. XXVIII. In Fahrenheit's thermometer, the freezing of water is marked 32: the boiling of water in the mean weight of the air, 212: human heat, 96: the boiling of mercury, 600: the cold produced by a common mixture of ſnow and ſal amoniac; o:  the greateſt artificial cold which Fahrenheit was able to produce, 40 below o: the cold at which, of late years, by an artificial mixture, the freezing of mercury began was about 350 below o; and the mean term of congelation, 568. In Newtons thermometer, o correſponds to 32 in Fahrenheit's, and 34 to 2123 Which degrees are ſubdivided into minuter parts. In Reaumeur's thermometer, o correſponds to 32 in Fahrenheits; 80 to 212;5 250 above o to 6o0; and 187 below o, to 3950, In De LIle's thermometer, o correſponds to 212 above o; about I52 below o, to 32 above o3 328 above o, to 600 above o; 469 below o, to about 350 below o; and 500 below D, to 390 below o, When degrees of heat are mentioned in this hook, Fahrenheit's ſcale is to be underſtood. OF PYROMETERS. Of the conſtruction, advantages, and diſadvantages of the fimple pyrometer; of the lever pyrometer; of the pyrometer made by M. Graham, Muſchenbroek, Ellicot, Smeaton, and others. OF FUSION. A table of the degrees of heat at which fuſion is produced in ſome bodies. Tin aa 408° Regulus Martis 805° Lead 504 Iron 869 Biſmuth 460 Olive Oĩl 36 L æ  Honey 104° Fat of Fowlss 68° Pitch 186 Fat of Vipers 96 Reſins 240 Fat of Veal 100 Bulphur 244 Fat of Bullocks 104 Bitumen 300 Fat of Sheep I24 CommonButter 88 DBees Wax I40 Fat of Ducks 80 Sperma Ceti 180 Of the variations which take place in making ſuch experiments, and of their uſe. P R O P. XXX. A compoſition of lead, zinc, and biſmuth, in equal parts, may be kept in fuſion, vhen they have a degree of heat which will not ſinge paper. A compoſition of one part of lead, four parts of tin, and ſive of biſmuth, will melt at 246 degrees. And a mixture of lead, tin, biſmuth, and mercury; their proportions being as two, three, five, and one eight part; will melt with a heat leſs than that of boiling vater. P R O P. XXXI. The particles produced by flints ſtriking againſt ſteel are commonly ſlices of the metal which are ſhrivelled up, or fuſed, or vitrified. P R O P. XXXII. Some bodies cannot be reduced to fuſion by furnace- ſire, or with diſſiculty; but if another body is added to them, they may be eaſily fuſed. P R O P. XXXIII. After ſome bodies are brought into fuſion, they are capable of having their heat increaſed in different degrees, till they are fully ſaturated with the \  fire; and then they have a white heat, which commonly is not diſtinctly ſeen in twilight, till the degree of heat is 884. P R O P. XXXITV, By collecting the rays of the ſun, heat has been increaſed ſo as to produce the following effects. Clay, ſand, marble, jaſper, porphyry, fireſtone, crucibles, flints, animal bodies, and pumice-ſtone vere melted into glaſs. Gems became friable. Gold was vitrified, or diſſipated into ſmoke. Aſbeſtus was turned into a yellow ſtag. Copper ore was turned into glaſs in eight ſeconds. A piece of Roman patera began to melt in three. And in fifty, a piece of the Alexandrian pillar was fully vitrified. OF THE EVAPORATION OF BODIES. P R O P. XXXV. The particles of all bodies, when in open veſſels, are diſſipated by the application of fire in a certain quantity. A ſmall degree of heat produces this in ſome, while the greateſt is neceſſary to produce it in others. P R O P. XXXVI. If a veſſel of water is placed where the air has but little motion, and its heat is 60°, it will evaporate about eight inches of its depth in one year; and if it is kept at the ſame degree of heat with that of the aiv in a hot day in ſummer, it will evapo-  rate ahout the ſixtieth part of an inch of its depth in two hours. If it is expoſed to æ ſtrong wind, it vill evaporate much more. OF BOILING. P R O P. XXXVII. A fiuids, excepting air, that are homogeneous, |and that exhale without any ſeparation of their parts, may be made to boil by ſire, and then they are as hot as they æan be in the open aæ2ir; but by confining the ſteam, the heat may be increaſed prodigiouſly ; and the water will receive greater or leſs degrees of heat before it boils, according to the weight of the ſuperincumbent atmoſphęre P R O P. XXXVIII. While the air is of a mean weight, ether will boil at about 100 degrees of heat; alcohol at 1763 water at 212; ſpirit of nitre at 242; lixivium of tantar at 240; oil of vitriol at 546; lintſeęd oil Rd quickſilver at about 600. OF THE BURNING OF B0DIES. Of ſmoke, of ſlame, of calx, and of the decompoſition of bodies by burning. OF EXCITING HEAT IN BODIES, By the following methods fire is excited in bodięs ; and, conſęquently, heat in various degre⸗s-  P R O P. XXXIX. By mixing the: vitriolic acid with water in a certain temperature, with alcohol; vinegar, calcareous earth, pit-coul, ſal gem, ſal amoniac, oĩl of aniſeed; &e.: by mixing the ſpirit of nitre with lead, tin; iron; copper, braſs; &c. : aqua-fortis with alcohol, ſpirit of ſal amoniac, alum; borax, &e.: the muriatic acid with iron, copper, tin, boneearth, &c.: the vegetable acid, with ſalt of tartar, caleareous earth, &c.: water, with acid of vitriol, and iron: water with quicklime: and by agitating oils in common air. If ſpiritus fumans nitri is added to any of the following bodies; there will be æn efferveſeence and ftame; oll of caràways, ſaſſafrãs, guacum, camphor, pepper, cornu-cervi, cranium humanum, ungulae, &c. If two parts of aqua fortis; and one of oĩl of vitriol; are mixed together, and poured into an equal bulk of oil of turpentine, the mixture will Eindle into a flame: If large and equal quantities of ſteel-ſilings, and powder of ſulphur are made into a paſte with water, they will; after ſome time, break out into a flame, though covered up with earth. P R O F. XI. Heat is produced by vegetable bodies while they undergo the vinous fcrmentation; and by animal and vegetable bodies while they undèrgo the putrefactive fermentation. P R O P. XLE By attrition, heat and ſometimes ffame are pro-  duced; as by the rubbing of ſticks, ropes, &e. s and by the friction of the parts of large machines, when a fluid is not interpoſed. P R O P. XLII. Heat is produced by percuſſion, as by hammering a ſmall piece of iron, if it makes part of a large maſs; and by colliſion, as by the ſtriking of flint againſt ſteel. P R O P. XLIII. Heat and fire are produced by expoſing phoſphorus to common airP R O P. XLIV. By an aſſemblage of the ſuns rays, a ſire may be produced which will diſſipate the moſt firm, and the leaſt inflammable bodies: and yet the power which the rays have to produce ſuch effects increaſes in ſo high a ratio, that their heat at a ſmall diſtance from the focus, does not equal that of boiling water. Cor. Hence the effect of contracting the flams of a blow-pipe, and of a furnace. OF GENERATING COLD IN BODIES:  P R O P. XLV. By the following methods bodies are robbed of their fire; and, conſequently, cold is produced, in various degrees. By mixing the vitriolic acid greatly diluted, with nitre in a certain proportion, or with the volatile ſal urinae: by mixing aqua fortis with ſal amo-  niac: ſpirit of ſea ſalt with antimony: the acetous acid with all volatile alkaline ſalts: alcohol with ſal amoniac, and almoſt all eſſential oils: water with nitre, borax; ſca ſalt, blue vitriol, rock-alum, ſal amoniac, &c. P R O P. XLVI. If a veſſel containing water be ſet in ſnow or pounded ice, with which is mingled ecommon ſalt, ſal amonĩac, &c. as the ſnow or ice melts away, the water will freeze in the veſſel. Or if the whole be ſet upon the fire; as the ſalt and ſnow grow liquid by the heat, the ſame effect will follow. P R O P. XLVII. A great degree of cold, even to 40° below freez⸗ ing, will be produced, if ſpirit of nitre, or oil of vitriol, be mixed with ſnow or poundèd ice. If the ice ſo produced be mixed with the ſtrongeſt ſpirit of nitre, which has been cooled artificially, and if the ſame operation be often repeated, when the heat of the air is not greater than 20 above o, the cold of the mixture will be increaſed to ſuch a degręe,; as to freeze the mercury in the thermometer. The greàter the cold of the air, the better does the experiment ſucceed. When it was very great, the artificial cold produced in this mãnner, was, it is ſaid; between I500° and I600° below o. P R O P. XLVIII If a bottle of water, or wine, or ſpirif, &e. has its outſide moiſtened with water from time to time, and is placed in a current of air, cold will be generated in the bottle while the moiſture on its outſide is carried oſf by the air; and very intenſe M  cold may be produced, in a ſimilar manner, by the evaporation of volatile fluids, ſuch as wine, brandy, alcohol, &c. CoRr. Hence liquors and animal bodies may be cooled very much in the hotteſt weather; and ice may be produced. OF LATENT OR IMBIBED FIRE. P R O P. XLIX. If a piece of ice is in a medium, which contains a greater quantity of fire than is neceſſary to melt it, the temperature of the ice will continue riſing 1ill the ice begins to ſoften, and then its temperature will be ſtationary for about I5o0 times longer than the time which it took to riſe from 30 to 31 degrees. At the end of this time, the ice will be perfectly fluid, and its temperature will become progreſſive, according to Prop. Iv. If a pound of water, the temperature of which is about 329, is poured to an equal quantity of water which is at 2129, the temperature of the mixture will be 1229: but if a pound of beaten ice is mixed with an equal quantity of vater at 212°, the temperature of the mixture will be 47°. P R OP. I. IF water, at a temperature ſeveral degrees higher than 329, is expoſed to a medium conſiderably lower; when the water arrives at that temperature in which it can no longer remain fluid, it is ſtationary for near I50 times the time ſpent in paſſing  from 34 to 33 degrees. After all the water is perfectly frozen, it begins immediately to ſink in its temperature, according to Prop. Iv. If a ſolution of Glaubers ſalt is made at I80°, and kept at that temperature; if it is let cool, without being expoſed to agitation, it will cool without being cryſtallized: but if it is quickly ſhaken, it will inſtantly cryſtallize, the thermometer at the ſame time riſing ſeveral degrees. P R O P. LI. Unboiled water, if undiſturbed, may be cooled below the freezing point, and yet remain fluid; but upon giving it a ſhake, it will freeze immediately. When boiled water in the ſame circumſtances is cooled to the freezing point, a part of it is immediately changed into ice; after which more ice is continually formed, till the whole is congealed. P R OP. LII. If one thermometer is put into a freezing mixture, and another over it; after ſome time the firſt will ſink, and the ſecond will riſe as the freezing goes on. By the condenſation of ſteam, heat is generated. OF ANIMAL HEAT. P R O P. LIII. The heat of the moſt inflammable foſſils, and of the moſt flouriſhing vegetables, is the ſame with M 2  that of the bodies which ſurround them, as explained Prop. 1v.xVvII. Moſt living inſects have but a ſmall degree of heat above the air they live in; but the heat of a ſwarm of bees is about that of the human body. The heat of living fiſhes is in general nearly the ſame with the medium in which they ſfwim. That of the cetacea is 969. From 100to 108° is the vital heat of birds; and from 100F to 10 3 , of the common quadrupeds, 960 i is the heat of a young healthy man, whoſe mind is at eaſe, and body at reſt. There is a power in the animal frame of generating heat when cold would be deſtructive; and of generating cold when heat would be deſtructive. This power is very diſferent in different animals. Some of them are killed by very ſmall changes of heat and cold; but man can bear very great ones: he can withſtand the cold of ſurrounding mediums;; which, without this power, would ſoon freeze the fluids in his body: and he can not onl enjoy life between the tropics, but live for ſome time in places heated by art many degrees abovæ that of boiling water. OF THE HEAT OF THE EARTH. P R OP. LTV. There is, independent of the fhining of the ſun, a permanent heat in the bowels of the earth and ocean; which is different from that in the air, in  the waters, and in ſmall bodies on the ſurface of the earth: and this heat of the earth and ocean is not the ſame at all depths, eſpecially in the ocean. Co&ꝶ. I. Hence the mean temperature of ſprings, or natural fountains, is different according to their heights above the level of the ſea, and the magnitude of the hills from which they flow. The water below ice is often conſiderably warmer than the ice. The cold of the upper ſurface of ſnow lying upon the ground is o, while the cold of the under ſurface is a little below 32°. Hence ſome ſprings flow and ſmoke during ſevere froſt; while others in their neighbourhood are frozen. Some lakes do not freeze till the winter is far advanced; and ſome do not freeze at all. Hence lava retains its hoat a long time, and very unequally. And from the fluidity, tranſparency, and evaporation, of the ſea, joined to the above circumſtances, the mildeſt temperature of the ſeaſons is in iſlands and on ſea-coaſts, all circumſtances being equal. Cogr. 2. Hence animals defend themſelves againſt the coldneſs of the weather by going into the earth, or into the ſnow. CoRr. 3. Hence, in high houſes, the uppermoſt ſtory is the hotteſt in the morning, the lowermoſt is the cooleſt, and this temperature is reverſed at night: and when the chimnies are open, and without fire, there is a current of air from the rooms to the atmoſphore; and the contrary. P R O P. LV. Tho the heat in different places on the ſurface of the earth depends ſomewhat upon the diſtancè  of the place from the poles, and the obliquity of the ſun's rays; yet, except in high latitudes, it depends much more upon the height of the place above the level of the ſea, the ſerenity of the ſky, the length of the day, the nature of the ſoil, ſubterraneous fires, the denſity and moiſture of of the air, the winds, the neighbouring rivers, lakes, ſeas, woods, hills, and regions covered with ſnow or ice. : P R O P. LVI. The ground, if not very moiſt, is ſeldom frozen deeper than a few feet, even in northern countries. The air in Britain, A. D. 1768, was 2° below : at Peterſburgh, A. D. 1739, 30°; and, A. D. 1759 about 42°: at Selingenſkoy it has often been 55°: at Kirengens, A. D. 1738, it was at 113: and at Jeniſſa, A. D. 1735, it was at more than 120° below o°. P R O P. LVII. The ground eaſily acquires a great heat from the ſun's rays; and more or leſs according to its nature and ſituation. In many parts of Europe it has been heated to I50° and in ſome of the inland parts of Africa, it is ſaid, to 2129, or to the beat of boiling water. The air at St. Peterſburgh, A. D. 1734, was 98° above : at Leyden, A. D. 1750, 92°: at Utrecht, A. D. 1733, 94: at London, A. D. 1746, 85: at Senegal I10: at Podor, I34-  OF THE HEAT OF THE SUN AND PLANETS. P R O P. LVIII. As heat depends upon other circumſtances much more than upon the immediate rays of the ſun; and as we are ignorant of the nature of the matter of which the ſun and planets conſiſt, we can form no judgment of their heat; nor is the heat of the planets to be eſtimated by their diſtance from the ſun. THE THEORY OF FIRE. OF the diferent theories of àre; and a theory of it founded upon the above, and other experiments. S E C T. XIII. COROLLARIES TO THE PRECEEDING SECTIONS. Of combining, and decompoſing bodies by ſolution, fuſion, evaporation, precipitation, fermentation, putrefaction. Of painting, dyeing, cementing, ſoldering, etching; and the principles of various arts. Of the twiſting and ſhortening of ſtrings, ropes, cloths, &c. by moiſture. Of the capillary ſyphon. Of flters of different kinds. ? R OP. I. Several liquors may be mixed together, and if   filters are applied to them, the liquors may be drawn off ſeparately. Of the riſe of ſap in vegetables, and the ſecretions in animal bodies. Of hot ſprings, or hot natural fountains. Of inflammable exhalations. Of ſuffocating vapours, corruſcations, and exploſions in mines and caverns. P R O P. II If ãre is applied to ſaltpetre and ſulphur when mixed together, they will crackle, flame, or explode, according to the ſlowneſs and force with which the fire is applied. Of gun-powder; how made, preſerved, and fired to moſt advantage. P R O P. III. The quantity of air obtained by firing gun-powder is equal in bulk to 244 times the bulk of the gun-powder fired;3 when the air ſo produced is compreſſed by the atmoſphere, and reduced to the ſame heat. Co&ꝶ. If the elaſtic power of common air is increaſed four times by a heat equal to that of iron juſt beginning to grow white; and if the air from gun-powder is equally affected by heat; then in the inſtant of exploſion the expanſive force of this air is about a 16006 times greater than the preſſure of the atmoſphere. Of rockets, fire-works, and other uſes of gunpowder. Of pulvis fulminans, anrum fulminans, and the effects which they produce. 35 jy æ a ll iil n _ —  OF fteam: OF rhe aeolopile; and the uſes t0 Which i it hasi been applied. ltã P R O P. W. One ounce of Troy-weight of water makes 9250 tubic inches of fteum, of æqual elaſtic force with ihe ſame number of inches of common ai?; the weight of the ſteam being one-fifth part of the aeight of the air; and the ſteam of one cubic inch of water being ſufficient to exclude the àir oũt of a veſſel of 4600 mnches ĩn eapucity. OF Papins digener, ad the effects produced by i. Of earthquakes, and vulcanos; ànã ſhe cæuſes of them. Of configurations, and cryſtals; and the manner in which they are produced. P R O P. V. Configurations are as various as can be imagined ; but in the ſame circumſtances they are always the fame: P R O P. VI. The cryſtals of ſea-ſalt are cubes, many of which are pyramids, with a hollow quadrangular baſe; of nitre, parallelopipeds with ſix angles; o ſalt of laurel, partly hexangular parallelopipeds, and partly truncated pyramids; of ſalt of liquorice, double hexangular pyramids; of ſalt of white helJebore, rhombuſes; of vitriol, rhomboidals; of aIum, octogonals; of Iead, cubes: of tin, quadrangular pyramids; of copper, oblique angled parallelopipeds; of iron, rhomboidals; and of other bodies, other ſolids; the cryſtals of the ſame boN dy, if completely formed, being invariably the ſame. Of the vegetation of metals, and the reſuſcitation of plants. Of the figures on ſlates, flints, agates, Mocha ſtones, marbles; and the method of producing them by art. Of the forms of precious ſtones; and of columns of baſaltes, &c. found in the earth. Of the aſcent of vapour in air, and in vacuoOf fogs, clouds, rain, dew, hoar-froſt, ſleet, ſnow, hail, and other phenomena of air and water when mixed together.-  S E CT. I. OF ELECTRICS AND NON-ZLECTRICS. P R OP. I Every piece of matter is either an electric, or non-electric; or, which are ſynonymous terms, a non-conductor or conductor. To the firſt claſs belong amber, glaſs, ſealingwax, ſulphur, roſin, baked wood, ſilk, feathers, wool, hair, paper, leather, &c. To the ſecond claſs belong metals, and ſemi-metals, water, flame, all fluids excepting air and oils, animal bodies, common earth, &c. This propoſition is only true when the bodies are rubbed, &c. in the common manner. It will afterwards appear that electrics and non-electrics are convertible into each other by a different manner of rubbing, by heat, cold, &c. S E CT. II. OF ELECTRIC MATTER, P R O P. I. An excited non-conductor, or electriſed conductor when inſulated, is ſurrounded with a maſs of very ſubtile matter, which is the cauſe of the LN;  ſe le dit ———— — uuaſ  attraction and repulſion of Iight bodies, when brought near it 3 and the form of this matter is that of the body it ſurrounds. P R O P. II. The particles of this electric matter eaſily pervade the moſt perfect vacuum, and the denſeſt conducting bodies. P R O P. III. Tho electric matter be extremely ſubtile, yet it may be ſeen, if it runs oſf in a ſtream, or if it leaps from body to body, but not otherwiſe; and it may be heard, ſmelt, felt and taſed, it accumulated in large quantitiosCor. Hence light is ſcen iXx a harometer at the top of the quickſlver when it falls; and nono is ſeen when it riſes: and hence the eſfect of the military lantern. PR OP. Electric mattor is not created by friction, but collected; heing diffuſed thro all bodies. CoR. When we would accumulate electric matter, a communication ought to be made between the rubbers and the earth, or the walls of thæ houſe. P R OP. V. Fire and electric matter ſubſſt together in the ſame body. Water extinguiſhes fire; but ſerves to collect electric matter. Freezing is not retarded by electric matter, tho accumulated in large quantĩties. A bar of metal may: be heated at one end, while it is cold-at the other; bus ęvery parꝶ of it.is electrified qually.  P R O P. VIL. When electric matter ſtrikes thro a body; if the body contains phlogifton, or pure fire, in a certain quantity, the body will be dilated, or melted, or inflamed; and tho the proportion of the phlogiſton, of the pure fire, and of the electric matter ſhould be varied, the ſame effects will follow. P R O P, VII. By the electric fock, the calees of metals may be reſtored to their metalline ſtate: and gold and ſilver may be calcined; ſome of the particles being converted into a tranſparent ghaſi, and ſome tinged with various colours. S E CT. IiI. OF THE ATTRACTION OF ELECTRIC MAFTER. P R OP. I. The particles of electric matter are ſtrongly attracied by other bodies. P R O P. II. Tho electric matter is ſtrongly attracted by other bodies, yet it would feem that in its paſſage thro them, it brings none of their particles along with it; for it has the ſame acidulous phoſphornẽ taſte, and ſmell, vhatever be the body thro which it paſſes. Con. Hence electric matter cannot bè made a vęhicle to perfumes or medicines, in the vay that ſome have aſſerted. P R O P. IllI thę furfacę of  body, on whichv electric mat-  t  r  ter is accumulated be round, large, and ſmooth, it will continue electrified till the ſurrounding bodies attract the electric matter. If it has an edge, or angle, the electric matter will paſs off ſpeedily. If it has a ſharp point, or points, it is with diſficulty that it can be electrified at all. P R OP. IV. Pointed non-electrics ſerve to draw off, as well as to throw off, electric matter. P R OP. V. When electric matter is drawn off by non-eleetric points, it is ſlowly, and without noiſe. When it is drawn off by round or hlunt bodies, ĩt is ſuddenly, and with an exploſion, or ſnap. CoRr. A great quantity of electric matter may be drawn off by a ſharp wire, without producing any ſenſible effect. P R O P. VI. If electric matter paſſes thro a body or bodies, which are good conductors, and the parts of which are in cloſe contact with each other, its motion ſeems to be inſtantaneous, tho the diſtance be very great: hut if the bodies are not good conductors, or if they are at ſome diſtance from each other, its velocity may be meaſured; and its power is diminiſhed. P R OP. VII. An increaſe of ſurface makes a body capable of receiving a greater quantity of electric matter; and it would ſeem in proportion to the ſurface. B R O P. VIII Excited non-conductors, or electriſed conduc-  tors, retain their electric matter, till conductors that have leſs are brought near them; and then it is equally divided. S5 E CF. V. OF THE ELECTIVE AFTRACTION OF ELECTRIC MATTERi P R OP. L The following bodies attract, or conduct, electric matter according to the order in which they ſtand. CLass I. Iron, braſs, copper, ſilver, gold, lead. CuLass II. Bifmuth, nickel, Zinc, antimony, arſenic, cobalt. CLass III. Metallic ores, ſemi-metallic ores. CLass IV. Charcoal, water, oil of vitriol, ſpirit of wine, animal bodies, moĩſt vegetables, flame. CLASS V. Common-earth, common ſtone, glue, &c. P R O P. II. The following bodies are placed according to their non-attracting, or non-conducting qualities; the firſt in order being the moſt perfect nonconductors- CL as8 I. Diamond, ſapphire, carbuncle, opal, amethyſt, beryl, cryſtal, glaſs, and all vitrifications. CLass II. Venico talc, garnetsubies, topazes, hyacinths.  Ct ass T. Amber, ſealing-wax, baked wood, porcelain-veſſels, ſilk, air, carnelians, reſins, ſul⸗ phur, ſalts, ſugar, pitch, gums, jett, oils, ether, marble. CLass IV. Down, wodl, feathers, hair, parchment, horns, bones, whale-bone, ſhelis. CLAsS V. Dry willow, mãhogany, aſh; elm, oak, boxwood, ebony, &e. Of the differences in the conducting, and nonconducting powers of the bodiès in the above claſfes; according às they are more or leſs pure; and according to other circumſtances: P R O P. III When electric matter paſſes thro a body or hodies, and comes in its paſſage to a body or bodies, the conducting powers of which are different, it will run thro that body which is the moſt perfeœt conductor tho its courſe ſhould be much longerBut if the paſſage thro the leſs perfect conductor is very ſhort, it will ſometimes go thro ſhe ſeſs perfect conductor entirely, and ſometimes divide itſelf between both. If it is to go thro a homogeheous body, or thro bodies that are equally good conductors, it will take the ſhorteſt pafſage.Coxr. 1. A man may hold a piece of metal in his hand, and a quantity of electric matter will paſs thro the metal, without his receiving the leaſt fhock, provided the quantity is not very great, nor the piece of metal very ſmallCor. 2. Hence, and from Prop. vI. Sect. inielectric matterunay be made to paſs thro cãaſcades, lakes, or the ocean, tho violently agitated; anẽ  hence ſpeedy intelligence may be given to perſons at a great diſtance. 5 E C T. V. OF PHE REFULSION OF ELECFRIC MATER: P R OP. I The particles of electric matter mutually and ſtrongly repel each other. Cor. A ſmall jett of water when electrified will ſpread out into many ſtreams; orF be divided and thrown àbout like drops of rãin. Water which only drops from a cãpillary tube; &r from a funnel, will run in à cortinued ſtream; or ſtreàms, when electrified; and the quantity that flows in ſtreams will be greater than that by drop⸗ in the ſame time. If the bore of a capillary tube is ſo ſmall that water cannot drop thro it, electric matter will make it run; and in a conſtant ſtream: If the bore of à tube thro which water runs is larger than rhat of the largeſt capillary tube, electric matter whll not inereaſe the quantity that runs in à given 8 E CF. VI.  THE THREE STATES OF ELECTRIGC MATTER. PR OP. I. While a body is in the natural ſtate; if any light  piece of conducting matter, vhether inſulated or not, which is in the ſame ſtate, is brought near it, the light piece of matter will neither attract nor be attracted. If the light piece of matter is in the plus ſtate, and inſulated, it will firſt be attracted and then repelled. If in the minus ſtate, it will be attracted. P R OP. II. If a body is in the poſitive ſtate, and the light piece of matter is in the natural ſtate, and inſulated, it will firſt be attracted and then repelled. If the light piece of matter is in the plus ſtate, it will be repelled, provided the plus ſtates aręe equal; if unequal, it will firſt be attracted ànd then repelled. If the light piece of matter is in the minus ſtate, it will be attracted and then repelled, provided the quantity received can overcome its gravity, and put it into the natural ſtate. P R O P. III. Wihile a body is in the negative ſtate, and the light piece of matter is in the natural ſtate, it will be attracted. If the light piece of matter is in the plus ſtate and inſulated, it will be attracted and afterwards repelled, provided the quantity given is more than ſufficient to put them both in the common ſtate, and to overcome its gravity. If it is in the minus ſtate, it will not be attracted, provided the minus ſtate of both is the ſame. The veight of the light body, and the heat or moiſture of the ſurrounding air often diturb theſe experimenis. -  P R OP. IV. Smooth glaſs rubbed in the common way exhibits the poſitive ſtate; reſins, wax, and amber, the negative. Hence the terms, vitreous, and reſinous, ſtates; vitreous, and reſinous, electric matter. P R O P. V. When an inſulated conductor is brought near an electrified body, it acquires on the part neareſt to that body a contrary ſtate; and on the oppoſite part the ſame ſtate with that of the electrified body. As the conductor is brought nearer, each of the ſtates will increaſe till brought within the ſtriking diſtance; and then a quantity of electric matter will go off from the electrified body, and ſtriking upon the conductor, will put it throughout in the ſame ſtate. P R O P. VI. When an electric body is brought near an eleetrified body, the electric body will acquire the different ſtates on different ſides. Theſe ſtates will increaſe as the diſtances decreaſe, till at laſt if ſome electric matter is communicated to the electric body, the electric body will not be throughout in one ſtate, but will often ſhew the different ſtates i in different parts, and in alternatè ſucceſſion. P R O P. VII The form of a pencil of electric matter paſting from ãn electrified body in the dark ĩs like a cone; the baſe of which is to, or from, the body, aceording as it is in a poſitive or negative ſtate. O 2  108 EL ECTR ICITV. 8 E C T. VII. OF THE LEYDEN PHIAL. P R OP. I. At the ſame time that the wire and the inſide of the phial are electrified plus, its outſide is electrified minus; and in exact proportion. P R O P. II Both fides of the phial cannot be reftored to the ſame ſtate hy inward communic ation or contact of the parts. It muſt be done by a communication formed without by ſome. conducting body touching them both at the ſamo time, or touching them alternately. In the firſt caſe both ſides are reſtored to the ſame ſtate, with the greateſt quickneſs; in the laſt caſe, by degrees. CoRr. A phial cannot be electrified. that is foul or moiſt on the outſide, from the cork or wire all along to the coating. P R O P. II As no more electric matter can be thrown into the inſide of the phial, when all is. driven from the outſide; ſo in a phial that is not electriſed, none can be thrown intò the inſide, when none can ęſcape from the outſide; and in a phiãl that is clectriſed, little can be deawn from the inſide, unleſs an. equal quantity can at the ſame time. iii in at the outſide.  P R O F. IV. The ſhock to the nerve;s of the pesſon who holds the phial, and touches the wire, is produeed by the ſudden paſſing of the electrie matter thro his body, in its way from the infide to the outſide of the phial; or by its acting upon the electrio matter coptainod: in his body. P R O P V. A phial may be electrified thro the ooating as well as thro the wire; and there will be the ſame exploſion and ſhock to the nerves, if the electrified phial is held in one hand by the wire, and the coating is touched by the other, as when held by the coating and touched by the wire. But a phial electrified thro the wire, will give the exploſion thro the wire: and one electrified thro the coating, will give the exploſion thro the coating, and in no other way. P R O P. vi. A Leyden phial cannot be charged if thore is the leaſt erack or fiffure in the glaſs, or if any part of it is not vitrified. P R o P. VII. The whole force of the phial, and power of givIng a ſhock, is in the glaſ⸗ itſelf; the conduſtors in contact with the two ſurfaces ferving only t0 give to, and recęive from, its ſeveral parts. Coæ. i. Hence, and from Prop. vui1. Sect: mnr. it is not the abſolute quantity of non-conducting matter contained within the phial; but, all things being equal, the quantity of its ſurface that makes it capable of giving a greater ſhock. r —mlli — 2iti —- m_——— ntuiuliũæ.  -  I1IO ELECTRICITVY. CoR. 2. The properties of the Leyden phial may be given to a pane of glaſs, or to a plate of roſin, by coating it, and by accumulating electric matter upon one of its ſides, in the ſame manner as upon the fide of the Leyden phial: and a quantity of air may be made to give a ſhock in like mauner. -CoR. 3. The phial will retain its charge a long time, if placed in dry air; or if its wire is covered bya non-conduẽting body. S E CT. ViIII. OF ELECTRIC MACHINES. Of the different methods of fitting up and exciting glaſs globes, glaſs cylinders, glaſs plates, and baked wood. Of prime-conductors, and the manner of inſulating bodies to moſt advantage. Of compoſitions of equal parts of roſin, ſhelllac, and ſulphur; of two parts of ſhell-lac, and one of Venice turpentine, &c. with the beſt way of exciting them.. Of jars and batteries; and the beſt method of giving ſhocks, or of ſending great quantities of electric matter thro bodies. Of electrometers made of a ſingle thread; of a thread and ball; of a thread, ball, and glaſs-ſemicircle; of a thread and two balls; of a quadrant and radius; of a a difcharges at different ditances, &c.  S E C T. IX. OF THE COHESION OF BODIES BY ELECTRIC MATTER. P R OP. I. If two panes of glaſs are applied to each other, if their external ſides are coated, and if the one is electrified plus and the other minus, there will be a ſtrong coheſion between them. P R OP. II. Wahite or black pieces of ſilk, when excited, adhere to bodies with broad ſmooth ſurfaces, tho ſuch bodies ſhould not be electrified. . P R OP. III. Two pieces of ſilk, one white and another black, when excited and brought together, will adhere together, and ſometimes with a force that will require many times their own weight to ſeparate them. S E CT. X. OF ELECTRIC AND NON-ELECTRIC BODIES, VHEN NOT RUBBED IN THE COMMON MANNER. P R O P. I. Cloth, flannel, wool, ſilk with or without oil, and leather with or without chalk, greaſe, amalgam, &c. have very different effects upon the beſt electrics; ſo that according to the rubber, the body will appear to be an electric or non-electric.  ELECTRICITV. P R O P. II. The following non-electrics may be excited like electrics, tho not ſo ſtrongly; if inſulated and rubbed gently againſt wool, or ſoft black ſilk. Iron, ſilver, gold, tin, lead, copper, braſs, &e. Marble, pebbles, agatè, gypſum, dried earth, unglazed earthen ware, &e. Pepper, cinamon, cloves, mace, garlic, onions, carrots, turnips, potatoes, beans, peas, oranges, apples, cane, leaves of vegetables, &c. Ivory, bone, horn, ſhells of ſiſhes and fowls, parchment, catrgut, tallow, &e. 5 E CT. Xi. OF ELECTRICS AND NON-ELECTRICS, àCCORDING TO THEIR TEMPERATURE, AND THE TEXTURE OF THEIR PARTS. ; P R OP. I. Amber, glaſs, vax, roſin, ſulphur, wood, air, &c. when made very hot, become conductors; and by varying their temperature, they change from the conducting to the non-conducting ſtate. Cor. Hence an electric machine cannot be excited, and the Leyden phial will not give a ſhock, vhen they are much heated. P R OP. II. If water is converted into ice in a ſmall degree of cold, the ice will econduct; if in a great degree; it will not conduct. The conducting power of charco⸗l ĩs diſfcrent aceording to the lieat employ-  ed in making it; that which was made with the greateſt heat being the moſt perfect conduẽtor. P R O P. IlI The ſurfaces of new glaſs tubes often conduòt clectric matter, but after ſome time loſe that property. If they are made red-hot; they recover it again, anũ loſe it as before: Cor. I. Hence electrie machines become good by uſe, tho they could not be excited at ſirſt. CoRr. 2. Tho electric matter commonly paſſes thro the ſubſtance of conducting bodies, yet it fometimes paſſes over their ſurfaces. P R O P. IV. Free ſtonè, baked clay, &e. have conducting and Aon-conducting fits, nęooæ ting to their temperature from 32° of heat tò 250°, P R O P V. Some conductors, ſuch às ſtone and brick, become non-conductors, when redueed to a fine dry powder: but the minuteſt filings of metals are alWays conductors. P R O P VI. etallic calces, and the ruſt of metals, are nontondactors; and ſome animal and vegetable ſolidWhen reduced to aſhes. S E C T. XiI, OF CHANGING THE STATES OF ELECTRIC MATTER BY CHANGING THE SURFACE OF THV BODY OR OF THE RUBSBEE. j P R OP. I. Vitreous bodies with smooth ſurfaces, when   rubbed in the common manner, are in the plus ſtate; and vitreous bodies with rough ſurfaces are in the minus. P R O P. II. If the poliſh is taken off part of a glaſs tube, the plus and minus ſtates may be produced by the ſame ſtroke of the ſame rubber; and if ſmoothneſs is reſtored to the unpoliſhed part by chalk, &c. the whole tube will electrify plus as if the poliſh had never been taken off itP R O P. IIIL. White ſils, vhen excited, electrifies plus, and black ſilk electrifies minus. P R OP. IV. A globe of ſealing wax, and a globe of glaſs with a ſmooth ſurface, communicating with each other, cannot be excited; if the rubbing of both, and if all circumſtances are equal. P R O P. V. Sealing. wax may be electrified plus by rubbing it with quickſilver or tinfoll. A ſmooth glaſs tube may be electrified minus by rubbing it acroſs a cat's back, or with a rabbit's ſkin. Amber may be electrified plus by a blaſt of air. Two pieces of plate-ghaſs may be excited by rubbing them gently againſt each other, and the one will be poſitive, the other negative. Almoſt all electrics will acquire either ſtate at pleaſure by uſing proper rubbers; and the rubbers are always in a contrary ſtate to that of the body rubbed.  S E CT. XIII. OF ELECTRIFYING BODIES BY HEAT WVITHOUT RUBBING THEM. P R O P. I. The lapis tourmalenſis may have each of its ſides, or both of them at once, made poſitive by friction; but it may be excited by heat without any friction; and one of its ſides C, will be in the plus ſtate, while the other ſide D, will be in the minus. A ſmall degree of heat will ſometimes produce this appearance; but it may eaſily be effected by plunging the tourmalin in hot water, and drying it afterwards. : P R O P. II. The tourmalin, not being electrical, will become ſo by cooling; but with this difference, that the ſide C will be in the negative ſtate, and the ſide D in the poſitive. P R OP. III. If the tourmalin, in a non-excited ſtate, be heated equally, and ſuffered to cool without either of its ſides being touched, C will be poſitive, and D negative, the whole time of the increaſe and decreaſe of its heat. But if the heat is not equally diffuſed, as by the ſudden approach of a hot iron, the above appearances will vary. P R OP. IV. If one piece is cut from the poſitive end of thę tourmalin, and another from the negative end, P 2  the pieces will have the ſame properties which they had before they vere cut off, But the oppoſite ſides of each piece will he plus and minus, according to the general property of the tourmalin; 'and the remaining part will have the ſame properties which it had when entire. P R OP. V. The moſt of theſe qualities belong to the Braſl topaz, and to fome other precious ſtoness. P R OP., VI. If a thin glaſs ball has ciectrie mattęr hovn into it, and is hermetically ſealed, it may be excited by heat alone; and air may be electrified plus and minus by changing its temperature P R O P. VII. Melted wax poured into a veſſel of glaſs or wood, is electrified negatively; and the glaſs or wood, is S electrified poſitively. PR OP, VIII. Chocolate becomes highly electrified by cooling in the tin-pans in which it is made. It ceaſes tõ be ſo by handling; but if melted again it will be eleẽtriſisd as before, eſpecially it ꝶil i is addod to it. Sulphur is ſtrongly excited, i melted in an earthen veſſel, and left to cool upon conductors; but it is not excited if left to cool upon electries. If ĩt is melted in a glaſi veſſel, the ſulphur will be negative, and the glaſs poſitive, whether they are left to cool upon eleẽtrics or non-electries. If iĩt is poured into a veſſel of baked wood, ĩt will become pegative, and the wood poſfitive ; but if into ful-  ꝑpus or rough glaſs, it will not be excited at all. f it is poured into a metal cup, and there left to cool, it will not be excited till they are ſeparated; and then it will he plus, and the cup will be mi; nus. 8 E CT. XIVv. OF THE ELECTRIFVING QUALITIES OF SOME ANIMALS. P R OP. I. The hair upon the heads of moſt infants, and npOD ſome grown perſons, may be ſtrongly excited by friction. In the ſame manner, a quantity of electric matter may be produced from a cat's back, that vill inflame ardent ſpirits. A ſimilar property, jn ſome degree, belongs to ſome other animals, P R OP IThe torpedo, anguilla tremula, gymnotus, c. have the power of giving ſhocks, which are communicated and intercepted by the conductors and non-conductors of electric matter. It would ſeem that theſe animals can collect electric matter in the plus and minus ſtates upon the different fides of their bodies; and then diſcharge it, like the Leyden phial, in order 10 deſtroy their prey, or to annoy their ænemies ; bus ſome things relating to this power require farther inveſtigation.  S E C T. XV. OF ELECTRIFYING MAGNETS AND IRON.. P R OP. I. Electric matter and magnetic matter may ſubſiſt together in the ſame body. The accumulation of electric matter aſfects not the ſtrength of the magnet in ſuſtaining weights, or in acting upon needles, allowance being made for the attractive and repulſive power of electric matter when acting upon light bodies, as explained in Sect. ni. P R OP, II, A ſtrong electric ſhock frequently gives polarity to needles. If the needle, when ſtruck, lies eaſt and weſt, the end entered by the electric matter will point north. If it lies north and ſouth, the end that lay towards the north will point north, at whatever end the electric matter entered. The polarity given is ſtrongeſt when the needle lies north and ſouth, and weakeſt when it lies eaſt and weſt. P R OP. III. By an electric ſhock the poles of a magnetie needle are ſometimes reverſed; and ſometimes the magnetic power is totally deſtroyed-  5 E CT. XVI. OF ELECTRIFYING LIVING VEGETABLES AND ANIMALS. P R OP. I. The growth of ſmall vegetables is often quickened by electrifying them plus; and the contrary eſfect is produced by electrifying them minus. P R OP. II. The pulſe of animals is commonly quickened, and their perſpiration increaſed, by electrifying them plus for ſome time. P R OP. III. Obſtructions are often removed, and diſeaſes ſometimes cured, by electric ſparks and electric ſhocks; in giving which the following rules ſhould be obſerved. The ſhocks ſhould be very ſmall at firſt, and ſhould never be ſo great as to give terror to the patient. In moſt caes they ſhould be gentle and frequent. They ſhould be given to palſicd limbs without paſſing thro the vitals; and, when this rule is obſerved, they may be greatly increaſed. They ſhould be continued for a long time, and ſhould be accompanied with proper medicines. P R OP. IV. By great electric ſhocks, vegetables may be blighted, or killed; and animals may be ſtruck blind, or diſabled in their limbs, or inſtantly deprived of life.  S E C T. XVII. bF ELECTRIC METEORS: P R OP. I. Lightning ſometimes moves in ſtraight lines; ind ſometimes in angular directions. Its colour is fometimes white, and ſometimes red. It is conducted by metals, water, &e. and is not conducted by glaſs, wax, &e. It ſcorches ſome bodies, burns others, and fuſes metals. ſt diſſipates or ſtrips off gilding without hurting the paper or painted wainſcot, to which it ĩs ixed. It makes holes in ſome bodies, and rends or diſfipãtes others. It gives polarity to iron, reverſes the poles of magnetic needles, or deſtroys the magnetic power entirely. It blights and kills vegetables, ſtrikes animals blind; diſables thei? Iimbs, or deprives them of life in b moment; bringing on a ſpeedy putrefaction. ftrikes the higheſt ànd mòſt pointed bodies; ften accompanied with the noiſe ealled ThonderP R O P. . Elecric mãtter moves in the ſame mãnner, acccording as it goes thro a ſhort ſpace, or among bodies irregularly diſpoſed, or th?ro a conſiderable maſs of air; and ĩts colour ĩ like that oF lightning. P R O B. III Lightning and electrie matter are conducted and rnot conducted by the Tame kinds of bodies, ſee Sectrv; and they inflame the ſame kinds of bodies; and Fuſe metals, ſee Sect- 11-  PROP. IV. BY a ſhock of electric matter gold-leaſ may be difpated, or fuſed, without burning the paper, or painted boards with which it is in contact. Holes may be ſtruck thro bodies; wvood may be ſhivered; glaſs may be broken; water, ſtone, lime, &e. may be diffipated; earth may be torn up; gun-powder ſired, &c. P R O P. V. That the eſffects of electric matter upon iron; magnets, and vegetables, are ſhe ſame as the effect of lightning upon them, appears from Sect. xv and xvVI/ P R O P. VI. Animals may be ſtruck blind by an electrie ſiock, or diſabled in their limbs, or killed inftantly; and the putrefaction of animal bodies is haſtened by great ſhocks of electric matter. P R O P. VII. Electric matter ſtrikes the higheſt, or moſt advaneed, and the moſt ponted bodies; and it makes a noiſe as loud as thunder, in proportion to it? quantity, and the maſs of air which it agitates. P R O P. VII. If a wire or rod of metal with a ſharp polnt is fupported by non-conductors, and raiſed higher fhan the neighbouring hills, trees, or edifices, it will be electrified by the thunder-clouds which comve near it. The Leyden phial may be charged, and every electrical experiment may be performed by it, in the ſame manner as with common elec” tric matterO-. -  A boys kite or dragon, with a long wire, may be made to anſwer the ſame purpoſe. P R O P. IX. A pointed pyramidical rod of metal erected on buildings, and communicating thro non-conductors, or leſs perfect conductors, with the moiſt earth, will either prevent a ſtroke of lightning altogether, or conduct it into the earth, ſo as thatthe building will receive no harm. A rod of metal may be fitted up in ſhips, which, in the ſame manner, will prevent their being hurt by lightning. Cautions to be obſerved in raiſing kites, andthunder-rods, for experiments, or the ſecurity of houſes. Of the ſecureſt places in the fields, and in houſes, againſt the deſtructive effects of lightning. P R O P. X. Some electric matter may be drawn almoſt always from the air by a boys kite, if the wire islong: and the clouds ſeem to be often plus or minus with regard to the trees, houſes, or hills towhich they give lightning, or from which they receive it. P R O P. XI. The prodigies that have been ſeen on the ſpears and helmets of ſoldiers, the commozants on the maſts of ſhips, and the lambent fires on the tops of ſeeples, ſeem to have been produced by ſmall quantities of lightning; and they may be imitated: by electric matter.  P R O P. XII. If electric matter and inflammable air are throma upon moiſt earth, over which a gentle wind paſſes, the appearances will be the ſame with thoſe of the ĩgnis fatuus. P R O P. XIII. If electric matter is made to paſts thro a very rare atmoſphere, it will dart from place to place with the appearances of the aurora borealis and auſtralis, commonly called ſky-ſtreamers; and it will reſemble what is called a ſhot or fallen ſtar, if ſome moiſture or inflammable air is interſperſed. P R O P. XIV. During a bright and ſtrong aurora borealis in high latitudes, a noiſe is heard, and the magnetic needle rambles from its uſual poſition. A ſimilar noiſe, in a ſmall degree, may be produced by the ruſhing of electric matter: and a ſimilar rambling may be given by electric matter to a magnetic needle; and to a needle of the ſame conſtruction that is not magnetical. Of great balls of fire which are ſometimes ſeen in the atmoſphere, S E C T. XVIII. THEORIES IN ELECTRICITY. Of the different theories in electricity. A review of the experiments which prove the above propoſitions, together with others upon which a theory of the electrical phenomena is founded, Q2  S E CT. I OF MAGNETS, AND THEIR ATTRACTIVSE QUALITE. lilll P R OP. I. Magnets attract iron, and no other body or boies vhatever, unleſs they have a mixture of iron. P R OP. II. The action and re-action of the magnet and i iron are mutual and equal. P R OP, III. There are two parts in a magnet called its ſouth and north poles, which attract vith greater force than its  othæ parts. PR OP. V. If two magnets are brought near each other, and have a free motion, they will mutually attract each other, vhen their poles are of a contrary denomination. But if their magnetic powers are very uncqual, and if they are brought very near each other, they will attract, tho of the ſame denomination. æ, P R OP. V. The attractive power of the magnet ſeems to decreaſe as the ſquares of the diſtances increaſe; but this law is ſubject to rea: variations from different cui;- Hllt  DPROP. VI. The attraction of the magnet is not hindered nor increaſed by the interpoſition of any body whatever; excepting ſuch as are magnetical, or fuch as are eapable of being made ſo. 5 E CT. II. OF THE REPULSIVE POWER OF MAGNETS. P R O P. I. If two magnets are brought near each other, and have a free motion, they will mutually repel each other, when their poles are of the ſame denomination. But they will attract, if their magnetic powers are very unequal, and if they are brought very near each other. P R O P. II The repulſive power of the magnet is ſubject to the ſame law with the attractive; and is equally unaffected by the interpoſition of every body. Bect. I. Prop. v. vI. li 5 E C T. I. or THE COMMUNICATIVE POWER OF THE MAGNET. P R OP. I. The magnet will communicate all its properties, without any diminution of its own virtue, to a —iiut —— —— nc. æ —  ——  ſmall piece of iron that is rubbed upon its poles, or that is brought near them. P R OP. II. Iron acquires and loſes the magnetic virtue much ſooner than ſteel S E CT. IV. OF THE DIRECTIVE POWER OF THE MAGNET. P R OP. I If a magnet has a free motion, one of its poles will always turn towards the north, and the other towards the ſouth. P R O P. II. If the magnetic virtue is communicated to a ſmall piece of iron, that is floated on water, or hung by a thread, or ſuſpended on a prop, it will have a directive power like a magnet; and it is called a magnetic needle. CoR. From the above properties of the magnet, it is eaſy to underſtand many tricks, or contrivan, ces, which excite wonder. S E CT. V. OF THE MAGNETIC COMPASS. Of the various ways in which the magnetic compaſs was formerly made for ſea and land. Of the points of the compaſs or rhumbs.  Of the common mariners compaſs, its conſtruction and uſe. Of the beſt ſhape of the needle for the mariner's compaſ; beſt cap, prop, caſe, and manner of fitting it up. S E C T. ViI. OF THE DECLINATION OF THE NEEDLEP R OP. I. The declination or variation of the magnetic needle at a medium, was at Paris, A. D. 1541, 7° Eaſt. A. D: 1550, 8, , E. A. D. 1580, 11° 30E. A. D. 1610, 89,  E. A. D. 1640, 3° o' E. A. D. 1664, o, 40 E. A. D. 1666, o°, . A.D: 1670, 19, 305 Weſt. A. D. 1680, 20, 4 W. A. D. 1686, 4, 30 W. A. D. 1692, 5, 55 W. A. D. 1700, 8, 17 W. A. D. 1710, 1, 59W. A. D. 1720, 13  W. A. D. 1726, 135 45 W. A. D. 1728, 14, W.; from which, to A. D. 1771, it moved to 19°, 45V.3 and from A. D. 1771, at a ſlower rate weſt; ſo that, A. D. 1776, it had the appearance, it is ſaid, of being ſtationary. The latitude of the sbſurrator at Greenwich, near London, is 51° 28, 40 N. and the longitude, of, o, o. The lat. of the obſervatory near Paris is 489, 505 14N. and the long. 29, 20 ' E. The latitude of the obſervatory near Glaſgow is 555 51, 36N. and the long. 4, 24,  W.  P R OP. II. The s3 variation at London, A. D. I 576, vas 119 i5' eaſt. A. D. 1613, 6, 1 E. A. D 1622, 5, o E. A. D. 1634, 4° 5 E. A. D: ii54 oè, o. A. D. 1663, 1°, 22 weſt. A. D. 1672, 2% 3 W. A. D. 1683, 4, 330 W. A. D. 1692, 6, o. W. A. D. 1700, 8°, W. A D. 1730, 10 15W. A- D. 1744, 14% 15 'W. A. D. 1756, 15, 155W. A. D. 1759, 177W. &c. The mean of the annual variation for ſeveraſ years paſt in London has been about 10W.; but A. D. 1774, it was 21 I6'W. A. D. 1715,210 , 43 W.; and A. D. 17736, 219547. W. P R O P. IiI. The mean variation at Glaſgow, A. D. 1775/ was 24°, a1 W. and, A. D. 1776, 24°, 3 w At Stromnsſ, A. D. 1774, lat. 58°, 59N. anẽ Jong. 3 30W. it was, by the azimuth compaſ5, 244W. In Hudſon's Straits, A. D. 1774, lat. 620, 3N. and long. 69° W. it was 43W. A. D1774, lat. 6° 25 N. and long. 719, 350 W. it was 44W. A. D. 17735 lat. 79°, 56 N. and Iong. 10°, 2, 30 E. it was 20°, 38 W. A. D. 1774, lat. 56°, 53'N. and long. 85°, 22 W. it was 24W. A. D. 1774, lat. 310 20 N. mmd long. 820, 30 W. it was r7? W. P R OP. IV. Near the equator, in long. 40° Eaſt, the higheſt variation from A. D. 1700, to A. D. 17565 was I7°, 5 Weſt; and the leat 16, 30W. In lat. 15 N. and long. 6W. the variation  vas conſtantly 5°E. In lat. 10 South, and long 5° E. the variation decreaſed from Im W. to 7 15 W. In lat. 10S. and long. 5W. it increaſed from 20, 15, to 129, 45W. In lat. 15° N. and long. 200W. it increaſed from 1°W. to 9°W. In the Indian ſeas the irregularities were greater, for A. D. 1700, the weſt variations ſeem to have decreaſed regularly from long. 500E. to long. 100°E.: but A. D. 1756, the variation decreaſed ſo faſt, that there was eaſt variation in long. 80°, 85° and 90° E.; and yet, in long. v5, and 100° E. there was weſt variation. P R O P. V. A.D. 1772, in lat. 209, 25 South and long. 22° t 7 W. the variation was 35 166 W. In lat. 25°, i25 and long. 235, 31 W. it was 1° , 1 W. In Iat. 409 20'S. and long. 16, 27 W. it was 19°, 55 wert. A. D. 1773, in lat. 61 9S. and long. 31°, 42'E. it was 28°, 19 W. In lat. 60, 58'S8. and Iong. 97°, 26' E. it was 40, 31W. In lat. 569, 5'S. and long. 506, 10'E. it was 13°, 4, 350W. In lat. 46 23 30 S. and long. 163° 55 E. it was 12° , 7 E. In lat. 209 , 58 305. and long. 192°, 5 E. it was 9°, 44E. In Iat 519 40S. and long. 225, 6E, it was; 7 , 30 E. In lat. 565 57, 5. and jong. 240, 47 E. it was -0 , 235, 30 E. In It. 700, 20'S. and long. 253, 3 E. it was 24°, 46'E. A. D. 1774, in lat. 15, 6S and long. 241°, E it was 25, 31, 30 E. In lat. 100, 35S. and long. 2209, 8 E. it was 5°, 28' 30 E. . In lat. R   200, 1, 30 S. and Iong. 184°, 40E. it was 11° 8, 15 E. In lat. 20, 52 S. and long. 166, E. it was 10°, 127 E. A. D. 1775, in Iat. 58°, 17S. and long 3489, 16E, it was o, 16 W. In lat. 2°, 24N. and long. 32 127 W. it was o, 14, 45W. In lat. 50°, &, 30 N. and long. 4,  W. it was 19°, 28 W. Of the variations collected by Halley; and by Dodſon and Mountaine: and of variation-charts and books. Of the variation compaſs; and the beſt manner of fitting it up. Of the azimuth compaſs, and its uſe. Of the importance to philoſophy and navigation, of obſerving the variations in different parts of the earth. S E CT. VII. OF THE INCLINATION OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE. P R OP. I The inclination or the dip of the magnetic needle at London, A. D. 1576, was 71°, 50. A. D. 1653, 729 45. A. D. 1676, 73°, 305. A. D. 1720, 75 1?. A. D. 1723, about 759, &c. P R O P. II. The inclination is different in the ſame Iatitude and longitude, according to the length of the nee-  dle, its weight, its magnetic power, and the manner in which it is ſuſpended. CoRr. Hence, tho there are tables of the inclination of the needle in a great variety of latitudes and longitudes, yet they are of little value; becauſe no accurate account is given of the needles that were uſed. The obſervers of late years, however, have ſtudied to remedy this imperfection. Of the beſt method of conſtructing the dipping needle, and of making obſervations with it. P R OP. III. The mean dip of the needle at London, A. D. 1775, was 72°, 30; and A. D. 1776, the ſame. At Glaſgow, A. D. 1775, 7155, 30; and, A. D. 1776, the ſame. At Stromneſs, A. D. I 774,75 45; and in Hudſon's Straits, 8 29, 40'. A. D. 1773, in lat. 52, 17 N. and long. 1°, 45, 15 E. it was 73°, 22. In lat. 65, 17 N. and long. 2°, 42' 30' E. it was 73 30. In lat. 70% 45N. and long. about o°, 22, o E. it was 77°, 52. In lat. 74, 5'N. and long. 99, 43'E. it was 799, 30. In lat. 790, 59N. and long. 11°, 4', 30" E. it was 80°, 26. In Iat. 78°, 36'N. and long. about 10, 17, 30 E. it was 80°, 45. In lat. 80, 29N. and long. about 11°E. it was 81°, 52'. A. D. 1775, the dip at Albany Fort, lat. 529, 24N, and long. 83°, 3050 W. was 79°, 17, 7'. In lat. 56°, 53'N. and long. 85°9, 227 W. it was 82, 25'. R 2  P R O P. IV. A. D. 17735, in lat. 15 55 South, and Iong. 55 49W. the mean of the ais vas 11° 20 45. A. D. 773 in Iat. 38°, 21, 30 S. and long. 1789, 83, 45 E. it was 62° 5 40". In lat. a5° , a7, 56 S. and long. 166°, 2', 46 E. ĩt was 705 /4, 5. A. D. 1774 in lat. 550, 21 s7 S. and long. 2899, 57, 9" E. it was 66°, 5, 2 Of the uſe oſ the dipping -u in philoſophy and navigation. S E C T. VIII. E OF THE DAILY VARTATION OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE. P R O P. I. From about eight or nine dclock in the morning, every day, a good variation needle moves veſtward till about two or three o'clock afternoon; vhen it becomes ſtationary for ſome time; after which it gradually comes back to its former fituation, or near it, by the next morning. P R OP. II. This daily variation, which is commonly from c to 14', is greater in ſummer than in winter; and it is moſt remarkable in ſudden changes of the temperature of the weather, or of the place where the needle is kept.  P R O P. III There is a daily variation in a fine dipping needle, which is ſimilar to that of the horizontal needle; but the daily variation of the firſt ſeems not to be ſo great as that of the ſecond. S E CT. IX. OF DIMINISHING AND IMPROVING THE VIRTUE OF MAGNETS. P R OP. I A magnet is diminiſhed in power by not being Eept, or depoſited, in ſuch a manner as that its poles are in the magnetic line, or line of variation; the pole commonly called the north pole being placed towards the north pole of the earth in the northern hemiſphere; and the pole commonly called the ſouth pole being placed towards the ſouth pole of the earth in the ſouthern hemiſphere. Of the contrary manner of naming the poles of a magnet, in conſequence of the earths belng conſidered as a great magnet. P R OP. II. A magnet will become weak, if a piece of iron is not kept in contact with, or near to, its poles. P R O P. III. Tho the power of a magnet is not diminiſhed by communicating its virtue to a ſmall piece of iron; yet it may be diminiſhed greatly by commu-  nicating its virtue to a piece of iron that is large, compared to the ſize or ſtrength of the magnet. P R OP. IV. Heat diminiſhes the ſtrength of a magnet; and if it is much heated in the fire, it will loſe its virtue altogether. P R O P. V. A ſmart blow will ſometimes change the poles of a magnet, and ſometimes. deſtroy the magnetic power entirely. P R O P:. VI. By placing magnets near each other their virtue is often impared. But by a certain poſition of a ſmall magnet near great ones, its virtue may be improved. Sect. x. Prop. Iv. P R O P. VII. A natural magnet is ſometimes ſo formed, that it may be cut with a ſaw in ſuch a manner as that two or more magnets may be made out of it; and one or two of them may have a ſtronger virtue than the ſingle ſtone had before it was cut. P R O P. VIII. By armour a magnet is made fitter for experiments and uſe; and as the armour collects the magnetic power into ſmaller bounds, the magnet will, by means of it, give a ſtronger touch, and ſuſtain a greater weight. rr;m——u“m;  S E C T. X. OF CHANGING THE POLES OF MAGNETS. P R OP. I If a ſmall flat magnet B, having its poles at each end, is placed lengthways between two larger magnets C and D, the ſouth poles of which are oppoſed to each other; and if the north poles of two ſmaller magnets E and F are applied to the middle of B, then th the ends of B will have ſouth poles, and its middle will be one continued north pole. P R O P. II. The oppoſite ends of the magnet B, which are now ſouth poles, may be made both north poles; and the two ſides ſouth poles, by an operation ſimilar to the laſt. P R O P. III. If B is placed ſo as that the oppoſite halves of its two flat ſurfaces are in contact with the contrary poles of C and D when placed in the ſame ſtraight line; and if after remaining ſo for ſome time, the other oppoſite halves are placed in the ſame manner, but in a contrary direction, then the one half of the ſurfaces of B will be a north pole, and the other half a ſouth pole; ſo that the north pole of the one ſurface will be oppoſite to the ſouth pole of the other. ll P R OP. IV. If B is placed between C and D, ſo as to give it a ſtrong and regular polarity at the two ends; and  if its whole ſurface, except the poles, is touched with the pole of D or of E, but in a direction quite contrary to the firſt polarity; then the north pole of B will be ſurrounded with a ſouth pole, and its ſouth pole will be ſurrounded with a north pole; ſo that the edges of each ſurface will have a pole of a different denomination from that which occupies the middle. S E C T. XI. mn OF ARTIFICIAL MAGNETS. P R O P. I. A bar of iron will acquire the properties of the magnet by placing it for ſome time in a ſituation perpendicular to the ſurface of the earth; and in northern countries the end next the earth is the north pole. P R O P. II. The magnetic power may be given to a piece of iron by hammering it when cold in the magnetic line; or by plunging it in water, vhen red hot, in the ſame, or in a vertical poſition. P R O P. III. By rubbing pieces of iron againſt each other they become magnetical; or by breaking a piece of iron by bending it often in different directionsP R O P. IV. If ſeveral plates of ſteel are touched by a ſtrong magnet, if they are put together, ſouth pole to  ſouth pole, with iron interpoſed, and properly armed, they will make a good artificial magnet. PR OP. V. Artificial magnets made according to the methods of Mr- Savary, Dr: Knight, M Mr. Michel, and Mr. Canton. Tlii ĩlili PR P. vI. By theſe methods magnets may be made at a ſmall expence, which are much » ſuperior to any 1 that are natura. ES S E CT. XII. OF THE IMMEDIATE CAUSE OF THE MAGNETIC VIRTUE. P R O P. I The magnetic power or virtue ſeems to move in a ſtream from one pole of a magnet to the other internally; and to be then carried back in curve lines externally, till it arrives at the pole to be again admitted. P R OP. II. The immediate cauſe vhy two or more magnetical bodies attract each other, ſeems to be the flux of the ſame ſtream of magnetic matter thro them. P R OP. III. The immediate cauſe of magnetic repulſion ſeems to be the conflux and accumulation of the magnetic matter. 5  85 E C T. XIII. THEORIES EE MAGNE TIS M. OF the hypotheſes which have been formed in order to explain the phenomena of the magnet. A theory of its attractive, repulſive, communicative, and directive power; of the declination, and inclination of the needle, diurnal and annual; of artiſicial magnets; and of the other magonetical phenomena.  S E C T. L OF GRAVITY UPON, OR NEAR, THE SURFACE OF THE EARTH. P R o P. I. The power of gravity produces motion in bodies in the direction which the perſon who makes the experiment calls downwards; or, vhen that motion is reſiſted, the preſſure called weight: and all bodies, whether called heavy or light, or hard or ſoft, are ſubject to this power; and at all times. P R O P. II. The motion and preſſure of bodies, acted upon by gravity alone, i is in lines perpendicular to the horizon. CoRr. Hence the . uſe of the plummet in drawing lines perpendiculas, or parall}èl, to the horizon. Tho ſuch perpendiculars are not exactly parallel, ſee Prop. vii. yet if drawn in a great plane, and near the ſame place, the errors are ſo ſmall, that no human art can meaſure them. P R O P. IIL The motion of falling bodies is equally ſnift, whatever be their forms or their quantities of matter; provided they fall from the ſame height, and meet with no reſiſtance. 5 a  140 G R AVITATI ON. Coꝶ. I The weight of bodies is according to their quantities òf matter; and not according to theiæ texture, forms, or bulks. CoR. 2. The preſſure of bodies is according to the ſame law; but the èffects of preſſure upon the reſiſting body may be different, according to the baſes of the preſſing bodies, or the texture of the reſiſting body. P R o P. v. When bodies fall thro the ſame reſiſting medium, their retardations: are proportional to their quantities of matter, all ther circumſtances being equal. PRO P. v. The motion of all bodies which deſcend by vity, is a motion equably accelerated. li CoR. 1. Bodies thrown upwards loſe equal velocities in ; times.  CoR. 2. Whatever velocity a falling body acquires in a given time; if it is thrown perpendicularly upwards with the ſame velocity, it will loſe as much in an equal time. CoRr. 3. If a body is thrown upwards vith the velocity acquired by falling in a given time, it will in the ſame time loſe all its motion. PR OP. VI. In Britain a ball of metal ſalls about one e Engliſh foot, in the fourth part of one ſecond of time; about four feet, in half a ſecond of time; ſixteen feet and one twelfth part, in one ſecond of time; and about ſixty-four feet in two ſeconds of time. at  —  —-"t ————m  Cor. I. Hence the ſpaces paſſed over by bodies moving by gravity are as the ſquares of the times of their falling from reſt; and if the times of falling were increaſed, the ſpaces paſſed over vould be as follows. li Seconds of Feet in any Feet in the time. ſecond. whole fall. i I I16 2 3 c4 3 5 I44 4 7 256 5 9 400 6 u 576 7 I3 784 8 I5 l 1024 9 17 1296 1IO 19 1600 15 29 3600 20 39 400 28 49 10000 30 59 I4400 33 69 19600 40 79 2 5600 45 8 32400 50 99 40000 55 : 109 48400 60 1I9 57600 Cor. 2. Taking equal parts of time, the ſpaces deſcribed by à falling body in cach ſucceſſive part   of time, will be as the uneven numbers I, 3, 5,7, 9, II, &c. CoRr. 3. A body moving uniformly with the velocity acquired by falling thro any ſpace, will deſcribe twice that ſpace in the time of its fall. Cor. 4. If bodies are thrown perpendicularly upwards, the heights of their aſcent will be as the ſquares of their firſt velocities, or as the ſquares of the times of their aſcending. CoRr. 5. If a body is thrown perpendieularly upwards with any velocity; with the ſame velocity undiminiſhed, it will deſcribe twice the ſpace of its whole aſcent in the ſame time. P R OP. VII. The figure of the earth is proved to be globular by the following phenomena. The riſing and ſetting of the ſtars is accelerated to a traveller who goes eaſt, and retarded to one who goes weſt: but if he goes from ſouth to north, the north pole is elevated one degree for about every ſixty-nine miles and an half; and the contrary when he goes ſouth. When the hadow of the earth falls upon the moon, it is always circula. To the people in a ſhip which approaches a tall object, the higher parts of it come firſt in view; and, vhen ſhe recedes from it, the lower parts are the firſt that diſappear. A ſhip which continues to ſail in one direction ſurrounds the earth. If a ſhip ſurrounds it by going eaſt, while another ſurrounds it by going weſt; when they meet, there will be a difference of one day in the computation of time by the  people in the two ſhips. Perpendiculars to the horizon made by plummets, at conſiderable diſtances from each other, are found not to be parallel, but to tend towards a center. Cor.: Since the length of 1° or one part of 360°, meaſured upon the ſurface of the earth is ſixty-nine Engliſh miles and an half; the circumference of the earth, if a true globe, is 2 5,020 miles; and its diameter, 8,000 miles, in round numbers: or, more accurately, if the length of one degree on the ſurface of the earth is 25 French leagues, its whole circumference, if a true globe, is 9,000 leagues; each league containing 2,283 French fathoms; 830 of which make an Engliſh mile, or 5,280 ſtatute feet. P R O P. VIII. The power of gravity is different in different Iatitudes; and, by calculations founded on experiments is, in proportional numbers, as follows. Gravityy. Lat. North. Places. 100060 48°, 50 Paris. 10001I8 51, 28 London. 1001I26 64, 33 Archangel. u21I001375 66, 48 Pello. DN9929 41, 44 Rome. 999253 30, 2 Cairo. 99732 18, 27 St. Domingo. 99744 18, O Jamaica. 99533 14, 44 Martinico. 99533; 4, 56 Cayenne  Gravity. Lat, South. Places. 99631 , 2' P. Palmar. 99605 o, 9 Rhiobambe. 99802 o, 14 8S. Sea coaſt. 99643 o, 23 Quito. 99906 16, o St. Helena. 100036 34, 2 C. Good Hope. SBee Mechanics, Part vI. Sect. 1v. and v. P R O P. IX. It was found by meaſuring a degree of the earth at different Iatitudes, that the earth is an oblate ſpheroid; the axis being to the diameter of the equator as 229 to 230; that is, the ſemi-axis being about ſeventeen miles leſs than the ſemi-diameter of the equator. Of the manner of making this calculation; and of other proportions by different calculations. SCHOLIUM. If one diameter of the earth is &, 562,024 fathoms, or 2,874 leagues and three fourths; and if the other diameter is 6,525,376 fathoms, or 2,8 58 leagues and two fifths; then the whole bulk of the earth is 12,366,044,000 cubic leagues; its whole ſurface, 25,858,089 ſquare leagues: and, if we ſuppoſe its mean denſity to be equal to that of common clay, a cubic foot of which weighs about 140 Ib, then the weight of a cubic fathom is 30,240Ib; the weight of a cubic league, 359, 7785, 200, 000, 000 Ib; and the weight of the whole terraqueous globe, 4, 448, 994, o0ò, ”σ”, o”, o”, 0”-”, còIb.  GR AVITATI ON i445 P R O P. X. By experiments made at the level of the ſca, and at different altitudes from it upon the immenſe mountains in South America, it was proved that the power of gravity decreaſes as we recede from the center of the earth, and nearly in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances. Co&ꝶ. I. The difference of the power of gravity at ſmall diſtances from the level of the ſea cannot be perceived by the moſt acute ſenſe, or accurate inſtrument. For if the radius of the earth is 3000 miles; at the top of a mountain, one mile in perpendicular height, the diſtance from the center of the earth will be 4001 miles; and, therefore, the power of gravity at theſe diſtances will be as I6,000,000 to I6,008,001; Or, as I6,000 tO 16,008. Coxr. 2. If a hody on the ſurface of the earth, or at one ſemi-diameter from the center, weighs 3,600 Ib, it will, at the diſtance of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 femidiameters, weigh 9o0, 400, 225, 145, 100 IbP R O P. XI. By the attraction of the mountain Chimboraco in Peru, a plummet was drawn from the true vertical line ſo as to make an angle with it of eight ſeconds. This mountain is about two miles in height above the level of the province of Quito; and 3217 fathoms, or about 20, 280 feet, or near four miles, in perpendicular height above the level of the ſea. Tho it is the largeſt mountain in the earth, yet it is about 7, 400, o0ò, ooo of times Ieſs in bulk than the earth; and its attraction up-  on the plummet, if it is ſolid, ought to have been thirteen times greater than 8; but it is hollowed by ſubterraneous fires, vhich produce frequent volcanos3 and which, perhaps, have made the whole mountain. The mean effect of the attraction of the mountain Shehallien in Perthſhire, is 5, 8; and from its magnitude compared to that of the whole earth, it appears that the mean denſity of the earth is about double that of the mountain. The direction of Shehallien in length is nearly eaſt and weſt; its height above the ſurrounding valley is, at a medium, about 2,000 feet; and its higheſt part above the level of the ſea is 3, 550 feet. P R O P. XII. The eſfect of the attraction of the moon, and of the ſun, upon large ſurfaces of water in the earth, is diſtinctly ſeen; but the effect of their attractions upon ſmall ſurfaces cannot be meaſured. See Part viI. Hydroſtatics, and Part Xx. Aſtronomy. 5 E CT. II. OF GRAVITY IN THE HEAVENLY BODIES. See Part x. Aſtronomy. S E CT. III. THEQRIES IN GRAVITATION. Of the various hypotheſes which have beer formed concerning the cauſes of gravity. THE END OF VOLUME FIRST.  Ciczro de O Docenti cuique ſuo utendum judicio, ſua arridet methodus, docendi ratio, rerum ſeries, argumentorumque momenta, quae diſcentium ingeniis, ut juvenum captus eſt, optimẽ accomodata, atque ad ſenſus penitũs permanantia, ſibi videntur. Quumque noſtra methodus, iſtis quae nuper invaluerunt, non paullum diſcrepet; ſi quid ea aſſerat quod diſcipulis prodeſſe poteſt, eorum intererit, breve aliquod in manibus terere ſyntagma, quod rerum ſeriem, ſummaque diſputationum capita exhibeat; ipſisque omnia vivà voce fuſius explicata, in memoriam revocet. 