 Book VIII. OF VEGET ABLES. CH a ?P. Lpage I: Structure of Vegetables. General Obſervations on organixed DodiesConſtituent Principles of Vegetable Mat:erStructure of Plants 7he Stem.7he Bark The Wood.TLe Pith.The vaſcular Syſtem in PlantsReſpiration of Plantshe RootThe Leaves.The FlowerTh Fruit—The Seed. Bonnets Experiments. Perpendicular Growih of PlanisPlants tropagated by Slips, Suchers, and Oꝶ ſets. CH AP. II.page I2. Fluids of Vegetables. The Succus Communis or Sap.Veſſels for the Circulation of the Sat.Succus Proprius; its Veſſels and CourſeBonne?s Experiments on the Nouriſbment of PlantsDr. Halcs's Experiments on Fruit TreesBonnet's on Flowers, &c. CH A P. III.page 19. Functions of Vegetables. Perſpiration of PlantsCirculation of the Fluids in Plants Property in Plants of cmitting vital dir; of decompoſing Water Senſibility to the Sus Light:—Cauſe of the green Colour of VegetablesBonnet?s Experiments on Vegetable Perſpiration.Sexual 8yſtemGrowth and Nutrimeut of VegetablesMauures. Principles of Agriculture. C H A P. IV—page 37. Vegetable Subſtances. Of the moſt remarkable vegetable ProductionsViegetable Oxyd: Vegetable Acids Other eſſential Salis of Vegetables. CHAP. V.page 41. Of the more ſimple vegetable Compounds. Gumum ArabicGum Tragaocanth.Common European Gum Sugar; obtained from moſi VegetablesProceſi of mating Sugar. Manna.  Fat, or expreſſed Oils. Chocolate. Vegetable Wax.  Aualyſis of Oline Oil. Eſſential Oils  OF Cinnamon.  OF Balm, Peptermint, and Wormood. OF Lavender. OF RoſesOf Aniſeed —OF Parſley3. —O CamomileO Saſſafras and CarrawayOF Nutmeg, Pepper, and Mace. Ballams.Balſamn of ToluBenxoin anãd StoraxCamphor, ReA2 sins,  r ins Gum CopalCatchoue, or elaſtic Gum ecula—ZBriony. PotatoesSagoSalep. —Farina or FlourGlutenStarch Saccharine Matter of WheatBread Colouring Matters of Vegetables Principles of the Art of DyingArnotto.EBaſtard SagfronArehil.  IndigoAlkanet Root,Luteola. Madder. Wealnut Alder.Sumach, & eGallLates, llil CH A P. VL.page 61. VFermentation. Three Kinds of Fermentation—7he vinous or ſpirituousStirit of Wine or AlcoholEther.Acetous Fermentation Peutrid FermentationæOdbſervations on Putrefaction in general. ã Boo r IX, OF A NIM ALS. CH Aò. Ipage 74. Of Animal Matter in general. General Remarks on Animal BodiesDProducts from ihe Diſtillation of Animal Matter.Elementary Principles which enter into the Compoſition of Animal MatterAnimal AcidsDifferent Forms of Animal MatterTellyGlueLyriph.Further Products VFatrFibrous Paris. ll Cunar. Ipage 8i. OXOf the Blood. i Sanguineous and exſanguineous AnimalsWarm and cold blocded Animals Serum and Craſſamentum Polypuſes Analyſis, of Bloord Lymph—lron in ithe BlovdCauſe of the red ColourDRed GlobulesHeacſon's Experiments. Cn AP. IIL]page 89. Structure of Animals. : Sixe of ManHis erect PoſtureVarieties in the Struqture of Animals.Parts of the Animal Bodyg.. C H A P. IVpage ꝗ3. Structure of the Bones. Bones conſiſt of Fibres; cellular —The Marrow—Waſe of Bene in old Age Epiphyſes Perioſteum2~rogreſi of QſificationArticulation. lli ll Cu ar. V—page 97. Diviſion of the Skeleton, with the Bones of the Head. Dhe Steleton briefiy deſeribed EBones of the Cranium Bones of the  Faceof the Noſecf the Palate—be upper ond under V Vorm and Proportion of the Head Subſtance and Structure of the dBanes of the Head. Sutures. : C n A P. VLpãge 107. The Teeth. General Deſcription of the Tecth.InciſoresCaniri.Molares Enamcl cf the TeethGrovth cf the Teeth.The Face lengthened after Eight Years of Age.Varicties in the Teeith of different Animals. C u a r. VII.page iIo. Bores of the Trunk. Spine or Dact DoreHow ihe Head is mved. —The Thorax. The PelvisPrincipal Marks of Diſtinctioa betveen the Male and Femuale Steletcn. Cn a r. VIILpage 126. The Pones of the inferior Extremitv. The Os FemorisDZDones of the LegThe Foot. Cn a r. IXpage i126. The Bones of the ſuperior Extremity; with a brieſr Compariſon cf the Human Skeleton with that of Brutes. Dones of the HumerusOs BrachiiAntibrachiumZcnes of the Hand.Reſemblance beticeen the ſuperior and inferior Extremities. Ceompariſin betaveen the Human Sheleton and that of Quaãrutedãs. CH A P. X.—page 139. Structure of the Muſcles. Generul Deſuiption of MuſilesOlUſervations of the AbLà Fontara. QO  LeavenbochMuſiles compiſed of ſmall FibiesStructure of. digterent Muſeles.utageniſts. Muſcles of the Fætus. CH A P. XI.page 143. Muſcles of the Head. Musiles of tle F crchead. OF ihe Eye- lids OF the EyeOf tle Noſe.Muſcles of the Mouth.—IVhy the Face is the Iud æ to tht Mindemporal MuſclesMuſiles of the NechOf the J a. The TongueMaſcles of the Palate, &. CH AP. XII.page i51. Muſcles of the Trunk. . Muſcles of the Nech and BackOF tbe BreaſtOf ile RibsTEle. DiapbragmMuſiles of the dbdomenOFf the Pelvis, &. C n a rP. XIIIL.page 165. Muſcles of ithe inferior Extremities. Muſiles of the ThighDOF the LegOF the Foct' and Tees. CH A P. XIV.page 174. Muſcles of the ſuperior Extremities. Scapular MuſelesMuſcles of the Fore-armOF ihe Hand—Of the Fingers. C H A P. XV.page 199. The Cellular Subſtance, Fat, and Integuments of the Body. General Deſcription of the Cellular Subſiane; its UſesThe Fat; its Uſes.The ShinThe Organ cf Tc...h.he Epidermis Cauſe of the black Cclour of 1he AjricansCornsFontana’s microſcopic Obſervaticas on the Epi.lermisQuantity of Perſpiration from the Human Be4y. CH AP. XVI.page 204. The Hair and the Nails. Ojinions of Anatomiſts aviih reſeſt to the Nature of the Hair, Nails, & ec. Hair originates frem the Cell lar SubſtanceFecntanas Observations on Hair.The Nails. he Horns, Horfs, and Claws of Animals. CH ar. XVIL—page 206. The Cavity of the Abdomen. Contents of the AbdomenParis involved by ihe PeritoneumAParis not involved by itThe Peritoneumhe MeſentersThe Omentum.Dipferent in Man and Qua drupeds. CH A P. XVIII.page 209, The Stomach and Inteſtines. Geniral Deſeription of the Stomach.Lengih of the Inteſtines in Man and Quadrupeds.Small and large Inteſtines. h CH Aa P. XIX.page 215. The Liver, Spleen, and Pancreas. Nature and Situation of the LiverT he Gall BladderBile Ducts. Cauſe of JauadiceThe Spleen —The PancreasItis Uſes. Cu a P. XX.page 220. The Organs placed near, but without the Cavity of the Abdomen. The Glandulæ SuprarenalesThe Kidneys/The Bladder. CHAP. XXIpage 226. The Cavities of the Mouth and Fauces, &c. Tts PalaitThe PharynxThe OcſophogusThe Larynx.Tl GlottisThe Epiglotiis. The Windpipe. CH A P. XXIIpage 233. The Pleura, the Lungs, and the Thymus. Deſeriptien ef the Thax7The Pleura7 he DBreaſts2ZDreaſis of Infants contain Milb—The Mediaſtiuum7he Lungs.be Thynus. Cu a r. XXIII. page 237The Heart. The Pericardium6he Heart.—7le Ventricles and Avricles Their UſesGeneral View of ith: Blood-veſſils. CH a P. XXIV.page 243. Gereral Diſtribution of the Arteries. he Aorta.Vhe coronary Artery. The carotid and ſubclavian ArteriesTle intercoſial ArteriesBrounchial ArteriesThe Cæliac Artery.Meſenteric Arteries.ſcnal Arterics. Lumbar Arteries. Iliac ArteriesCrqaral Artery.Pulmonary Artery, &. CH A P. XXV.page 255. General Diſtribution of the Veins. Palimnary VeinsVena CavaVeins of ithe Hcad.Jugular ana SubelavianVeins of the ſuperior ExtremityVina AuygosVeins of the lower ExtremitiesCourſe of the Blocd tlhrough the abdominal Viſcera, the Liver, Cs. C H a P. XXVIpage 26æ. Structure and Courſe of the Lymphatics. o Kinds of Lymphatics. Deſcription of iheſe VellelsLymphatic GlandsLatealsThoracic DuctReceptacle of the Chyle, &e. CH a P. XXVII.—page 266. Of thæ Brain, &c. The Dura MaterThe Falx.Sinuſes of the Brain—The Pia MaterThe Cerebrum and Cerebellum.Source of the Optic Nerves The Pineal Gland. The ſuppoſed Seat of the Sou.The Medulla Oblongata Source of the Nerves7he Spinal Marrow. CH A P. XXVIIIpage 279. Structure and gereral Diſtribution of the Nerves. Origin of the NervesExtreme Subtility of the Nervous Fibres Ganglions Plexus Fontana's Microſcopical Obſervations on Nerves.Nerves from the BrainOlraciory and Optic Nerves, &e.Auditory Nerves, Se.Lingual Nerves, &c.Sympathetic Nerve.Nerves from the Spinal Marrow.Phren.c Nerve Dorſal and Brachial Nerves, &cLumbar aud Crural Nerves, &c. Sciatic Nerve. Cauſe of muſcular Motion—Its Dependence on the WillCContractile Povoer of Muſcles after Death, Extent of the Contraction of Muſclisddvantage Ji cm ihe Obliquity of certain MusſclosIſertion of the TendousVForce of Muſcles. C H A P. XXXV.page 353Animal Electricity. Aecidental Diſtovery oF M. Galvani. Adnimal Eleũ Iricity only excited by MetalsEx beriments on dead AuimalsConductors and Nonconductors ef this PoverExperiments cn the living SulbjectOn Earth Worms, &c. 4Analęy beiaveen this Poier and Eleũtricity. Ssloct of ibe Torpedo.Nervous Encrgy. CH a P. XXXVIpage 363. Senſation. Diſiculty of the SubjectSeuſation the Effict ef certain Relations eſtabliſhed by the CreatorObjects of diſterent Senſes. Influence of the Neres in conveying Senſitions to the BrainThe Brain the Repoſitery of Ideas. lſtinẽ of duimals as connected avith ihe nervous Syſtem Harmony of the SeuſesDuration of senſible Iupreſions The Five Senſes. : CH a Pp. XXXVIIpage 569. Touch, and ĩits Organs. The moſt extenſive of the SenſesOrgans of Touch.In what Manner it enables us to judge of the Qualities of BodiesYoung ſan couched by Cheſclden. DRemarhs on bis Caſe. CH a P. XXXVIII.æpage 37I. Taſte, and ĩts Organs. The Torguæ the Organ of TaſleeDeſcription of —0 aith Nerves Musel- s of e TongueHow taſting is performed. CH a Pp. XXXIX.page 373. Smelling, and ĩts Organs. Final Cauſe of this SnseLoſ2 acute in Man than in ſome other AnimalsDiſjerent allo frem theirs.Deſeription of the Organs of Scent. Compariſon betaveen this Senſe and that of Tapte. CH a Pp. XL.page 375.Hearing, and its Organs. Deſcrittion of the Ear Aduirable Structure of this Orgon for enveying and echoing Sound anner in avhich the Pulſes cf Air are conveyed to the Ear.Communication by the Euſtachian Tube Reaſon ahy Perſons avho liſten attentively open their Mouths Tte Membrana T mpani probal iLę great Inſirument of hearing. Cn A P. XLI.page 384. Sight. Deſcription of the EyeEyes of differem Animals—How Viſion is performed.How all ithe Parts of un Object are comprehended ly the EyeAa Iiiage of every Object painied on ihe Retina of each Exe, and yet ouly one Object perceivedCauſe and Cure of ſquinting The Senſe of Sight limited. By avhat Means ve judge of Diſiance.  State of the Sight at different AgesCautions ſor prescrving the Sight. hl j CH a P. XLII.page 404. The Geſtation and Birth of Animals. Varieties in the Production of AnimalsProportion of Males to Females—Growth of tha FœtusOwviparous AuimalsMode of Exiſience before Birth.Woeight of a new-born IntantMiſcellaneous Calculations couceruing the Proportion of Rirths to that of Deaths in Infang, c. Cuar. XLIIL.page 412. The Growth and Decline of the Body. Increaſe of the Body before and afier Birth.Diſproportion of the Parts decreaſes with Growth.W hat Parts firſt ceaſe to increaſe in Sixe. YouthManhood —Firſt Symptoms of DeclineAt what Peried old Age generally commences.Symptoms of Age.Cauſes why ihe Human Frame cannot be of long Duration. Boor X. OF THE HUMAN MIND. Cu a rP. Lpage 416. Of the Study of the Human Miiã. Our Kurleqe of Mind limited Confuſed & Metatl;; ſesPlan of 1his InjuiryVhe Firſit Part reſpecis the Inſtrumems and Modes of Action cf the Human Mind. —The Seccnd, the Spriugs or actiæe Povers7he Thir, the meſt important Quæſtions in Merali, &e. Cn a r. IIL.page 421. Of Perception. The Serſes the great Source of InformationDi linion betuvecn SenAation and Perception.Sæiſes correct each otherlie ſer the ſams Ojects produce ſnilar Percepiious in different Mern.ceas. / / i C n A P. IlL.age 425. O6f Ideas. dctas of Senſation and Reflection—-simple and complex,Medes and Subſtances. C H A P. IV.page 420. Of Aſſociation. Synehronous Aſociations.Succeſſive Aſſociations.A great Part of our Knowledqge conſiſts of ihe latierCommon SenſeTrain of Ideas.In what Manrer the Truin of Ideas is carried onRelations of Contiguity, &c.Ho w iheſe are formeã in the Mind.How the Train of Ideas is regulated —Influence of ihe Will. Cu a Pp. V.page 436. Memory. Ideas of Memory.Diſtinguiſbed from Ideas of Imaginationfudqment concerning Diſtance of Facts,Memory in young and old PersonsRecollectionCertainty. CH AP. VI.page 442. Of Invention. Invention; whatldcas of Memory and Imagination.Invention and Judguent. Cn A P. VIL—page 445Of Judgment, Judgment  whatAſlentProbalility. CE ar. VIIL.page 448. Of Words. Absiract and general Terms.Uſes and Abuſes of Wordshinting in Language. Cn ar. IXpage 500. Of Pleaſure and Pain. Pleſure in conſequence of Action. —By AlſociationBy Paqſſiiu UtilitySurprixeVarietyARegularity Imagination. C H A P. X.page 509. Of Love and Hatred. Defuition of LoveOrigin of the Social Paſſon.Diſlite and Hatred. Dcſire and Averſion. CH AP. XI.page 51I. Of Beauty. Or Beauty in generalOriginalFrom Aſci ation, Nature anà Art. CH a P. XILpage517. Of Cuſtom. Pain from CuſtomaVleaſure. —Admiration. CH a Pp. XIII.page 521. The Paſſions. OF ihe Paſſions in general. Particular Paſſions. Aſociated Paſ} sions,Paternal Love,Sympathy.Avarice. AubitionLove. xii C O NT EN T S. Cuar. xv. page 53æ. Or Reaſoning. Common Sens what D2Refective Reaſoning.Anoligical Reoſeriug Wroug DataPleaſures of Reaſining. CH AP. XV.page 539DOf the Arts. MuſicPainting.Poctry.)Uit. . Cu a?P. XVi—page 543. Of Morals. ui of ihe Doctrine of Aſficiation in Morals. —To Thuries of Morals.A Moral Senſe. The Arguments againſt a Moral Senseo A4  sirong Argument for Divine Revelation. C H A ?. XVIILpage 497 OF Genius. i General Olſervation on what conftitutes GeniusOF the Var ieties in Geniusenius oppoſed to Dulugſi. Diferent Caſi of Genius. CH ar? XVIII.page 503. Of Taſtee. i Agreenent and Diſugreement i in Taſte. 0f a a Standard of Taſe. CH ar. XIX. page 506. Of Opinion. Paradox of the Stoics. CExplanation. Che ſenſible Pleaſures more vunmerous than the ſenſible Pains. m-Th; ſune aith the intelleual Pleaures on Paius CH AP. a;& 508, Of the Free Agency of Man, Predeſtination, or fatal Neceſſity, not connected avith ihe Doctrine of. the Alfcciation of IdeaslInconſiſtency of the FataliſtsMotive and Action in Morals totally different from Cauſe and Effect in Phyſics The Onus Probandi in this Queſtion lies on the Fataliſis. —Queſtion concerning the Influence of Motives. Argument of the Fataliſis from the Divine Preſcience. Abſurd and horrible Conſequences reſulting sron the Doctrire of Fatality. Modeſty and Humility recommended in philoſophical StudiesThoſe Sciences to be preferred which are OF VEGETABLES. C H A r Eũ 5TRUCTURE OF vEGE TABLES. Ceal Obſervations on organized Eodies. Contiuen Prinigli Vegetable MatterStructure of Plantshe Sten.he Bart. The Wood. The Pithhe vaſcular Syſtem in Plants. DReſpiration of Plants Th? Root.Thæ Leaves7he FlowerThæ Fruitbe Seed Bonne?s Experimenis. Perpendicular Growih  PlantsPlants spr opagateã by Slips, Suchers, and Oꝶſi ts DISTINCTION has been eſtablied by philoſophers, which is not deſtitute of utility, though i it muſt be conſeſſed that in this; as in every other inſtance which regards the ſyſtem of nature, the line of demarcation is ſcarcely defined with ſuſicient preciſion. All natural bodies have been claſed under two grand diviſions; unorganized and organized bodies. If the phrae vegetable life might be freely admitteq, it would be conſiſtent with correctreſs to term the ſormer the inanimate; and the latter the animated parts of creation. Through the former of theſe regions we have already travelled with ſome diligence, though it is-to be apprehended not without pain and difficulty to the reader: for an author is but ſeldom an adequate judge of the degree of entertainment which his labours are capable of afſording to others.The latter, which includes what the old writers denominate r7. Prineipls of vqutt x Matter. IBook vIIſ. the vegetable and animal Lingdoms, remains to be conſidered. Unorganized bodies, we have ſeen, conſiſt of ſimple combinations of many different elementary principles. Organized bodies, on the contrary, conſiſt of few principles; but in the proportions, combinations, and arrangement of theſe principles, they are infinitely varied; and their ſtructure is as complex, as their materials are- ſimple. Thus, in the mineral creation w& may enumerate not fewer than forty diſtinct elementary principl:s; the vegetable creation for the moſt part conſiſts only of three; and the utmoſt to which it can be extended, is about ſix or ſeven diſtinct ſpecies of matter, which occaſionally enter into the compoſition of thoſe varied beauties, that ſingularity of ſtructure, that vaſt aſemblage of organized bodies, ſo different in qualities and external appearance, which the woods, the fields, and the girdens, preſent 10 our view: ſo numerous that they have hitherto eluded the art of the moſt ſkilful botaniſt to muthodia and arrange. The conſtituent or elementary principles of vegetables, are hydrogen, oxygen, and charcoal. T heſe, as far as our obſervations have hitherto extended, are common to all vegetables. There are ſome other ſubſtances, ſuch as calcarious earth, iron, and azote, which are occaſionally found in vegetables; but as they are not common to all plants, they cannot be conſidereò as eſſential to the conſtitution of vegetable matter. But if the materials of which vegetables are compoſed are ſo ſew and ſimple, their organization is curious bey ond any thing which the mineral world preſents to our viev. The parts of vegetables, which natusaliſts are accuſtomed to conſider as diſtinct in their nature and. functions, are ſix, the ſtem or trunk, the : proot, root, the leaf, the flower, the fruit, and the ſced. In many vegetables the root appears nearly ſimilar, in all Its conſtituent parts and principles, to the ſtem or trunk, and indeed the one ſeems a continuãtion oſ the other; which muſt be my apology for reverſing in ſome degree the order of nature, and treating firſt of that pers, which though it ſeems to proceed or ſpring immediately from the other, is vet tnc moſt perſe.. in its organization, and is in general oſ the greateſt uſe and importance to man. ; I. The ſtem or trunk, which includes alſo the branches, I might ſav all the mere ſolid ænd ſubſtantial parts of a tree or plant, conſiſts of three parts, the bark, the wood, and the pith. 1ſt. The bar is protected cn the outſide, by a cuticle, epidermis, or ſcarf-ſcin, which conſiſts ſometimes of numerous lay ers, and differs. in thickneſs in diſferent plants. This ſkin or cuticle is an organized body, compoſed of very minute bladders, oſten interſperſed vith longitudinal woody fibres, as in the nettle, thiſtle, end the enſity of herbs. It contains alſo longitun veſſels, and is viſibly porous in ſome plants, and particularly the cære. On removing the cuticle, the true bark appears,; and may be conſidered ⸗ as a congeries of pulp or cellular ſubſtance, in which are placed a number of veſſels, as vell as longitudinal fibres. The veſſels of the bark nre ciſerenty ſituate.], ænd deſtined for various uſes, in difſcrent plants. lIn the bark of the pine, ſor inſtance, the inmoſ are lymph-ducts, exceedingly minute; thoſe neareſt the ſurface are gum or reſiniferous veſſels, for the ſecretion oſ the turpentine, and theſe are ſo lrgę as to be viſible to the naked eye. ad. The wood lies between the bark and the pith. Its ſubſtance is denſer than that of the bark, and its ſtructure more difficult to be underſtood. It is however generally ſuppoſed to conſiſt of two ſubſtances, the parenchymatous or cellular, and the ligneous. The ligneous parts are no more than a coRgeries of old, dried lymp-ducts. Between the bark and the wood 2 new ring of theſe ducts is formed every year, which gradually Ioſes its ſoſtneſs as the cold ſeaſon approaches, and towards the middle of winter is' condenſed into a ſolid ring of wood. Theſe annual rings, which are viſible in moſt trees when cut tranſverſely, ſerve as marks to determine their age. They ſeem to decreaſe in breadth, as the tree advarces in age; and as they are found to be very unequal. in ſize throughout, their breadth probably varies according as the ſeaſon is favourable or otherwiſe. lil The wood differs from the bark, not merely in the degree of hardneſ; its ſtructure is eſſentially different, and the apparent converſion of bark into wood is entirely a deception. One ſtriking difference between the wood and the bar i is, that the ſormer is poſeſſcd oſ ſpiral veſſels which run from one end of the tree to the other. From the great reſemblance of theſe airveſſels to thoſe of inſects, they ãre ſuppoſed to be ſubſervient to the ſame functionn. The ſtem of ſome plants is entirely hollov, partly, ĩt is ſuppoſed, from theſe plants, which are generally of a quick growth, requiring a more than ordinary ſupply of air, 3d. The pith is ſituated in the center of the ſtem, and in young plants it is very abundant. It ĩs ſaid by ſome authors to conſiſt of exactly the ſame ſubſtance as the parenchyma or cellular ſubſtance of the bark; and 10 be compoſed of ſmall cells or bladders, generally of a circular figure, though in ſome plants, as the borage and thiſtle, they are angular. In moſt plants the pith gradually dies avay as they approach to maturity; and in old trees it is almoſt entirely obliterated. Such are the ſolid parts of plants; but to render their organi zation more clearly underſtood, in plate I. ſig. 1. is the ſection of a branch of aſh, cut tranſverſely as it appears to the eye. Fig. 2. is the ſame ſection magnifiedc. A. A. the bark. B. B. B. an arched ring of ſap-veſſels next the cuticle. C.C. C. the cellular ſubſtance of the bark, with another arched row of ſap-vſſels. D. D. a circular Iline of lymphducts next the wood. E. E. the wood. F. the ſirſt years growth. G. the ſecond. H. the third. I. I. I. the true wood. X. X. the great airveſſels. L. L. the leſer air-veſſels. M. M. M. parenchymatous inſertions of the bark, repreſented by white rays. N. O. the pith. The name of air- veſſels, as was beſore remarked, has been given to certain tubes ſituated in the wooqd, leaves, and petals, but not in the bark of treesss They are formed by a number of ſmall filaments, ſpirally rolled up ſo as to form a cavity in the middle, and are ſuppoſed to be the inſtruments of reſpiration in plants; but how this function is performed, is not clearly underſtood Trees and ſhrubs only are poſſeſſed of airveſſels; and when a plant is placed under the exhauſted receiver of an air- pump, the air only iſſues from the wood, in which the airveſſels are ſituated. There is reaſon to believe that the airs proper entrance to plants is through the cuticle, which is proved to be a vaſcular ſubſtance, ſince, when under an exhauſted receiver, it iſſues directly through the cuticle. That the air Is neceſſary to the ſuſtenance of plants, appears from the experiments of Dr. Bell*. In the  See his excellent Theſis on the Phyſology of Plants, Manch. Mem. vol. ii. vinter ſeaſon he covered ſeveral young trees with var niſh, leaving the tops of the branches only expoſed to the ai. They remained in this ſituation during the following ſummer, when ſome of them lIived, though in a languid ſtate; but thoſe ſfrom which the air had been more accurately excluded, died without a ſingle exception. To this proof the ſame author adds, that trees overgrown with moſs have few leaves, weak ſhoots, and ſcarcely any ſruit; and that it is the common practice of all judicious gardeners to ſtrip the moſ from the bark of aged trees, which by admitting the air, generally reſtores them to vigour and fruitfulneſs. II. The root, » hich fixes the plant to the earth, and is the chieſ ſource of its nouriſhment, differs much in different ſpecies of vegetables. All roots agree in being fibrous at their extremities, and ĩt is by their fibres chieſly that they are fitted to draw nouriſhment. The root terminates upwarde in the ſterm or trunk, which ſuſtains the other parts of the vegetablee. The internal ſtructure of the root, or rather oſ its fibres, diſfers not very meterially in general from that of the ſtem. It conſiſts of a cuticle, bark, wood, and commonly of a ſmall portion of pith; though there are ſome roots which have no pith at ali, vhile there are others which have little or none at the extremities, but a conſiderable quantity near the top. The cuticle, in all roots at a certain age, is double; the cortical ſubſtance, or burk, dffers greatly inæ its quantity and diſpoſition in different plants. In trees ĩt ĩs thin; in carrots, on the contrary, it is one half of the ſemidiameter oſ the root; and in dandelion it is nearly twice as thek as the woody part.I he roots, as vell as the trunk oſ plants, are ſurniſed with a veriety of veſſels for the purpoſe of conveying and circulating air and the juices neceſſry to their nouriſhment. In plate I. fig. 3. is a ſection of the roct of wormwood, as it appears to the eye; and fig. 4. is the ſame magnifiedc A. A. the ſkin with ĩts veſſels. B. B. B. the bark. C. C. C. the lymph- ducts of the bark. The other holes are ſmall cells or ſapveſſels. D. D. D. parenchymatous inſertions ſrom the barẽ. E. E E. the rays oſ the wood, with the air- veſſels. This root has no pith. III. The leaves are organs eſſential to the exiſtence of plants. Trees periſa when totally diveſted of them; and in general, when Itript of any conſiderable proportion of their leaves, they do not ſhoot vigorouſly. The leaves are formed by the expanſion of the veſſels oſ the ſtalk into a net-work, which exhibits a beautiful appearance when the intermediate parenchymatous matter is conſumed by putrefaction. Both ſurfaces of the leaf are covered with a membrane, which is a thin burk, continued from the ſcarf-ſkin of the ſtall. . IV. The flower conſiſts of four parts, the calyx, the corolla, the ſtamina, and the piſtillum. The calyx or flower-cup isalmoſt always of a green colour, and is that which ſurrounds and ſupports all the other parts of the ſlower. The corolla is of various colours, is variouſly ſouped in different vegetables, and is that which conſtitutes the moſt conſpicuous part of the fiower. It ſometimes conſiſts of one continued ſubſtance, but more frequently of ſeveral portions, which are called petals. The ſtamina are ſuppoſcd to be the male part of the f.oer. Linnæus defines them to be an entrail of the plant, deſigned for the preparation of the pollen. Each ſftamen conſiſts of two parts; the filimentum or fine thread 7hich ſupports the anthera, and the anthera or head B 4 itſelf, / i itſelf, which contæins within it the pollen, and when ome to matuiity diſcharges it ſor the impregnation of the germen. From ihe ſi poſed function of the ſtamine, they afford the chieſf foundation of the diſtribution of the vegetable ſyſtem into claſes. Such Povers as want this part are called female; ſuch as have it, but want the piſtillum, male; ſuch as have them both, hermephrodite; ſand ſuch as have neither, neuter. The piſtillum or pointal is ſuppoſed to be the female part of the fliower; it ĩs defined by Linnæus to be an entrail oſ the plant, deſigned ſor the reception of the pollen. It conſiſts of three parts, the germen, the ſtyle, and the ſtigma. The germen is the rudiment cf the ſruit accompanying the flower, but not yet arrived at maturity. The ſtyle is the part which ſerves to elevate the ſtigma from the germen. The ſtigma is the ſummit of the piſtillum, nd i is covered ith a moiſture for the breaking of the pollen. The pericarpium or ſeed-veſtl is the germen grown to maturity. Such are the conſtituen: parts of the flower; they are however infinitely varied, and ſerve both to diverſify the face of nature, ænd to intereſt and delight the curioſity of man. One curious fact it is neceſſury to notice before I diſmiſs this branch of my ſubject, and that is, that every flower is perfectly formed many months before it makes its appearance. Thus the ſflowers which appear in this vear are not properly the productions of this year: the mezereon fliowers in January, but the flowers were completely formed in the bud in the prececing autumn. If the coats of the tulip-root alſo are carefully ſoparated about the beginning oſ September, the naſcent flower, which is to appear in the following ſpring, will be found in a ſmall cell, formed by the innermoſt T . u . i H . E - . . Et BEIES coats, as repreſented in plate I. fig. 5. where the young flover appears towards the bottom of the root. V. The fruit conſiſts of nearly the ſame pe as are found in the ſtem; of a ſkin or cuticle, which is a production or continuation of the ſin oſ the bark; of an outer parenchyma, which is the ſame ſubſtance continued from the bark, only that ĩits veſicles are larger and more ſucculent or juicy. Next the core there ] is commonly an inner pulp or parenchyma; and the core is no more than a hard woody membrane, which incloſes the ſeed. It ĩs to be obſerved, however, that the organization of fruit is very various; in ſome the ſeeds are diſperſed through the parenchymatous or pulpy ſubſtance; in ſome, inſtead ofa core, we find a ſtrong woody ſubſtance incloſing the ſeed or kernel, which from its great hardneſs is termed the ſtone; in ſome, there are a number of ſeeds; and in others, only a ſingle ſeed, incloſed in a large maſs of parenchymatous matter. VI. The ſeed is a deciduous part of a vegetable, containing the rudiment of a new one. The eſſence of the ſeed conſiſts in the corculum or little heart, which is faſtened to the cotyledones or lobes, and involved in them, and cloſely covered by its proper tunic. The corculum conſiſts in the plumula, which is the vital ſpeck of the future plant, extremely ſmall in its dimenſions, but increaſing like a bud to infinity. The roſtellum, however, mut be included, which is the baſe of the plumula; it deſcends and ſtrikes root, and is the part of the ſeed originally contiguous to the mother plant. It is commonly ſuppoſed, and with ſome reaſon, that the perfect plant, or at leaſt all the organization which is requiſite to a perfect plant, gxiſts in the ſeed, ſurrounded by a quantity of farinal  ſ-J Gener ation of Plants. IBook VIm, ceous matter, which ſerves to abſorb moiſture, and to furniſh nouriſhment to the corculum till its parts are ſufficiently unfolded to draw ſu; pport from the ſoil. A kidney- bean or lupine, when it has been ſoaked for ſome time in water, and begun to ſwell, is eaſily ſeparated into its twõ lobes; and. be: ween theſe is diſplayed the nãſcent plant. The naked eye can eaſily diſcern the ſtem, and its connexion with the lobes. Through the lobes are diffuſed innumerable veſſels, hich immediatel; communicate with the embryo plant. On the external ſurface of the ſeed are abſorbent veſſels, which attract the moiſture; by this moiſture a degree of fermentation is produced, and thus a juice is prepared by a natural proceſs in every reſpect proper for the nouriſhment of the plant in its firſt efforts to extend its tender frame. The plant in its infancy is almoſt a gelatinous ſubſtance, and increaſes and indurates by degrees ; ; and I believe in general the hardneſs of wood Bears a pretty exact proportion to the ſlow neſs with which a plant increaſes. That part of the ſtem which is next the root is the firſt which aſſumes the woody texture. : M. Bonnet, in order to aſcertain how far the lobes of the ſeed were neceſſary to the growth and health of the corculum, detached them vith great dexterity without a vital injury to the infant Dlant. Some French- beans treated in this manner, and ſoved in a light ſoĩl, grew, but the conſequence was, that not only he firſt ſeaves were much ſmaller, but the plants were uniformly weaker in every part of their growth than others, which for the ſake of compariſon vere ſown at the ſame time without being mutilated. The ſeeds which were deprived oF the lobes put forth fewer bloſſoms, and produced leſs ſeed. The ſeeds of moſſes are naturally devoid of lobes. The firſt leaves which make their appearance, and which are called ſeminal, appear not leſs neceſſarv to the perfection of the plant than the farinaceous lobes. If they happen to be broken of, the plant experiences a proportional loſs of vigour. It is a matter of curious ohſervation, that ſeed, thrown into the ground at random, ſhould aluays come up in the proper directionn. M. Dodart has offered an ingenious explanation of this fact, which conſiſts in ppoſig that the roſtellum contracts by humidity, and that the plumula on the contrary contracts by dryneſs. According to this idea, when a ſeed is put into the ground the wrong way, the roſtellum, which then points upwards, contracts itſelf towards the part where there is moſt humidity, and therefore turns downwards. The plumula on the contrary pointing downw⸗rds, turns itſelf towards the part of the ſoil which is drieſt, and therefore riſes towards the ſurface. This explanation, however, evidently reſts on no better baſis than conjecture. Independent of the ſeed, there are two other methods by which plants are propagated, by ſlips and ſuckers; and many plants naturally make aneffort to propagate themſelves in this manner. The bulbous-rooted plants in general increaſe by oſf-ſets. When a tulip is firſt planted in the ſpring, the ſtem iſſues from the middle of the bulbous root; but when the tulip is taken up in the autumn, the ſtem no longer proceeds from the middle of the root, but ſeems attached to one ſidee The fact is, that the root which ĩs taken up is not the ſame that was planted. The original root has decayed by having its ſubſtance abſorbed for the nouriſhment oſ the bloſſfom, and a nev root hæ IEli ?L u”b: oF vEGE? ABLES : ES : - / he Suceus Communis or Sap.Ve }ſſe l æ the Circulation of the Sap. Succus Proprius; its Veſſe ẽls and Cui ſe.Douner's Experiments on the Nouriſtanent of P Plons Dr. Hale's Experiments on Fruit Trees. DBonne? s on Flovers, & e. T5 Auids or juices of rejeubles ſay: Dr. Bell, ,are of two kinds.  The one is of the ſame nature in all the variety of vegetables: the other varies according to the different plants i in which it exiſts. The former, which is called the succus communis, when collected early in the ſpring, from an inciſion made in the birch or vine, differs little from common water *. The latter, whichii is named the ſuccus proprius, poſeſes various properties in various plants, and gives to cach its ſenſible qualitiess. Theſe two juices never mingle with each other in the tree, and the latter is ſound in the vaſ propria only. : It is not yet acertained, whether the juices of plants are tranſmitted through veſſels, or cellular ſubſtance. Each ſide of the quæſtion has had its advocates, who have ſupported their reſpective opinions with probable arguments : but it is to be regretted, . It has, how ever, been al lledgea to contain a ſaccharire matter in ſome trees, as in the ſuzar meple, &c. It has likewiſe been ſuppoſed to contain an acid. But, i in various  experiments which Dr. Beit ade on it, he found nothing i in it of either kind; and therefore, where ſuch appearances have taken place, he ſuppoſed them io ariſe from an adventitſous mixture of the ſap, and the succus trprius ij 2.] Vaſculer S ſtem of Vegetables, 13 hat, on ſo intereſing a ſubject, no concluſion can be formed from the actual diſiection oſ vegetables. It however ſeems moſt probable, that all the ſluids of plants are tranſmitted through veſſels, for the following reaſons. 1. The exiſtence of vaſa propria and vaſæ bria is diſcoverable by the naked eye, and made ſtill more maniſeſt by the microſcope. That ſuccus proprius and air are contained in theſe is evident, and thereſore analogy leads us to believe, that the ſuccus communis is alſo contained in veſſels. 2. Secretion, oſ which vegetables have undoubtedly the power, is in no inſtance, that we know of, performed without the action of veſſels. 3. An experiment, made by Dr. Hales, ſeems clearly to prove, that the ſap is contained within its own veſſels, and does not fortuitouſly pervade every interſtice of the plant. He fixed an inſtrument round the ſtem of a vine, by which its contractions and expanſions could be accuately meaſured; but he found no difference in the circumſerence of the trunk, when the tree was full of ſap, and when it was entirely without it, although the inſtrument employed was ſo nicæ], as to detect a variation of the hundredth part of a finger's breadth. If the ſap had been tranſmitted, without veſels, through the cellular ſubſtance, this, on the withdrawing of the ſap, would have been compreſſed, and of courſe the ſtem of the tree would have contracted itſelf into a ſmaller compaſs*. * To determine this queſlion abſolutcly, it may ſeem, that the moſt certain and obvious method would be by injections, the grext ſource of our knovledge of the anatomy of animals. They have been employed by Bonnet, Dr. Hope, and others, but they have failed. They riſe a conſiderable way into plants, but as, in different caſes, they take diſferent courſes, fiom this and other circumſtances there is reaſon to believe, that their courſe, and that of the ſup, ure materially different ſiom each other.  Botaniſts have made many experiments to aſcertain the courſe of the ſap. Early in the ſpring, when thè ſap begins to flow, inciſions have been made in the trunk and branches of trees, as far as the pith; and, in ſuch caſes, it has been conſtantly found, that a larger quantity of ſap flower from the ſuperior, than ſrom the inferior margin of the inciſion. This circumiſtance led to the opinion, that in the beginning of the ſpring, great quantities of moiſture are abſorbed by trees irom the atmoſphere, and hence the ſource of the abundance of ſap*. But this concluſion is found to diſagree with the phenomena oſ nature, from the two folloving experiments. c I. Inciſions of various heights being made in the ſtem of ſeveral plants, their roots were immerſed in æ decoction of log-wood. The roots abſorbed the coloured liquor, which at length began to ſflow from the ſuperior, and not from the inferior, margins of the inciſions; nor had the liquor extended itſelſ much upwards, beyond the margin of the inciſion ſfrom which it was diſcharged. c 2. In the ſeaſon when the ſap flows moſt abundantly, called the bleeding ſeaſon, a deep cut was made into the branch of a growing vine, and the greateſt quantity of ſap was diſcharged from the upper margin of the inciſion: but a branch of the ſame tree, cut in the ſame manner, being inverted, the ſap flowed moſt copiouſly from the other margin of the inciſion, which of courſe was now that next the root. On the other hand, many experiments may be brought to prove directly, that, in the bleeding ſeaſon, the ſap aſcends from the roots towards the branches; the following however may ſuſfice. I. Early * Du Hamel and othersSee Phyſ, des A-bres, Ton I. ꝑ. 67. Chap. 2] Courſe of the Suicus Progrius. i3 in the ſring, wſen little or no ſap. had as yet ntered the plant, Dr. Hope made a number of inciſions of different altitudes, i into the root and ſtem ofa birch. As the ſap roſe, ũt firſt ſlowed from the ſuperior margin of the loweſt inciſion, and then, in regular ſucceſſion, from the upper margins of the other inciſions, till at laſt it reached the higheſt. 2. If, in the beginning of the bleeding ſeaſon, before the ſap is ſound in the ſtem or branches, an inciſion i is made in the root of a vine, a conſiderable ſlow of ſap will follow the wound, 3. The quantity of ſap is very generally proportioned to the humidity of the ſoil æ-  When a portion of the bark and wood of the pine is cut from the ſtem, the iccus proprius Aows in conſiderable quantity both from the upper and under margin of the inciſion. Hence it occurred to botaniſts, that this juice might have little or no motion, and that ĩts eflux from Tuch an orifice might depend entirely on ĩts being ſreed ſrom the preſſure of the bark and wood. But I cannot accede to this opinion: for although, in the beginning, the succus proprius flos from both margins of the inciſion, ina little while, as I have obſerved, it'is diſcharged from the ſuperior .It may ſtill be aſed, Why the ſap flows moſt from the ſupeperior margin of. each inciſion, ſuppoſiug. it to ariſe from the roots? The inciſion, it is ſaid, hurts or deſtroys the energy of the ſap- veſſels fora conſiderable vay below, whence the ſap is notpropelled npwards againſt its ovn weight, and the preſſure of the atmoſphere now admited. From the divided veſſels, it paſes by a lateral communication (for there are ſap-veſiels in every direction) into thoſe undivided, and when it hæs got above the inciſion, it again paſſes laterally into the divided veſcis; and falling downvards, from its own gravity, a want of continuity of veſſels, and the diminiſhed preſſure of the sumoſphere, ir flows from the ſuperior margin of the inciion. EN 16 H Planis are nuriſtel. ſBook VIII. margin only. This obſervation in ĩtſelf is not however deciſive. For it may be ſuppoſed, that the liquor flows more copiouſly from the ſuperior margin, becauſe the preſſure of the air is leſs upon it, than on the inferior, and becauſe the liquor itſelf is diſpoſed to ſall downwards by its gravity, in the ſame manner as the ſuccus communis. That I might put this matter out of doubt, I placed the branch of a pine in a horizontal poſition, and another branch I inverted, ſo that its branches were turned towards the earth. In theſe ſituations, I cut a portion of the bark and wood from each, and in both inſtances, the ſuccus proprius flowed only from thoſe margins of the inciſions which nere fartheſt from the roots. Hence it appeũrs clearly, hat the courſe of this juice, in its veſſels, is never om the roots lowards the branches, but always in the contrary direction* M. Bonnet conceives that the nutrimental uices of vegetables paſs during the day- time from the roots to the trunk by the ligneous fibres, aſſiſted by the airveſſels, and are principally carried to the ſurſace of the leaves, where a copious perſpiration takes place. At the approach of night the heat no lunger acting on the leaves and the air contæined in the air-veſſels, e ſap returns towards the roots; at the ſame time that the humidity condenſed on the inferior ſurſaces of the leaves, which by their inequalities are beſt fitted to retain it, is abſorbed and conveyed through the branches to the trunk. In this mænner he is of opi-  From the experiment above recited, it appears, that the flow of the proper juice is not inſluenced in the ſame degree, as that ofthe ſap, by an alteration in the poſture of the veſſels ftom which iĩt iſues. To what cauſe this is owing, does not clearly appear. nion that vegetables are nouriſhed in the day- time by their roots, and in the night by their Ieaves. The ſame philoſopher wiſhed to diſcover whether plants nouriſhed by their leaves would live as long, and thrive as well, as others nouriſhed by their roots. He plunged in ſmali veſſels, filled with water, plants oſ mercury, immerſing the leaves of ſome and the roots of others. He leſt to each plant one or two ſprigs; which were ept out of the water, and which vere only nouriſted by the part of the plant whieh vas immerſed. He rendered all theſe ſprigs as equal and as much alike as poſſiblee. He leſt the plants in this ſituation for five or ſix weceks, at the end of which time he could obſerve no difference between the ſprigs uniformly nouriſhed by the leaves, and thoſe nouriſhed by the roots. He only remarked that the leaves plunged in water ſeemed to ſuffer a little more from the action of that fuid than the roots. M. Bonnet alſo buried the top of a willow-tree, leaving the roots above ground. The roots being prevented from drying by a covering which did not entirely exclude the air, ptt forth leaves mixed with roots; the top, which was buried in the ground, produced roots, and the plant continued to live. Dr. Hales, in his ſtatical experiments, mentions ſeveral in which he tried to change the natural flavour of fruits, and to communicate thoſe of ſeveral ſpirituous liquors, and of different odoriferous infuſions. With this intention he plunged in different liquors branches loaded with fruit; and left them there for ſome time, vithout being able to perceive that the taſte of the fruits was in the leaſt altered, whether the experiment was made upon them ripe or unripe. But he almoſt always perceived the ſmell oſ the liquors or infuſions in the ſtalks of the leaves, and in the wood. He conjectures, with much probability, that the veſſelę near the fruit become ſo fine as no: to admit the odoriferous particles. M. Bonnet made experiments on flowers fimilar to thoſe which Dr. Hales made on fruits. He choſe ſuch flowers as have naturally little perfume, as the diſferent ſpecies oſ French-beans. Stems with theſe flowers were immerſed in tubes, ſome of which were ſilled vith ſpirits of wine, others with Huncary water, &c. In about twenty-four hours the ſlowers vere faded, and they had already acquired in a very ſenſible degree the odours of the liquors which they had imbibed. The odour became much more remarkable a few days afterwardss. M. Bonnet alſo found that the leaves of the apricot.tree acquired a ſenſible odour from the liquors into which branches ef tha: C H A P. III. FUNCTIONS OF VEGETABLES. Perſpiration of Plants. Circulation of the Fluids in. Planuts Property in Plants of emitting vital Air; of decompoſing Vater.  enſibility tr0 the Sun's LightCauſe of the Green Colour of Vegerablis. Bennets Experiments on Vegetable Perſpiration. Sexual Syſtem Growih and Nutriment of Vegetables Manures. Principlis of Agriculture. T H E lIcaves oſ plants have been not improperly compared with the lungs of animals.  Plants as well as animals, ſays an author whom I have already quoted with approbation,  perſpire, and in both caſes this function is eſſential to health. By the experiments of Dr. Hales *, and M. Guettard t, it appears, that the perſpirable matter of vegetables differs in no reſpect from pure water, excepting that, it becomes rather ſooner putrid. The quantity perſpired varies, according to the extent of the ſurface from which it is emitted, the temperature of the air, the time of the day, and the humidity of the atmoſphere. As the leaves form the greateſt part of the ſurface, it is natural to ſuppoſe, that the quantity of theſe will very materially affect the quantity of the perſpiration. Accordingly, the experiments of Dr. Hales have aſceræained, thæt the perſpiration of vegetables is increaſed or diminiſhed, chieſly, in proportion to the increaſe or diminution of their foliage. The degree of heat in which the plant was kept, according to the ſam⸗  Statical Eſſays, vol.i. p. 494+ Mem. de I' Academie des Sciences, 1748. I Statical Eſſays, vol. i. ꝑ- 25. author, varied the quantity of matter perſpired this being greater, in proportion to the greater heat of the ſurrunding armoſphere. The degree of light has likewiſe conſiderable influence in this reſpect: For Mr. Philip Millers experiments prove, that plants uniformly perſpire; moſt in the forenoon, though the temperature of thèair, in which they are placed, ſhould be unvariedl M. Guettard likewiſe informs us, that a plant; expoſed to the rays of the ſun, has its perſpiration increaſed to a much greater degree, than it it had been expoſed to the ſame heat, under the ſhade. Finally, the perſpiration of vegetables is increaſed jn proportion as the amoſphere is dry, or in other words, diminiſhed in proportion as the atmoſphere is humid. Dr. Hales ſound that a ſun- ſlover, eighing ihreè pounds, perſpired twenty- two ounces during twentyfour hours. Dr. Keil perſpired thirty-one ounces in twenty- four hours. The quantity therefore perſpired by the ſun- floxer was much greater, in proportion tò ĩts weight, than that perſpired ſfrom the human body. Dr. Keil ate and drank four pounds ten ounces in twent v- four hours. Seventeen times more nouriſhment was taien in by the root of the ſun- lower, than was taken in by the man. Iſ the perſpiration of vegetables is checked, they ſpeedily fade. It is checked ſrom glutinous ſubſtances adhering to their ſurface; hence the advãntage of waſhing them. The more healthy and vigorous the plant, the more copious the perſpiration; though an exceſs, as well as a deſect of it, ſeems prejudicial and even deſtructive to vegetables. Tt beats alſo a proportion to: the quantity of leaves, thieſc being the principal organs of perſpiration. The ocoriſerous exhalation of leaves and flovers forms an atmoſphere around vegetables, which ſtrikes ilt l i 4 j our ur ſenſes, and which the contãct of a body of fire is ſometimes capable oſ inflaming, as has been obſerved with regard to the fraxinella. c Some botanils, obierves Dr. Bell,  have conceived, that plants, ar well as animals, have a regular circulation of their ſluids. Others think this very improbable. Or both ſides, recourſe has been had to experiments; and from theſe, concluſions perſectly oppoſite have been deduced. When a ligature has been fixed round a tree, in ſuch a manner that no juice could be tranſmitted through the barl, the tree has been found to thicken ahove the ligature; but below it, to continue of the ſame circumſerence. Hence ſome have concluded, that the ſap aſcends through the wood, and deſcends ihrogl the bark. Thoſe who are of a contrary opinion have found, that, in certain caſes, the juice aſcends through the bark only: ſor vhen a portion of the wood has been cut out, and the bark exactly replaced, the growth of the tree has been found to go on unchanged: hence it is ſaid, that the juice is tranſmitted equally through all parts of vegetables. The experiments adduced on each ſide of the queſtion are juſt, but the reaſonings on theſe, by each party, ſeem equally inconcluſive. The a analogy of animal nature appears to favour the opinion, that the juice riſes through the wood only, and deſcends only through the bark; but this analogy is not complete throughcut. The arteries are not placed in the internal parts alone, nor the veins in the external, but they accompany each other through every part of their diſtribution. In vegetables, the ſap riſes from the roots, but the proper juice deſcends rowards them; in the deſcent of the juice, the wood acquires its growth, and abſorption is a conſtant action of the leaves. Theſe cbſervations render It probable, that there ĩs a circulation of the juices; and if there is, the veſſels which perſorm it, we may reaſonably believe, accompany each other through every part of their courſe. By what force the juices of plants are propelled in their circulation, remains yet one of the ſecrets of nature. It has been attributed to capillary attraction, but this cauſe ſeems inadequate to the effect; nor is it poſible on that principle to explain why the ſap of the vine flows ſfrom an inciſion made in the ſpring, and not from one mãade in the ſummer. The capillary attraction ought not to be leſs powerful in the latter than in the former ſcaſon; indeed it ought to b- more ſo, as the heat is greater. Beſides, capillary tubes do not diſcharge their contents when broken acroſs; but from the ſtem of a plant cut tranſverſely, a large quantity of fluid is diſchargedl. The more probable opinion is, that plants are endued with ſomething of a vital poer or energy, which impels the juices through the whole vaſcular ſyſtem; and this opinion is ſtrengſnencd by an obſervation of Dr. Bell, which wa, the reſult of experiment, namely, that there are pariicular ſubſtances which increaſe the growth of plants, by actin; as ſtimulents on their fibres. The experiments of Dr. Prieſtley have fuſficiently ſiewn that vegetables have the power of corræcting bad air; and Dr. IngenhouZ has proved that they nave the faculty of producing vital only when aæcted on by the rays of light. If a vegetable is immerſed in water, and the rays of the ſun directed on it, air-bubbles will be obſerved to collect on the leaves, and at length riſe to the ſurfacæ of the water. This appearance is moſt remarkable in the morning, as the leaves have not then been previouſly exhauſted by the action of light. Vital air oſ a great degree of purity may be obtained in the fummer time, by inverting a jor filled with water in ſuch a manner a: to receive the air-bubbles as they ariſe. All plants, however, do not emit this air with the ſame facility; there are ſome which emit it the moment the rays of the ſun act upon them, and this is the caſe with lavender. Some aquatic plants afford vital air with great ſacility, ſome more ſlowly, but none later than in eight or ten minutes, provided the ſun's light is ſtrong. The air is almoſt entirely furniſhed by the inferior ſurface oſ the leaves oſ trees; herbaceous plants afford it from almoſt the whole oſ their ſurface. The leaves aſford more air when attached to the plant, than when gathered, and the quantity is greater, the freſher and ſounder they aree Young leaves afford but a ſmall quantity of vital air; thoſe which are full grown afford more, and the more the greener they aree The epidermis, the baik, and petals do not afford iĩt, and in general vital air proceeds only from thoſe parts of plants which are of a green colour. Thus græen corn and green fruits afford this air, but it is not produced by thoſe which are ripe; and flowers in general render the air noxious. Theſe facts may tend to explain the manner in which the light of the ſun operates in maturing fruits, viz. by expelling the ſuperfluous oxygen, and thus changing them from a harſh and ſour, into a mild and ſWeet ſubſtance. Aquatic plants, and ſuch as grow in moiſt places, are remarkable not only for affording a large quantity of vital air, but alſo for abſorbing inflammable gas, and are therefore in all reſpects calculated for purifying the air of marſhy ſituations. A very extraordinary power of abſorbing inflammable air was obſerved in the willow by Dr. Prieſtley; and this fact ſeems connected with the rapid growth of that plant in marſhy ſituations, where much jnf=lammable air is produced. M. Sennabier found that plants yield much more vital air in diſtilled water impregnated with fixed air, t thani in ſimple diſtilled ater. It appears further, from the experiments of D. Prieſtley, that plants will bear a greater proportion of inflammable than of fixed air, and that vital air appeared g generally injurious to plants. A ſprig of mint growing in water, placed over a ſermenting liquor, and of courſe expoſed to fixed air, became quite dead in one day; a red roſe became of a purple colour in twenty four hours. Plan nts die very ſoon both in nitrous air, 2nd in common air wvhen ſaturated vith it. Air appears uniformly to heve been purified by heal thy Plants vegetating in it; but theſe experiments require great nicety, as the leaſt degree of putrefaction will injure the air. The air contained i in the bladders oſ merine plants was found conſiderably purer than common air. li Atmoſpheric àũ is reſtored, ſer being injured- by reſpiration or combuſtion, by a plant vegetating in it. This reſtoration of air depends upon the vegetating ſtate oſ the plant; for a number of mint- leaves fre gathered being kept in air in which candles had burnt out, did not reſtore the ai, Any plant vill effect this purpoſe, but thoſe of the quickeſt growth i in the moſt expeditious manner. That Plants have a property of producing pure air from vater is evident from an experiment of Dr. Pricſley. The green matter which is to be obſerved in water, ĩs doubries a vegetable production. Water contæining this green metter always afforded vital air in a large quantity, but water which had it not afo: ded none. It has been frequently obſerved that vegetables do not thrive in the dark. A receiver was therefore ſled with water, and kept tillĩ it was in a ſtate of f giving air I Nũl - - . - l - i air copiouſly; aſter this it was removed intò a dark room, and from that time the production of air entirely ceaſed, When placed again in the ſun, it afforded no air till about ten days after, wlien it had more green matter, the former plants being probably all dead; and no air could be produced til new ones were formed. : From various experiments it appeared, that different animal and vegetable putreſcent ſubſtances afforded a very copious pabulum for this green vegetable matter, which produced ſo freely the vital air; whence the philoſophic author of this diſcovery is led to the following concluſionsf It is impoſſible, ſays he, c not to obſerve from theſe experiments the admirable proviſion in nature, to prevent or leſen the fatal effects of putrefaction, eſpecially in hot countries, Where the rays of the ſun are moſt direct, and the heat moſt intenſe. Animal and vegetable ſubſtances, by ſimply putrefying, would neceſũatily taint great maſſes of air, and render it unfit for reſpiration, did not ihe ſame fubſtances, putreſying in water, ſupply a moſt abundant pabulum for this wonderſul vegetable ſubſtance, the feeds oſ which ſeem to exiſt throughout the atmoſphere. By theſe means, inſtead of the atmoſphere being corrupted, a large quantity of the pureſt air is continually thrown into it. By the ſame means alſo, ſtagnant waters are rendered much leſs. offenſive and unwholſome than they would otherwiſe be. That froth which we obſerve on the ſurface of ſuch waters, and which is apt o excite diſguſt, generælly conſiſts of the pureſt vital air, ſu pplied by aquatic plants. When the ſun fhines, this air may be obſerved to iſſue from them. Even when animal and vegetable ſubſtances putteſy in air, as they have generally ſome moiſture in them, various other veggtable productions, in the fornſ of mold, mold, &c. find- a proper nutriment in them, and by converting a conſiderable part of the noxious efluvia into their own fubftance, arreſt ĩt in its progreſs : to corrupt the atmoòſphere: i ; The ſame vegetables which afford vital air very plentifully in the light of the ſun, afford in the ſhade air leſs pure thãn that of the atmoſphere. This ſtriking effect of light on vegetables is a ſtrong argument jn favour of the opinion, that the motion of the juices of the vegetables is performed by veſſels, which, like thoſe of animals, poſſeſs irritability, and are excited to action by ſtimulating ſubſtances. The effect of vegetation in producing the vital air, hich was aſforded in the preceding exper iments, ſeemed in ſome meaſure dubious to Sir Benjamin Thompſon, who extracted vital air, by immerſing in water a variety of ſubſtances, as raw ſilk, cotton, wool, eider-down, hare's fur, ſneeps wool, ravellings of linen, and human hairas related in a former book. He wvas led, from the reſult of theſe trials, to ſuſpect that the pere air was merely ſeparated ſrom the water, and that any ſubſtance which would act by a capillary attraction, ſo as to ſeparate the component parts of the water, would effect the production of pure air. He thereſore pròcured a quantity of ſpun glaſ;, which conſiſts of minute tubes, which he immerſed in water, but the quantity of pure air produced was very trifling. Hence he goncludes, that there is ſomething in thoſe ſubſtances which operates in producing pure air, ànd that it is not merely a mechanical ſeparation of the component parts of water. The light of lamps produced the ſame effect as the t s light air in greàt quantities vas produced, and perſectly pure. Vegetables will alſo, with any ſtrong light, produce vital air as well as  vãh the light of the ſun, ſun. The air from ſilk was much ſuperior to that ſrom vegetables. Plants have a remarkable ſenſibility to light; they unfold their lowers to the ſun, they follow his courſe by turning on their ſtems, and are cloſed a: ſ-. n as he diſappears. Vegetables placed in roums where they receive light only in one direction always extend themſelves that way.. Ifthey receive light in two directions, they direct their courſ? owards the ſtrongeſt. Trees growing in thick foreſts, where they only receive light from above, direct their ſhoots almoſt invariably upwarls, and therefore become much taller and leſ' ſpreading than ſuch as ſland ſingle This affection for light ſeems to explain the upright growth of vegetables, a curious phenomenon, too common to be much attended to. It has been aſcertained by repeated experiments, that the green colour of plants is entirely oving to light; for plants reared in the dark are well Inown to be perfectly white. If we take a ſucculent plant, and expreſs its juice, the liquor appears at firſt uniformly green; but allow it to ſtand, and the gre?n colour ſeparates from the watery fluid, and talis to the bottom in a ſediment. If we coliect this ſediment it will be found to be of an oily nature, for it dues not diſſolve in water, but it will in ſpirits of wine, or oil, to which it ĩiinparts a green colour. As the ſun produces the green colour in plants, and as this reſides in an olly matter, it was formerly concluded that light furniſhes the oĩly matter of vegetables, and that it effects this by furniſhing the principle of inflammability. The new chemical do rines, however, afford a much more ſutisfactory explanation of the effect of the ſun's rays in producing the oily matter in vegetables. Vegetable matter conſiſts in general of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen; the lun's rays a38 ii The Sexual Syſtem- il ſbot vin / produce a diſengagement of the latter principle in the form of vital air, and the two former are the conſtituént priuciples of oĩl M. Bonnet made a ſeries of experiments in order to aſcertain whether the ſuperior or the inferior ſurfaces of leaves have a greater ſhare in perſorming perſpiration. From the rials which he made, he concludes that the inferior ſurfice of the leaſ is in gener al by far the moſt æctive in this reſpect, though i in one or two fpecies of vegetables this difference was much leſs remarkable. The mallow was the only vegetable the leaves of which perſpired more by the upper than the inferior ſurface. The method which he employed to aſcertain the comparative effect of the two ſurfaces was to cover firſt one and then the other ſurſace with oil. The leaves were then immerſed in tubes filled with water, and the quantity oſ the perſpired matter was eaſured by the lengih of the tube emptied in a given time. The oll, by ſtopping up the pores, prevented perſpiration ſrom the ſurface to which it was applied. Some large leaves of the white mulberry- tree being kept ſuſpended on water with their upper ſurfaces in contact with the fluid, faded .in five days; ſome leaves of the ſame tree, being placed in a ſimilar ſituation, but with the inferior ſurface touching the water, were preſerved green for nearly ſix mo nths. lll The ſexual ſyſtem has been the faſhionable ſyſtem of botany for many years. It is well known that the palm is of that claſs oſ vegetables which has flowers of different ſexes on different trees. The peaſants in the Levant, whether acquainted with this fact, or whether directed to the practice by accident alone, have been accuſtomed to break branches from the male palm while in flower, and attach them: to ihe female plant, which they find to be conſtantly produẽtive of an abunNlli dant dant crop. This fact has alſo been proved by a moſ deciſive experiment of M. Greditſch. There was in the royal garden at Berlin a beautiſul palui- tree, a female plant, which, however, though twenty-five years old, had been always barren.. There was another palm at Leipie of the male kind, which bloſomed every year. This ingenions botaniſt. undertook to fecundate the palm at Berlin from thãt at Leipſic, and had ſome of thę, bloſſoms conveyed by the poſt. The conſequence was, that he produced that ſeaſon excellent dates; and the experiment; proſecuted with ſome variation for ſeveral ſucceeding ycars, is attended ith the ſame ſucceſs ⸗. J It has been ſaid, that the pollen as deſtined ſor the impregnation of the germen. This is perſormed in the following manner. The antheræ, which at the ſirſt opening of the flower are whole, burſt ſoon aſter, and diſcharge the pollen. Being diſperſed about the flower, part of the poſien lodges on the ſurface of the ſtigma, where it is detained by the moiſture with which that part is coveredl Each ſingle grain or atom of the pollen has been obſerved by the microſcope to hurſt in this uid, and is ſuppoſed to diſcharge ſomething which impregnates the germen below: vhat the Tubſtance i is which is ſo diſeharge, and whether it actually paſſes through the ſtyle into the germen, ſeems yet undetermined, from the great difficulty ofſ obſerving ſuch minute parts and operations. In ſome vegetables, the ſtamina move towards the piſtillum; and a very evident motion of them ĩs obſerved in the flowers of the common berberry, c on touehing them with  the point of a pin n. 3i lE ] 3 Bonnet Contemp. p- 6. The novRHME T Of vegetables, as it is ſo intimately connected with the Iimportant ſcience of agriculture, ha⸗ aeſeryedly attracted conſiderable attention⸗ Mr. Boyle driec in an oven a quantity of earth proper for vegetation, and, æfer careſull; weięhing it, planted in it the ſeed oſ a ud he wotered ĩt with pure ran watſ and ĩt produced a plant, which weighed fourteen ponnãds, though the earth had ſuffered no ſenſite à iation. ſL vuiw-tree was planted by Van Helmont, in a pot, containing 100 pounds of earth. This was in general watered with diſtilled water, or ſometimes with rain-water, which appeared perfectly pure. The veſel containing the plant was covered in ſuch a manner as totally to exclude the entrance of all ſolid matter. At the end of five years, upon taking out the plant, he found it to have increaſed in weight not leſ than 119 pounds, though the earth had loſ only two ounces of its original veight. Theſe experiments would admit oſ ſome doubt, and muſt have remained in a great meaſure inexplicable, but for the experiments of Mr. Cavendiſh, and the facts related by Dr. Prieſtley, which place it beyond a doubt, that vegetables have a power of decompoſing water, and converting it, with what they derive from the atmoſphere, into almoſt all the different matters found to exiſt in their ſubſtance. For the products of wood in diſtillation, 1 muſt refer the reader to what has been advanced in the chapter on carbon, or the carbonaceous principle. All the proper juices of vegetables depend on the organization, as is evident ſfrom the operation of graſting. From the materials of ſimple water and air, are produced thoſe wonderful diverſities of peculiar juices and fruits, which the vegetable world affords; and the immenſe variety of taſtes, ſmells, &c. In the ſame vegetable what a variety ĩs found The bark is different in taſte from the wood, the peculiar juices have ſomething different from them both, and the pith of plants affords a matter which could not have been expected from their exterior properties. The root is often different from the ſtem, and the fruit from both, in all their ſenſible qualities. In whatever way the nouriſhment of vegetables is received, it may fairly be ſaid to conſiſt principally of water. I am inclined to believe, however, that calcareous earth, in ſmall portions, may enter into the compoſition of at leaſt many vegetables; ſince animals which exiſt entirely on vegetable food are found to have in their ſolid parts, the bones for inſtance, a confiderable portion of this ſubſtancæ; though it muſt be confeſſed, that chemical analyſis, as far as it has hitherto gone, does not warrant us in ſuppoſing calcareous earth to be an eſſential conſtĩzuent of all vegetable matter. It may be ſaid further, that on ſome occafions the addition oſ other mætters, as of difſerent kinds of manure, adds greatly to the growth of vegetables; but in whatever degree a rich ſoil or dung may add to the Iuxuriance of growth, other facts ſeem to prove that it is not eſſential to vegetation. It is well known that many herbs ſiouriſh in pure water, and that pear, plum, and cherry trees, planted in pure moſs, have arrived at ſuch perfection as to produce good fruit . Different æ It is but fair to inſert the following fact, which ſeems to favour the neceſity of carbonic matter to the growth and increaſe of at leat ſome ſpecies of vegetables. ue M. Ruchert is perſoaded that earth and water, in proper proportion,, form the ſole nutriment of plants; but M. Giobert has clearly hewn the contrary; for, having mixed pure earth of Diſferent theories have been advanced, to account for the oper. ton of manures in promoting the growth oſ vegetables, none of which ſeem ltovether ſatisfactory. The common opinion ĩs, that the ſubſtances employed as manures are the food of plants, and are abſorbed by their roots. Tnis hypotheſis may be true to a certain extent, when applied to ſome manures, but cannot be true with regard to them all; for it is well known, that not only chalk and lime, but even ſlints, are very beneficial to ſome ſollss. Another opinion ĩs, that manures act by bringing ſolls to ſuch a conſiſtence as is ſavourable to the growth of the roots of vegetables, and to the aſfording of them water in a proper quantity. A third opinion is, that manures act as ſtimuli on the roots of vegetables, and thus excite them to more vigorous actionn. Some authors think that manvres act as ſolvents on matters previouſly contained in the ſoll, and thus fit them for entering the roots of plants; and others, that they act chemically, by formnę combinations which are favourable to vegetation: Vhich of theſe hypotheſes is beſt founded, it is diſãcult to determine; butĩt does not ſeem unlikely that they may be all true to a certain extentWhen we attempt to diſcover the component principles of the objects around us, and the ſources whence they are ſupported, we are loſt in the greatneſs and diverſity of the ſcenes preſented to us. We ſee animals nouriſed by vegetables, vegetables apparently by the remains of animals, and foſſils compoſed of the relics allum, filex, calcareous earth, and magneſia, in various prorortions, and moiſtened them with water, he found that no grain would grow in them; but when they were moiſtened with water from a dunghill, corn grew in them proſperouſly. Hence the neceſſity f the carbonLic ꝑiinciple is apparent?—&iran on Manures, p- 42. oſ bot theſe kingdoms. It is certain, however, that vegetables muſt in every part oſ the globe have preceded animals. A ſeed of moſę loduing in a crevice of a bare rock is nouriſhed by the atmoſphere, and the moiſture a fforded by the rains and dews. It comes to perfection, and ſheds its ſeeds in the mouldering remains oſ its own ſubſtunce. Its oſftpiing do the ſame, till a cruſt of port of graſs and other vegetables of the ſame growth. The ſame proceſs going forward, ſhrubs, and laſtly, the largeſt trees, may find a firm ſupport on the once barren rock, and brave the efforts of the tempeſt. From the advantages derived from a change of crops in agriculture, ĩt has been ſuppoſed thaet diſferent vegetables derive diſferent kinds of nouriſhment from the ſame ſoil, ſelecting what is beſt adapted to their own ſupport, and leaving a ſupply of nouriſhment of another kind for vegetables of a difſerent ſpecies. Was this, however, the caſe, vegetables would not ſo much impede each other's growth when placed near together. And in the operation of grafting, we have a clear proof, that the juices received by the root of one ſpecies of tree may, by the organization of the inſerted twig, be ſubſervient to the growth of leaves, flowers, and ſruit of a diſferent kind. The advantage derived from a change of crops may be better explained on other principles: ſome plants extend their roots horizontally on the ſurface of the ſoil, others ſtrike them downwards to a conſiderable depth. Some plants are found tò bind or harden the ſoll, others to looſen it. Thus, for example, wheat and rye- graſs render a ſoil ſtiſf, while pulſe, clover and turnips pulverize itt. By varying the crops, therefore, the ſoil is preſerved in a middle ſtate, between too much ſtifineſs and too much ſriability. Nor is this the only good eſect ariſing from this differer.ce of ruott. From this circumſtance ſome vegetables draw their nouriſhment ſrom the ſurface of the earth, while others derive it partly from a greater depth. So that by a change of crops, a larger portion of the ſoil is made to contribute to the nouriſament of plants than could have been effected by the cultivation of any ſingle ſpecies. One other advantage to be derived from a change of crops, is this: ſome plants extract almoſt the whole of their nouriſhment ſrom the ſoil; and this is particularly the caſe with thoſe which are moſt valuable, and which contain the greateſt quantity of ſolid matter. By the repetition of ſuch crops, however, the ſoil is found to become too much exhauſted. There are other plants which derive a large proportion of their nouriſhment from the air; by ſuch therefore the ſoll will be much leſs exhauſted, and under a crop of them vill be in ſome meaſure at reſt. The good effects of a change of crops may therefore be ſufficiently explained, without ſuppoſing that each particular ſpecies of vegetables is nouriſhed by a different kind of food. This opinion is alſo neceſſarily attended with two great difficulties: one is, that there exiſts in every ſoll as many diſtinct kinds of nouriſhment, as there are ſpecies of plants capable of growing in that ſoll; the other, that plants are endued with the faculty of diſcerning and ſelecting, ſrom all theſe kinds, their own proper nouriſhment. The former of theſe ſuppoſitions is too abſurd to merit the leaſt attention, and the latter has been diſproved by actual experirent, ſince plants are not able to prevent their roots ſrom abſorbing ſuch matters as prove poiſonous to them. Other vriter], however, have been more moderate, and though they have rejected the idea of ſpecific nouriſhment in gerneral, have nevertheleſs imagined thãat the hypotheſis might be well ſounded with reſpect t0 particular ſpecies of vegetables. This they infer from the exiſtence of ſoæcific manures, as ſoot for ſaintſoin, aſhes for white clover, and ſome others. It does not ſcem poſſible, however, to draw a line of diſtinction; and if ve reject the idea of a ſpecific nouriſhment in general, we cannot admit it in particular inſtances. In order to diſcover whether plants have an actual pover of diſtinguiſhing matters preſented to their roots, a friend, who aſſiſted me in compiling this part of the work, made, among others, the following experiment. . A vigorous plant of mint was placed in a twoounce phial, filled with filtrated well-water, to which were added four drops of a moderately ſtrong ſolution oſ ſal martis. On examining the plant the folIowing day, no other effect was obſerved, than that the very tips of the radicles were withered and black. Four more drops of the ſolution vere now added. On the third day the appearances were the ſame; and no new change taking rl ce on the fourth, twelve more drops of the ſolution vere added. On the fifth day the roots appeared oſa yellowiſh green colour, and the top drooped very much. The larger leaves were pretty much withered and blackened. The æbſorption of the water appeared to be in ſome meaſure impeded, but not entirely preventedl. On the ſixth day the whole plant was withering very faſt; the roots became of a dark olive-green colour, and the larger leaves were become very black, eſpecially the foot-ſtalks and the projecting fibres. On the ſeventh day the blackneſs had made ſtill further progreſs, and the plant was dead. A ſuſſicient prooſ that ſome of the iron was abſorbed by the plant, may be drawn ſrom the following circumſtanceits leaves when maD Fallow Land. Iook vi. ceratedi in ditilled ater, produced a black colour vith galls. The leaves of a plant of mint, which had been nouriſhed by water alone, when tried by the ſame teſt, produced no colour whatever. Trifling as this experiment may appear, it proves two points; that plants have not the power of rejecting even injurious matters when preſented to their roots; and that other matters beſides vater and air are capable of being abſorbed by them. Agriculture ſeems yet to be nearly in its infancy, /nd eventhe benefit produced by the common cuſtom of letting lands lie fallow, has not yet been ſatisfactoTily: ex lained. Sòmething may no doubt be attributed to the deſtruction of weeds, but more probably to ſome change produced in the ſoll by its being expoſed to the action of the ſun and air. The management of nitre- beds may tend to throw ſome light on this ſubject. Theſe are compoſed of calcareous earth and dung cemented together. After being expoſed for ſome months to the ãir, they are found to contãin a quantity of nitrous æcid, which, uniting to the calcarequs earth, forms a ind of ſalt, which i is extracted by lixiviationn. Now calcareous earth and dung are 1wo of the moſt powerſul kinds of manure, and it does not ſeem improbable that their fertilizing powers may be in ſome manner connected with their property ef affording nitrous acid. ⸗ C u A P. V. VEGETABLE SUBSTANCES. Oſ ihe moſt renarkable Vegetable Product: sns. Vegetable Oxyds Vegetable Acids. /Other cſſential S8alts of Vegetables. T has been already remarked, that the ſimple component principles, which are eſſential to the formation of vegetable matter, are but three in number, namely, carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. From the various proportions in which theſe ingredients are combined, reſults almoſt all the variety of vegetable matters which fall under our notice. Sugar, mucus (under which term Iinclude the different kinds of gums, and ſtarch) are vegetable oxyds, having hydrogen and charcoal combined, in different proportions, as their radicals or baſes, and united with oxygen, ſo as to bring them to the ſtate of oxyds. From the ſtate of oxyds they are capable of being changed into that of acids, by the addition of more oxygen; and according to the degrees of oxygenation, and the proportion of hydrogen and charcoal in their baſis, they form the ſeveral kinds of vegetable acids. On the other. hand, gum by being deprived of oxygen is capable of affording oil. M. Woulfe has f und that a pound of gum arabic diſtilled with a quarter of a pound of vegetable alkali, furniſhes a conſiderable quantity of oll. The liquor which riſes along with it is not at all acid; thereſore the acid of the gum remains united with the. aliali. Honey eſſorded copiouſly an oll, when ſubmitted to the ſame proceſ. D3 The The following are all the vegetable acids hitherto known. 1. Acetous acid, or vinegar. 2. Oxalic acid, or that of ſorrel and ſugar. . Tartarous acid. . Pyro æ, or empyreumatic, tartarous acid. Citric acid, or that of lemons. Malic acid, or that of apples. Pyro-mucous acid. . Pyro- ligneous acid. 9. Gallic acid, or that of galls. 10. Benzoic acid, or that of gum Benjamin. 1I. Camphoric acid. 12. Succinic acid, or that of amber. - A O Nitrous acid, repeatedly diſtiiled with gums, mucilages and ſugar, is decompoſed, the azote in part eſcapes, and the oxygen uniting with the inſ=lammable matter of theſe ſubſtances, produces the acid of ſugar. By a contiuation of the proce, however, the hydrogen anc charcoal of the murilaginous matters are ſeparaed; the charcoal, combining with the oxygen, forms carronic acid gas, and the hydrogen either eſcapes in the ſtate of inflammable air, or, attracting part of the oxygen, forms wacr. From this view of the ſubect, together with other tucts, it has been inſerred, that a greater or leſs proportion of vital air, united with the other two general principles of vegetables, hydrogen and chercoal, produces all the various acids of vegetables. Thus tartar is ſald to have been converted into the acid of apples, by treatment with s Pyro from the Grek æ45 (fire) means any thing prepared or extracted by ſire. Empyreumatic Eas the ſame etymology and meaning. nitrous acid. The acid of apples, by the continuance of the operation, becomes converted into acid of ſugar, or acid of ſorrel, which are the ſame thing. The ſame proceſs further continued, affords vinegar. Hence it ſhould ſcem that according to the greater progreſs of the operation of combuſtion, or the combination of vital air with the baæſis, the acids of tartar, of apples or unripe ſruit, of ſorrel or ſugar, of vinegar, and laſtly of charcoal, are produced. In this order of proceeding, thę acids become more and more perfect, and leſs eaſily decompoſable; and it probably proceeds from this cauſe, that the reverſe of theſe proceſſes could never be completely accompliſhed. Profeſſor Murray, of Gottingen, has aſſured us, that he has obtained acid of ſugar by repeated diſtillations and congelation, without uſing nitrous acid. Abbẽ Fontana obtained an acid perfectly like that of ſugar from all the gums and reſins. Mr. Watt of Birmingham, when making ſome experiments relative to ink, obſerved a number of particles floating in the fluid, which had the ſhape of cryſtals of the ſaccharine acid, and upon examination were found to be really ſuch; and, conducting the proceſs in the uſual way with the nitrous acil, he found that aſtringent vegetable matters contain the acid of ſugar in greater abundance than that ſubſtance from which it derives i its name. Theſe ſaline matters are called eſential ſalts of vegetables. There are ſome others which are alſo called eſſential ſalts, but are not peeuliar to vegetables. Such as the fixed vegetable alkali, which may be xtracted by incineration from plants in general, and the fixed foſſil alkali, which is only extracted from marine plants. Several neutral ſalts my ulſ/ be extracted f-om particular vegetables: as vitrriolated tartar from millefoll, and from aſtringent and aromatic plants; Glaubers ſalt from tamariſk; com: ca ſælt and muriat of pot-aſh from marine plantss. M:ny other ſalts vill doubtleſ be found, whæn a greater number of C u ar. V. OF THE MORE SIMPLE VEGETABLE COMPOUNDS. Gam—&um ArabicGum Trogacanth.Common European Gum Sugar; obia ned from moſt VegetablesDProceſi of matingSugor. Manna —Fat, or expreſſid OilsChocolate. Vege: able Wax Analy ſis of Olive Oil.Eſential OilsOf Cinramiu Of Baln, Peptermint and Ioru-od. —OF LavenderOF Roſes. —Of AniſeeOfF Parſee,Of CanomileOf Saſlafras and Carraway f Nuimeg. Pepper and MaceBallams.DBalſam of TDoluDBenæoin and Storax.Camphor. ReſinsGum Copal. Catehouc or elaſtic Gum.. F ecula. BriouyDPotatcesSago Salep.Farina cr Flour. Gluten.Stareb.Saccharine Maiter f heatDBread.Colouring Matters of Vegetal lisPrinciples of the Art of Dying.ArnottoBaſtard SaſronAdrchil Indigo. Altanct Root. LuteclaMadderWalnutAlder. Sumach, &c.—Gulls.Latles. HERFE are certain compound ſubſtances, which are formed by the proceſs oſ vegetation, and may be obtained without the application of any greater heat than that of beiling water, or the action of any other ſolvents, than water and ardent ſpirit. Theſe ſubſtances may be reſerred to the following heads :I. Gum. 2. Sugar. 3. Fat Olls. 4. Eſſential Olls. 5. Balſams. 6. Camphor. 7. Reſin. . Pure fecula of vegetables. . Farina. 1I0. Vegetable colouring matters. I. GumM.Its characters, when in its pureſt ſtate, are thoſe of a ſubſtance inodorous, inſipid, generally folid, of more or leſs tranſparency, with ſometimes a ſight tinge of colour, generally yellow; eaſily ſoluble in water into a viſcid liquor, called mucilage, in which ſtate it originally exiſted in the vegetable; not àcted on by ſpirit of wine or oils; not volatile in the heat of boiling water, nor fuſible in any heat, but ſubject to the ſame changes as other vegetable matter. Gun, in its dry and ſolid ſtate, is not in the leaſt acted on by oils, but mucilage maniſeſts a conſiderable diſpeſition to unite with them. Gum is not a ſolvent of reſinous or balſamic matter; this matter vill, however, be diſiolved in water, in conſequence of being added to gum, eſpecially by the aſſiſtance of agitation. Thus oils and balſams may in many caſes be combined with water, and remain combined with it, forming a milly ſolution, particularly if the quantity of gum is conſiderable. This kind of combination is very frequent in plants. There are many in which oll and gum are naturally unitedl. The uſcful juice of the poppy is of this kind, and from ſuch compounds gum reſins are obtained, by the evaporation of their watry parts. Theſe compounds have ſtill ſolubility in water, though the gum is the part chieſly diolved; the reſinons part is either leſt in its concrete ſtate; or being merely ſuſpenced, and not diſſolved, its particles are interpoſed between thoſe of the gum and water, and occaſion a degree of opacity. Such ſubſtances alſo in their folid ſtate as conſiſt of a mixture of gem and reſin are always opake, while the pure gums and pure reſins have more or leſs of tranſparency. Gum is very abundant in the vegetable kingdom; it is found in a great number of roots; the young ſhoots and young leaves contain it in large quantities, and its preſence may be known by its viſcous and adheſive quality, when theſe parts are cruſhed between the fingers. Gum is uſually obtained by wounding the bark of particular trees. It is obſervable, that ſaccharine ſruits, when ſour and unripe, are found to contain gum and an acid; whence it ſeems not unfair to conclude, that ſaccharine matter is formed oſ theſe matericls, operated on by the proceſs of vegetation. The moſt common gums areI. Gum Arabic, vhich flows from the acacia in Egypt and Arabia, and is oſ the ſame nature with gum Senegal, which is ſometimes ſold inſtead of it. 2. Gum tragacaænth, vhich ĩs obtained from a thorny buſh, growing in Crete, Aſia, and Greecee 3. The gum which flows from certain trees growing in this country, particularly apricot and plum-trees. The eſſential characters of all theſe gums are the ſame, but gum tragacanth is by far the moſt powerſul in producing a thick and tenacious mucilage. II. SuGAR. The mixed and various properties of this ſubſtance, have rendered chemiſts very doubtful to what claſs of bodies it ought to be referred. By ſome it has been called inflammable, by others ſaline, and by others it has been claſſed among gummy and mucilaginous matters. Sugar is ſoluble, both in water and ardent ſpirit. It is more inflammable than gums, and has not been proved to contain any ſalt ready formed, except ſome ſixed alkali. It is the only principle the preſence of which enables fluids to take on the vinous fermentation. Saccharine matter is found in a great number ofvegetables; ſuch as the maple, the birch, the red beet, the parſnip, the grape, farinaceous grain, potatoes: Margraſf indeed extracted it from moſt vegetables; and it is well known that honey is a ſaccharine matter, collected by the inſtinct of the bee from an infinite variety of plants, but principally from flowers. The arundo ſaccharifera or ſugar-cane contains this matter hovever in larger quantities, and aſfords it more readily, than any other plant. The ripe canes are twice cruſhed between iron cylinders, by which they are ſqueezed completely dry, and ſometimes even reduced to powder. The cãne juice or melaũes is received in a leaden bed, and thence conveyed i into a veſſel called the receiver; thence it runs to the boiling-houſe, where it is received into a copper pan or caldron, which is called a clarifier. Of theſ e there are generally three, and their dimenſions. are determined by the extent of the owners plantation. Methods of quick boiling are indiſpenſably neceſſery, as the pureſt cane juiee, vil not remain twenty coming tainted. As ſoon as the ſtream from the receiver has filled the boiler or clarifier with freſh liquor and the fire ĩs lighted, the temper, which iĩs generally Briſtol white lime in powder, is ſtirred into it. This ĩs done in order to neutralize the ſuper abundant acid, to get rid of which is the greatdiſficulty in making fugar. As the force of the fire increaſes, a ſcum is thrown up, which proceeds from the gummy matter of the cane, with ſome of the oil, and ſuch matters as are entangled in the mucilage. The heat is now ſuſfered to increaſe gradually, ill it approaches to that of boiling water; but it: muſt by no-means be ſufered to boll. When the ſcum begins to riſe into bliſters, and break into white froth, hich generally appears in about forty minutes, it is known to be ſuſficiently heated. The fire is then extinguiſhed, and, if circumſtances vill admit, the liquor is Ieſt a full hour undiſturbed. The liquor is now carefully dravn of, ſo as to leæave the ſcum, and conveyed by a gutter to the evaporating boiler; and if produced- ſrom good materials, and well managed, it will appear almoſt tranſparent. In this veſſel ĩ it is ſuſfered 1o boil, and the ſcum as it riſes is ‘continually taken ofs, till the Iiquor becomes finer, ſomewhat thicker, and almoſt of the colour of Madeira wine Being transferred to a ſmaller copper, the boiling and ſcumming are continued; and if the liquor is not ſo clear as might be expected, lime- water is added, vhich thins the mixture, ſo as to ſuffer the impurities to riſe more readily to the ſurface. When, in conſequence of ſuch ſcumming and. evaporation, the liquor is ſo reduced. that it can be contained in the third copper, it is laded into it, and ſo on to the laſt copper, which is called the teache. This arrangement ſuppoſes four coppers, beſides the three clarifiers. In the teache the liquor undergoes another evaporation, till it is ſuppoſed to be boiled encugh to be removed ſrom the fire. The cooler (of which there are generally ſix) is a ſhallow wooden veſſel, about eleven inches deep, ſeven feet in length, and from five to ſix feet wide. A cooler of this kind holds a hoghead of ſugar. Herẽ the ſugar grains, that is, as it cools it runs into a coarſe irregular maſs of im;erfect cryſtals, ſeparating ĩtſelf from the melaſſes. F rom the cooler iĩt is taken to the curing-houſe; where the melaſſes drains from it. When it ĩs cooled ſo that the finger may be plunged into iĩt vithout injury, it is poured into barrels, placed over certain ciſterns, and pierced at the bottom with many holes, imperſectly ſtopped with the ſtalk of a plantain leaf, through which the ſyrup drains. In the ſpace of three weeks the ſugar becomes tolerably dry and fair It is then ſaid to be cured, and the proceſs is finiſhed. The ſugar thus obtained i is called muſcovads, and is the rav material whence the Britiſh ſugar-bakers chieſly make their Ioaſ or refined lump. The juice of the ſugar- cane contains a ſuperabundance of acid, which prevents the dry concretion. In order to get rid of this, they employ lime-wa ter, as the ſ eſ is ſeparated by its means from ever; ęther  Juvpens The lime powerſully atrracting he acid w hen united vith it, ſorms an inſoluble ſal which either falls to the bottom or mixes with the ſcum. Many perſons have ſuppoſed that a portion of the lime remains mixed vith the ſugar; but Bergman aſſures us, that if the purification is properly conducted, the nature of the ingredients, the circumſtances of the operation, and finally the moſt accurate analyſis, abundantly ſhe, that there is not the ſmalleſt trace of lime remaining. Good ſugar diſſolves totally in diſtilled water, which could not poſſibly be the caſe if there was preſent any lime, either in a ſeparate ſtate or united with the ſaccherine acid. There is another ſort of ſugar, which is much uſed, and which in England paſſes by the name of Liſbon ſugar, but which in the Weſt Indies is called clayed ugar; the proceſs for making it is as follows: A quantity of ſugar from the cooler is put into conical pots or pans, with the point downwards, having a hole about half æn inch in diameter at bottom, for the meIſſes to drain through, but which is at firſt ſtopped vith a plug. As ſoon as the ſugar in theſe pots is cool, and becomes a ſixed body, which is known by the middle of the top falling in, the plug is taken out, and the pot placed over æa large jor, intended to receive the ſyrup which flows through. In this ſtate it is leſt as long as the melaſſes continues to drop, when a ſtratum of - clay is ſpread on the ſugar. The water gradually draining from the clay, dilutes the melaſſes, in conſequence of which more of it comes away from the ſoger, which becomes whiter ard finer. A ſecond covering of clay is put on when the firſt is dry, and pater is again ſuffered to filter through, after which the loaves are carried to an oven to ry. At the end of eight or ten days theſe loaves are broken, and the povdered ſugar is conveye to Europe. Certuin juices which flow out of plants are of a ſaccharine nature; ſuch is manna, which is produced by the pine, the fir, the oa, the mople, the juniper, the ſig, the willow, &c.; but the aſh, the ſarch, and the alhagi afſord it in the largeſt quantities. Robel, Rondelet, and others, have obſerved at Montpelier, upon the olive trees, a kind of manna, to which they have given the name of oelicmeli. Tcurneſort collected it from the ſame trees at Aix and Toulon. The aſh, which is very abundant in Calabria and Sicily, aſfords the manna of commerce: it flows ſpontaneouſly from theſe trees, but is much more abundantly collected by making inciſions in the bark. That which is procured by introducing chips of wood or ſmall ſticks into artificial apertures, forms a kind of ſtalactites, perforated within, and called manna in the tear. Manna in flakes flows from the bark, and contains ſome impurities. Manna affords, by treatment with the nitrous acid, the ſame acid as is obtained from ſugar. III. Far OILs are not emitted from the ſurface of vegetables, but are obtained by preſſure from their emulſive ſeeds or kernels. They feel ſmooth to the touch, are generally, when recent, without ſmell or taſte, and are inſoluble in water. They are not volatilized but by a heat conſiderably ſuperior to that of boiling water, and do not take fire till ſuficiently heated to be volatilizedl. When they are burned on the wick of a lamp, ſmall portions are ſucceſſively brought to its extremity, and being there volatilized, undergo inſlammation. Moſt fat oils are fluid, and require a conſiderable come ſolid by a very ſlight degree of cold; and others again are almoſt alu vays Tolid: : theſe laſt are called hutters. Such are thoſe of the cacao-nut, from which chocolate is. made, and alſo of the cocoa- nut. Vegetable wax is of the ſame nature, only more ſolid. It is the production of China; and is there made into yelIow, white, or green candles, the colour varying according to the manner in which the wax is extracted. The catièins of birch and poplar aſford a ſmall quantity ofa ſimilar vax. M. Berthollet eaſil y whitens it with oxygenated muriatic acid. l PFat òils expoſed to the air attract its oxygen, and become acid or rancid. Water and ſpirit of wine, by abſtracting this acid, deprive them of their ſtrony taſte, but never completely reſtore them to their original ſtate. M. Bertholiet has diſcovered that fat oils, thinly ſpread on the ſurface of water, and expoſed to the air, become thick, and aſſume the appearance of wax. This appears to ariſe from the abſorption of oxygen, as the, oxygenated muriatic acid  produces this change more ſuddenly. Theſe oils afford by diſtillation a ſmall quantity of vater impregnated with a peculiar acid, a light oil, a denſe ol, and inflammeble and fixed airs. The quantity of charcoal Ieſt behind is not abundant. By reciſtilling the firſt products, more water, and an oĩl which becomes lighter each time, are obtained. Lavoiſier collected the products of olive-cil burned in an apparatus properly conſtructed to aſcertain their nature and properties. He obtained ſeventy-nine parts of carbon, and twenty- one of hydrogen, from one hundred of oil. From theſe component parts, inferences may be drawn reſpecting the acid, the water, the fixed air, and the inflammable air, aſforded by partial decompoĩ ſitions or combuſtions of this fluid, When lllls oils oils are burned in pure air, one of their component principles, hydrogen, is combined with pure air, and forms water; while charcoal, ĩts other component part, combines with pure air alſo, and forms fixed air. The denſe animal oils, ſuch as butter, tallow, fat, and the oll of the whale, exceedingly reſemble vegetable fixed oils. They appear, however, to contain a proportion of azotic air and animalized matter, probably in the ſtate of ſerum or jelly. Agitation in water ſeparates a mucilaginous matter from fat vegetable oils, which ſeems to be the cauſe of their becoming rancid. They combine with pure fixed alkalies into ſoap, and they alſo unite with magneſia and lime, which form ith them ſoapy compounds. IV. EssENTIAL OILs are remarkable ſor a ſtrong aromatic ſmell, and are ſuſſiciently volatile to riſe with the heat of boiling water. They are in general ſoluble in ſpirit of wine, and their taſte is very acrid. They are much more inflammable than the fat oils. Eſſential or volatile oĩls exiſt in moſt fragrant vegetables, and in various plants are found in different parts; thus the oil of cinnamon is found in the bark; of balm, peppermint, and wormwood, in the leaves; of the roſe and lavender, in the ſ=lower; oſ nutmegs, aniſe, and fennel, in the ſeeds. They are obtained either by expreſſion, as from the peel of oranges and lemons, or by diſtillation with water. For the latter purpoſe, the plant is put into a copper alembic, with water; the water being made to boil, comes over together with the oil into the receiver, and ĩs obtained ſeparate by decantation. Some oſ the eſſential oils are ſluid, as that of lavender; others congeal by cold, as that of anniſeed; cthers are always concrete or ſolid, as thoſe of roſes and parſey. They differ much vith reſpect to colours: thus, vil of lavender is yellow, that of cinnamon deep yvellow, that of parſley green, that of camomile blue. Some of the eſſential olls float in water,, as moſt of the oils obtained from plants growing in temperate climates; others, as thoſe of ſaſſaſras and carrawayſeeds, and moſt of the oĩls from hot countries, ſink in that fluidl. This property is not, however, invariable withreſpect to climate, as the eſſential oils of nutmeg, pepper, and mace, are lighter than water. It is remarkable, that eſſential oĩlls ſometimes entirely differ in their properties from the plant which affords them; thus, oil of pepper is mild, and oil of wormwood is not bitterThe perfume, or principſe of ſcent, in plants, to which Boerhaave gave the name of ſpiritus retior, ſeems in general to reſide in the eſſential oll. It compoſes an extremely ſmall part of the weight of vegetables, as may be inferred ſrom the loſs of fragrance ſuſtained by eſſential oils with Iittle or no loſs of weight. It does not ſeem improbable, that the perfume, or principle of ſcent, in plants, is a gas of a peculiar nature. Its inviſibility and volatility, the manner in which ĩt is expanded and diſperſed in the atmoſphere, together with certain experiments made by Dr. Ingenhouz, on the noxious gas afforded by flowers, render this opinion very probable. It is eaſy to diſcover the adulteration of volatile oĩls, eſther by pouring ardent ſpirit on them, which vill not diſſolve the fat oil they may be contaminated with; or if they are dropped on paper, and held to the fire, the eſſential oil evaporates, leaving the fat oil behind, which makes a greaſy ſpot. If oil of turpentine is fraudulently added to them, its ſmell betrays its preſence when treated in this manner. BY expoſure to the air they become thick, and in proceſ of time aſſume the character of reſin. Needleſhaped cryſtals are depoſited ſimilar to thoſe afforded by camphor when ſublimed. Geoſfroy the younger obſerved them in the eſſential oils of motherwort, marjorum, and of turpentine. The ſame chemiſt obſerves, that their ſmell is ſimilar to that of camphor. Eſſential olls combine very readily with ſulphur, and form compounds called balſams of ſulphur, in vhich the ſulphur is ſo far changed that it cannot be recovered. V. The proper vegetable BaLsAMs are oily aromatic ſubſtances, imperfectly fluid, obtained by inciciſions made in certain treess The word balſam has been uſed in a very extenſive ſenſe, to denote a variety of vegetable ſubſtances, which agree in conſiſtence, though differing very widely in their nature and properties. This denomination, however, is more properly confined to ſuch reſinous matters as poſſeſs a fragrant ſmell, and more eſpecially contain acid, odorant, and concrete ſalts, vhich may be extracted by decoction or ſublimation; ſuch as benzoin, balſam of Tolu, and ſtorax. VI. CAMPHOR Is a peculiar vegetable ſubſtance, of a ſtrong ſmell and taſte, hich reſembles eſential oils in ſome of its properties, and differs from them in others. It is much more volatile than the eſſential oils; vith the moſt gentle heat it ſublimes and chryſtalizes in hexagonal laminæ attached to a middle ſtem. By a ſudden heat it melts before it riſes. Water does not diſſolve it; but it is plentifully ſoluble in ſpirits of wine, æther, and concentrated acids, from the two former of which it is ſeparated by the addition of wãter without alteration. Fixed and volatile oils diſſolve camphor with the aſiſtance of heat, and depoſit cryſtals in the form of a beautiful vegetation by cooling A peculiar acid is formed by the diſtillation of nitrous æcid with this ſubſtance. Camphor has been obtained in ſmall quantities from the roots of Zedoary, thyme, roſemary, ſage, anemony, and other vegetables, by diſtillation. It is obſervable, that all theſe plants aſford a much larger quantity of camphor, when the ſap has been ſuffered to paſs to the concrete ſtate by ſeveral months drying. Thyme and peppermint, ſlowly dried, afford much camphor; and M. Acherd hus obſerved, that a ſmell of camphor is diſengaged when volatile oil of fennel is treated with acids. M. Chaptal concludes, from theſe and ſome other facts of the ſame kind, that the baſis of camphor forms one of the conſtituent parts of ſome volatile oils, in which it exiits in the liquid ſtate, and does not become concrete, but by combining with the baſis of vital air. The camphor of commerce is obtained from a ſpecies of Iaurel which grows in China, Japan, and in the iſtarids of Borneo, Sumatra, Ceylon, &c. The tree which produces it ſometimes contains it in ſo large a quantity, that ĩt need only be cleft, in order to obtain very pure tears of camphor, of conſiderable ſize. The roots oſ this tree afford camphor in by far the greateſt abundance, but ĩt is alo procured from the branches, trunk and leaves. The method of obtaining the camphor is by diſtilling the different parts of the tree with water. The alembic in which the operation is performed is covered with a capital or head filled with ſtraw. On the application of a ſuſficient heat, the camphor is ſublimed in ſmall greyiſh grains, which are afterwards united into larger maſſes. The camphor in this ſtate is impure; it is purified aſter being brought to Europe, principally in Holland, vhere it undergoes ſublimation in low ſat-bottomed glaſs veſſels. Chaptal ſays, that the Dutch mix an ounce of quick-lime with every pound of camphor previous to diſtillation. VII. RESINS are dried juices of plants, of the nature of eſſential olls. Almoſt all the concrete juices, diſtinguiſhed by the name of reſins, are ſoluble in ardent ſpirit, and not in water, whereas gums are ſoluble in water, æand not in ſpirit. They uſually flow from wounds made in the trunks of trees purpoſely to obtain them. They are inflammable, and burn with much ſmoke. In cloſed veſſels they do not riſe wholly by heat, but are decompoſed. Reſins differ from balſams in their ſmell, which is leſs agreeable, and eſpecially in their containing no concrete acid ſalt. The common reſin of the pine, the reſin of the fir, pitch, tar, and turpentine, are perfect reſins, and are ſoluble in ſpirit of wine. Copal, and the elaſtic ſubſtance called cooutchouc, which is the inſpiſſated juice oſ an African tree, are uſually but improperly reckoned among reſinous ſubſtances; though neither ſpirit of wine nor water diſſolves them. They are ſoluble, however, in oils, by the aſſiſtance of heat, and have been thought to be of the nature of fat oils, though they differ in many remarkable properties. The juices called gum-reſins, or the mixtures of gum and reſin, are not completely ſoluble either in water or ſpirit of wine. Both theſe menſtrua, however, by diſſolving one of the component parts, ſuſpend a portion of the other, ſfrom their intimate union. VIII. PurE FECULA OF VECETARLES.If the ſubſtance of a vegetable is reduced to a pulp by poundng, this pulp by ſtrong preſſure affords a turbid white or coloured fluid, which by ſtanding depoſits a ſubſtance more or leſs fibrous or pulverulent, according to the nature of the vegetable ſubſtance from which it was obtained. This is called the fecula of vegetables, and conſiſts almoſt entirely of ſtarch. Some parts of vegetables appear to be altogether compoſed of this matter; ſuch as the ſeeds oſ the gramineous and leguminous plants, tuberous roots, &c. Theſe parts in general afford the fineſt and moſt abundant fecula. The ſtems and leaves of vegetables afford only a coarſe filamentous depoſition, but if this is powdered and waſhed, the water carries off a fine fecula, perfectly ſimilar to that afforded by grain. All vegetables therefore, and all the parts of them, afford more or leſs of this matter; the only difference is, that in ſome parts it is naturally diſengaged from other ſubſtances, in others it is in ſuch a ſtate, that it muſt be ſeparated by a laborious proceſs. The fecula of ſome vegetables is ſeparated as an article of food: as from the root of briony, from potatotes, from the root of à very acrid plant called manioc, from the pith of a kind of palm which grows in the Moluccas, which affords the fecula called ſago; and from the root of a ſpecies of orchis, which affords ſelep. IX. FARINA.Flour, or the pulverized ſubſtance of farinaceous ſeeds, has a ſtrong analogy with the gummy and ſaccharine mucilages. Farinaceous ſeeds, if kept in a moderate temperature, and ſupplied with moiſture, are, by the incipient proceſs of vegetation, converted in æ great meaſure into ſeccharine mucilages, as happens in making malt. Wheat-flour ĩs the moſt perfect farina with which we are acquainted, and I ſnall therefore confine my deſcription to it; thongh ĩt muſt be confeſſed that this deſcription will not apply in all reſpects to the more imperfect ſpecies of farina. If a handſul of wheat-flour is taken and kneaded in a veſſel of water, underneath a ſtream from a cock, the water carries off a fine white powder, and the kneading muſt be continued till the water paſſes off clear. The flour is then found to be ſeparated into three ſubſtances; a greyiſa and elaſtic matter remaining in the hand, which is called the glutinous or vegetoanimal part; a white powder depoſited by the water, which is the fecula or ſtarch; and a ſubſtance held in ſolution by the water, which is of a ſaccharine mucilaginous nature. The glutinous matter exiſted before in the flour in a pulverized form, and acquires its tenacity by imbibing a portion of the fluid, but is totally inſoluble in it. It has ſcarcely any taſte, is elaſtic, ductile, and of a whitiſh grey colour. When drawn out, it extends to the length of about twenty times its diameter before it breaks, and appears as if compoſed of fibres placed beſide each other, according to the direction in which it has been drawn. If the force ceaſes, it recovers its original form by its elaſticity. When dry it is ſemitranſparent, and reſembles glue in its colour and appearance. If it is drawn out thin when firſt obtained, it may be dried by expoſure to the air, and in that ſtate has a poliſhed ſurface, reſembling that of animal membranes. If it is expoſed to warmth and moiſtur]e while wet, it putrefies like an animal ſubſtance. If this gluten in its dried ſtate is placed on burning coals, or held in the flame of a candle, it exhibits the characters of àn animal ſubſtance; it crackles, ſWells and burns, exactly like a feather or piece of horn. By diſtillation it affords, like animal ſubſtances, alkaline water, concrete volatile alkali, and an empyreumatic oil. Its coal is very diſficultly incinerated, aud does not aſſord fixed alkali. From theſe facts it follows, that this ſubſtance is totally different from all the others known to exiſt in vegetables, and in many of its characters reſembles the fibrous part of the blood. It is to this gluten that wheat- flour owes its property of forming a very adheſive paſte with water. This gluten does not appear to exiſt in any conſiderable quantity in other farinaceous ſubſtances, as rye, berlev, buck-wheat, rice, &c. M. Berthollet thinks t. at this glutinous ſubſtace contains phoſphoric ſalt, like animal matters, and that this is the reaſon of the difficulty with: which it is incinerated. Rouelle the younger found a glutinous ſubſtance in the fecula of plants, analogous to that of wheat. The powder which I remarked, as being ſeparated from the farina, and which, being only ſuſpended and not diſſolved in the water, falls to the bottom by reſt, is the amylaceous fecula or ſtarch, which indeed compoſes the greater part of the flour. This ſubſtance is very fine and ſoft to the touch; its taſte ĩs ſcarcely ſenſiblee When firſt extracted by the proceſs which has been deſcribed, iis colour is greyiſh; but the ſtarch- makers render it extremely white, by ſuſfering it to remain inthe water for a time, after it has become acid. Starch ſeems nearly allied to mucilaginous matters, and is torally di fferent from the glutinous ſubſtance laſt deſcribed. Its habitudes and products with the fire, or with nitrous acid, are nearly the ſame as thoſe of gum and of ſugar; but iſ differs from theſe ſubſtances in being ſcarcely, iſ at all, acted on by cold water, though with hot water it forms a gelatinous ſluid, It ſeems to be more remote from the ſaline ſtate than gum, æs gum is mere remote from ĩt than ſugar. Starch burns Iation with a naked fire, ĩt affords an acid water of a brown colour, and a very thick oil towards the end of the proceſs. Its coal is eaſily reduced to aſhes, hich contain fived alkali. The ũuiſtunce which was mentioned as being diſſolv in the water in which flour is waſhed, does not eſſentially differ from other ſaccharine mucilages. By evaporating the water in which it is contained, M. Poulletier obtained a viſcous, glutinous ſubſtance, of a browniſh yellow colour, and ſightly ſaccharine taſte. This ſubſtance, called by its diſcoverer the mucoſoſaccharine matter, exhibited all the phenomena of ſugar in its combuſtion and diſtillation. It is this which excites the acid fermentation in the water which floats above ſtarch; for, as Macquer vell obſerves, the latter is not at all ſoluble in cold water. The mucoſo- ſaccharine matter exiſts in a very ſmall proportion in wheat-flour. M. Fourcroy, however, is of opinion, notwithſtanding the ſmall quantity of it, that it is the part principally concerned in the fermentation by which bread is leavened. With reſpect to what is the nutrimental part of flour, all the ſubſtances into which it is reſolved, by waſhing it in water, ſeem well adapted to this purpoſe; but as the amylaceous matter is the moſt abundant, ſo it is probably the moſt important ingredient. The amylaceous matter in wheat is to the glutinous in the proportion of about three to two. Bread is the farina of grain, made into a paſte with water, and baked. Unleavened bread, or biſcuit, keeps jongeſt without ſpoiling, and is thereſore uſed at ſea, vhere baking would be extremely inconvenient. Bread uſed on ſhore is in general leavened, and for this purpoſe a quantity of yeat is added to it, while in the ſtate of dough; in conſequence of this, and of being ſtept in a warm temperature, it undergoes fermentation, attended with the extrication of air, by which the particles are ſeparated from each other, and the maſs ſwells and becomes more porous. This diſtenſion is ſtill further increaſed by the rareſaction of the air in baking, and thus is formed a ſubſtance much more miſcible with water than dough, and upon thi⸗ latter property ſeems to depend its greater wholeſomeneſs, as being more digeſtible. 9. COLOURING MATTERS Of VEGETABLES. On a knovledge of the colouring matters of vegetables, depends the art of dying, which conſiſts in extracting from various ſubſtances colouring particles, and applying them to ſtufs and other matters intended to be dyed, ſo that they ſhall adhere as firmly and durably as poſſiblee Dyers enumerate five colours, which they call primary, from the mixture of which other colours are produced: theſe are blue, red, yellow, nutcolour, and black. Good dyes are thoſe which can reſiſt the action of water, air, and oſ certain ſaline and ſaponaceous liquors, which are uſed as the proofs of the durability of colours. Falſe dyes are thoſe which cannot reſiſt theſe proofs. A great number of vegetable colouring matters, which are oſ an extractive or ſaponaceous nature, are readily diſſolved in water. The colouring principle of many other ſubſtances reſides in a purely reſinous matter, inſoluble in water, and in ſome inſtances attached to matters inſoluble, even in ſpirit of wine; but they are all acted on by alkalies, which convert them into a kind of ſoaps, miſcible with water. The principal colours of this nature are the annotto, a kind of fecula, obtained by maceration of the ſeeds of the urucu putreſied in water, and vhich dyes an orange yellow colour; the ſlower of carthamus or baſtard ſaſfron, which aſfords a very fine red; archil, which is a paſte prepared with moſſes, macerated in urine with lime, and which dyes red, The colour of indigo alſo reſides in a reſinous matter. Certain colouring ſubſtances are ſoluble in olls. Alkanet, or the red root of a kind of burgloſs, is of this ind, but cannot be uſed in dying. We may eaſily conceive that a coloured decoction may ſtain any ſtuſf which is dipped into it, and that this colouring matter may be again abſtracted by the application oſthe ſame menſtruum as it was originally ſuſpended in. But the action of thoſe dyes, which, although once diſſolved and ſuſpended in water, cannot again, after they are applied to ſtuffs, be waſhed out, is not ſo eaſily underſtood. Theſe latter, or durable dyes, alone deſerve attention. Dyes of different colours require different treatment. Stuſſs to be dyed ofa red or yellow colour muſt be boiled in water, with alum or fixed alkali, before they are dipped into the dying decoctions: the red colouring materials are kermes, cochineal, gum-lac, and madder; the yellow materials are luteola or dyers weed, and other yellow flowers. The ſtuffs for bue dyes require no previous preparationn. Theſe blue dyes are made of indigo, or the blue fecula obtained from woad, diſſolved in a lixivium of fixed alkali, or in urine, vith or without the addition of ſome green vitriul. The ſtuſfs intended to receive a root colour, require no previous preparation, but to be ſoaked in warm water. Theſe dyes are chieſly decoctions of walnut- ſhells, walnut-roots, alder-bark, ſumach, and ſaunders. Theſe root colours, which are all yellow, ſerve to form a very good ground, on which other more brilliant colours may be applied, and to them no ſaline or other matter is added. The black dyes, which are inks or decoctions of galls, mixed with green vitriol, require no previous preparation of the ſtufr. It is obſervable that wool takes the aye better than ſilk, ſilk than cotton, and cotton than fla&x. Writers on the art of dying hold different opinions reſpecting the manner in which colouring particles apply themſelves to the ſubſtances expoſed to their contact. Many have ſuppoſed that this application takes place only in proportion to the number and magnitude of the pores in the varicus ſubſtances. Macquer, who has paid great attention to this ſubject, ſuppoſes that the greater or leſs facility with which the colour is applied, depends on the reſpective nature of the colouring paris, and the ſubſtances propoſed to be dyed: and that dying is truly an external tinge or painting, which ſucceeds and laſts by virtue of an aſfinity and intimate union between the colour and the dyed ſubſtancee This ſerves to explain the uſe of the matters, which it is on many occaſions neceſſary that the ſtuffs ſhould imbibe, previous to immerſing them in the dying ſubſtance, The ſame thing may be illuſtrat2d by conſidering the proceſs employed in the preparation of certain colours called lakes. Vegetable colouring matters are diſſolved, and then precipitated by the addition of ſome other ſubſtance. Thus, for example, if madder is boiled in water, together with an alkali, and alum is then added, the earth of the alum vill be precipitated, together with the colouring matter, with which it will form an inſoluble pigment. A double decompoſition here takes place, the vitriolic acid quits the earth of alum to unite with the fixed alkali, and the vegetable matter unites Cu A P. VI. FERMENTATION. Yhree Kinds of Fermentationuhe vinous or ſpirituous.Spirit i Wine or Alcohol—EtherAcetous FermentationPutrid FermentationObſervaticns on Puti efuciion in general. AVING conſidered the ſtructure and compoA ſition of vegetable ſubſtances, it becomes neceſſary to direct our attention to certain ſpontaneous changes which they undergo, when deprived oſ the vital principlee Theſe changes are called fermentations, which are three in humber. and are termed, from their products, the vinous or ſpirituous, the acetous, and the putrid. The circumſtances univerſally neceſſary to fermentation are moiſture, a certain degree of heat, and the contact of air. The three inds of fermentation are ſometimes conſidered as different ſtages of one proceſs; this, however, ĩs an improper view of the ſubject, as each kind of fermentation is a peculiar proceſs, and totally diſferent from every other. Some bodies become acid without having undergone the ſpirituous fermentation, and others putrify without ſewing any diſpoſition to aſſume either that or the acetous ſate. The conditions neceſſary for the production of the Vinous or ſpirituous fermentation are1. A degree oſ fluidity ſightly viſcid. —2. The preſence of ſaccharine mucilage. It is found that the fermentabie] juices of fruits, boiled till they become thick, are indiſpoſed to ferment, and this not only in their inſpiſſated ſtate, but when diluted again with water: for this reaſon it is, that in the making of ſugar nothing is of more importance than the juice of the cane being ſubmitted to boiling immediately on being expreſſed. Preſerves, and other mixtures prone to fermentation, are prevented from that proceſs by the ſame method.3. A proper temperature, which varies from forty-eight to eighty of Falirenheis thermometer. If below this, the fermentation is languid; if above it, it is impetuous, and is apt to ruſh into the acetous ſtate even before the vinous. 4. The addition of a quantity of the ſubſtance called ycaſt, which is itſelf the product of the vinous fermentation, is of great aſiiſtance in exciting it. By what power yeaſt acts in producing the vinous fermentation, has been much diſputed. Mr. Henry thinks that yeaſt is no other than fixed air already formed, but enveloped or entangled in the mucilaginous matter of the liquor from which it was obtained; and the ſame ingenious experimentaliſt was able to bring on the vinous fermentation; by adding to common wort a quantity of fixed air in the elaſtic ſorm. To account for this, ĩt is not difficult to ſuppoſe that fixed air has an attraction for its own conſtituent principles, when placed in favourable circumſtances to act upon them; and that it will thus occaſion the feparation of fixed air from the fermentable liquor, which is ſo remarkable during ſermentation. The phenomena which preſent themſelves in a liquor during the ſpirituous fermentation are—Firſt, A muddineſs, from the ſeparation of an aerial matter, which riſes in bubbles to the top in ſuch quantity, and in ſuch quick ſucceſſion, as to produce a hiſſing noiſe, and form a froth. Theſe minute globules of air occaſion the motion of the particles oſ the ſluid among one another; and this motion is perceptible, even before the air is viſibly ſeparated. The globules of air attach themſelves to the particles of the mixture, and buoy them up; at length the globule is detached, and the atom ſinks by its own weight. The nature of the air which is diſengaged was not underſtood till the modern experiments on aeriform fluids afforded ſo much aſiſtance to chemical ſcience. It is now aſcertained to be the carbonic acid gas, or fixed air, which, being heavier than atmoſpheric air, forms a ſtratum in the upper part of the veſſel in which the fluid is fermenting, where it may be perceived from its greater denſity. This air, contained in the ſermenting vats of brewhouſes, frequently produces the moſt fatal effects on the workmen; and a candle dipped into it is as certainly extinguiſed as if plunged into water. During the time that the fermentation is going on, the bullk of the liquid is augmented. Another phenomenon is the production of a gentle heat, equal to about ſeventy- two degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer. After ſome days, the number of which varies according to the dilution of the ſubſtance and the degree of heat, the motion in the Auid diminiſhes, the warmth abates, and the emiſſion of air is leſſened; the liquor becomes clear, and the ſcum, which conſiſts of the more ſolid particles and air, becomes heavier in proportion as the air eſcapes, and at Iaſt ſinks. The liquor has now undergone a great change; it has acquired a pungent and pleaſant taſte and ſmell, and an inebriating quality, and has loſt its ſeetneſs. If the liquor is now diſtilled, inſtead of an inſipid matter, we obtain an ardent ſpirit, and a ſour, groſs fluid remains behind *. BY * The phenomena of fermentation have long been known; but it remained for Lavoiſier to aſcertain with accuracy what happens in that proceſs. I ſhall thereſore extract his experiments and concluſions, as ſtated by himſelf, in his Elements of Chemiſry. mentation, conſiſts of the ſame principles as ſugar, except that they are combined in different proportions. Ardent ſpirit contains more hydrogen, and leſs carbon and oxygen; which latter principles compoſe the carbonic acid gas which eſcapes during the ſpirituous fermentation. M. Lavoiſier found that when ardent ſpirit is burned in a chimney adapted to receive the vapours, a larger quantity of water is formed than the whole of the ſpirit employed amounts to; whence it follows, that ardent ſpirit contains a large proportion of  Having thus accurately determined the nature and quantity of the conſtituent elements of the materials ſubmitted to fermentation, we have (adds M. L) next to examine the products reſulting from that preceſs. For this purpoſe, I placed the above 10 libs. of fermentable liquor in a proper apparatus, by means of which I could accurately determine the quantity and quality of gas diſengaged during the fermentation, and could even weigh every one of the products ſeparately, at any period of the preceſs I judged proper. An hour or two after the ſubſtances are mixed togesh.r, eſpecially if they are kept in a temperature of from 50(65.75°) to 18° (72.5°) of the thermometer, the firſt marks o fermentation commence; the I;quor turns thick and frothy, little globules of air are diſengaged, which riſe and burſt at the ſurface; the quantity of theſe globules quickly increaſes, and there is a rapid and abundant production of very pure carbonic acid, Zecompanied with a ſcum, which is the yeaſt ſeparating from the mixture. Aſter ſome days, leſs or more, according to- the degree of heat, the inteſtine notion and diſengagement of gas diminiſh; but theſe do not ceaſe entirely, nor is the fermentation completed for a conſiderable time. During the proceſs, 35 libs. 5 oæ. 4 gros. 19 grs. of dry carbonic acid are diſengaged, which carry along with them 15 libs. 14 oœ. 5 gros. of water. There remains in the veſſel 460 libs. 11 oœ. 6 gros. 58 rs. of vinous liquor, ſlightly acidulous. Thi⸗ ĩs at firſt muddy, out clears of itſelf, and depoſits a portion of yeat. When we ſeparately analyſe all theſe ſubſtances, which is eſfected by very troubleſome proceſſes, we have the reſults as given in the following tables. aſumes the ſorm of an elſtic fluid at the temperature of 185 degrees. lll Spirit TasLE V. Recapitulation of the Produũs. libs. cœ. gres gæ rVater -  ic acid- -347 1Io O 59 ; ] arbonic acid -- 25 7 I 34 409 libs. 10 oæ. O gros. Alzohol :i 31 6 t 1 04 54 &s. of oxgen, Acetous acid - I IT4 O contained in the Reſiduum of ſugar- z2 97 27 Yeaſt - -  13 I I4 Carbonic acid  Q9I4 257 28 lit;. 12 :œ. 5 gros, ] Allohol - -I6 11 563 59475. of charcoal,  Aærtous acid- -  10 O O contained in the Reſiduum of ſuger- I 2 253 Yeaſt - - o 6 2 39 Water - -6XI1  427 Water of the allohol - 5 8 53 1 libs. 8 oæ. 6 gros. 66] Combined with the grs. of hydrogen,à charconl of the alko. 4  5 o contained in the Acetous acid - o 2 4 o Reſduum of ſugar - o 5 1I6; Yeaſt. - -Do9 2 241 2 gros. 37 &rs. of azote in the yeat- o o 2 37 510 libs. Total - 50 0o O  In theſe reſults, I have been exact, even to grains; not that jt is poſible, in experiments of this nature, to carry our accuracy ſo far; but as the experiments vere made only with a few pounds of ſugar, and as, for the ſake of compariſon, I reduced the reſults of the actual experiments to the quintal or imaginary hundred pounds; I thought it neceſſary 10 leave the fractional parts preciſely as produced by cælculation.  When we conſider the reſults preſented by theſe tables with attention, ĩt ĩs eaſy to diſcover exacily what occurs during fermentation. In the firſt place, out of the 100 libs. of ſugar employed, 4 libs. 1 œ. 4 gros. 3 75. remain, without having ſuſfered decompoſition; ſo that, in reality, we have only operated upon 95 libs. 14 cæ. 3 gros. 69 grs. of ſugar; that is to ſay, upon 61 libs. 6 oœ. 45 grs. of oxygen, 7 libs. 10 oæ. 6 gros. 6 grs. of hydrogen, and 26 libs. 13 œ. 5 gros. 19475. of charcoal. By comparing Spirit of vine and the acids act with conſiderable violence on each other. When ſtrong vitriolic acid is poured on an equal quantity of rectified ſpirit of wine, a ſtrong heat, with a remarkable hiſſing noiſe, are excited; the two ſubſtances become coloured, and emit a ſveet ſmell, reſembling that of lemons, or the apple called golden rennet. Iſ the mixture is made in a retort, and then ſubmitted to diſtillation in the wellregulated heat of a ſand bath, a large receiver, kept cool by the application of moiſtened cloths, being adapted, the volatile products may be condend. Theſe are: 1. Spirit of wine of a ſweet ſmell. 2. A theſe quaniities, we find that they are fully ſuſicient for ſorming the whole of the alkohol, carbonic acid, and acetous acid produeex by the fermentation. It is not, thereſore, neceſſary to ſappoſe that any water has been decompoſcd during the experiment, unleſs ĩt is iii that the oxygen and hydrogen exiſt in the fogar in that ſtate. On the contrary, I have already made it evident that hvdrogen, cxugen, and charcoal, the three conſtituent elements of vegetables, remain in a ſtate of equilibrium or mutual union with each other, which ſubſiſts ſo long as this union remains undiſturbed by increaſe: temperature, or by ſome new compound attraction; and that then only theſe elements combine, two and t| o together, to form water and carbonic acid.  The effects oſ the vinous fermentation upon ſugar are thus reduced to the mere ſeparation of ĩts elements into two portiors; one part is gęn ated at the expence of the other, ſo as to ſorm carbonie acid, whilit the other part, being diſoxygenated in ſavour of the former, Is converted into the combuſible ſubſtance alkohol; therefore, if it was poiſble to re-unite alkohol and cærbonic acid together, we ought to form ſugar. It is evident that the chercoal ænd hy drogen i in the alkõhol do not exiſ in the ſtate oſ il, they are combined with a portion of oxygen, which rendere tiem miſcible with water; whereſore theſe three ſubſtances, oxygen, hy drogen, and cnarcozl, exi©t here likewiſe, in a ſpecſes of equilibritm or reciprocal combination; and in fæct, when they are made to paſi through a red hot tube of glaſs or porcelain, this union or equilibrium is deſtroyed, the elements become combined two and two, and water and carbonic acid are formeẽ fluid called erher, extremely volatile, and alſo of a pleaſant odour: this comes over as ſoon as the fluid in the retort begins to boil, and the upper part oſ the receiver ĩs at the ſame time covered with large diſtinct ſtreams oſ the fluid, which run down its ſides. 3. A light yellow oil, called ſweet oil of wine; and 4, a ſulphureous ſpirit paſſes over, the white colour and ſmell of which indicate the proper time ſor changing the receiver, in order to have the ether ſeparate; and this is ſucceeded by. black and foul vitriolic acid. Ether is a ſluid of a peculiar nature, It is the lighteſt and moſt volatile oſ all unelaſtic ſiuids, and its tendency to aſſume the elaſtic form is ſo ſtrong, that it is quickly diãipated in the ordinary heat of the atmoſphere, unleſs confined. It is highly inflammable, ſo that it is dangerous to bring a candle near any conſiderable quantity of it, the vapour taking fire, and communicating the inflammation to the whole volume. The acids with which ſpirit of wine is diſtilled, in order to obtain ether, ſeem to effect this principally by robbing the ſpirit of part of its carbon, which latter ſubſtance occaſions the dark colour in the mixture, by decompoſing the acid. A ſmall part of the acid adheres to the ether in its aſcent, and this conſtitutes the differences which exiſt among the ethers, according to the acid by which they were produced. The AcETOUS FERMENTATION is ſtill more ſimple than the ſpirituous, and conſiſts merely in the abſorption of the vital or oxygenous part of the atmoſphere, by which vinous ſluids are converted into vinegar; whence it appears that it is the proportion of oxygen alone which conſtitutes the vaſt difference that exiſts Between ardent ſpirit and vinegar. That wine is converted into vinegar, by the addition of oxygen, is proved, as well ſfrom the general analogy of the forF mation of other acids, as by the following direct experiments. In the firſt place, we cannot change wine into vinegar, without expoſing the former to the contact of air containing oxygen, or employing ſome other mode of oxygenation; ſecondly, this proceſ is accompanied by a diminution of the volume of the air in which it is carricũ on, ſfrom the abſorption of oxygen; and thirdy, wine, by being converted into vinegar, is increaſed in weight. The PurriD FERMENTATION i5 the deſtruction of the equilibrium which holds the conſtituent principles of bodies in a ſtate of combination. Thus a vegetable ſubſtance, which when entire conſiſts of a triple combination of hydrogen, oxygen, and carbon, is reſolved by putrefaction into hydrogen gas, and carbonic acid gas, which conſiſts of oxygen and carbon. As there is not enough of oxygen to convert all the carbon into carbonic acid gas, a quantity of the charcoal remains behind, mixed with the earthy and ſaline matter contained in the vegetablee. Thus putreſaction in a vegetable ſubſtance, is nothing more than a complete anaIyſis oſ it, in which the conſtituent elements are diſengaged in the form of gas, excepr the earth, and a quantity of charcoal which remains in the ſtate oſ mould. Such is the reſult of putreſaction when the ſubſtances ſubmitted to it contain only oxygen, hydrogen, charcoal, and a little earth. But this caſe is rare; and theſe ſubſtances putrefy imperſectly, and with difficulty. It is otherwiſe with ſubſtances containing azote, which indeed exiſts in all animal matters, and in a conſiderable number of vegetables. The putrid ferment ition of animal ſobſtances i is commonly called putrefaction, and this is well known to take place in them, after they arc deprived of life. The circumſtances vhich favour putreſaction are the ſame as thoſe which promote the ſpirituous and acetous fermentations, viz. humidity, the admiſſion of air, and a due degree of heat. Heat to a certain degree promotes putrefaction, yet 200 above that of the human blood ſeems to prevent it. A ſmall piece of fiſn which was luminous, and conſequently putrid, was put into a thin glaſ ball, and water of the heat of 118° extinguiſhed its light, and conſequently ſtopped its tendency to putrefaction, in leſs than half a minute; on taking it out of the water, it began to recover its light in about ten ſeconds, but was never ſo bright as before *. Azote, which abounds ſo much in animal ſubſtances, not only occaſions a more rapid putrefaction, but renders its products conſiderably different from thoſe afforded by the decay of ſuch vegetables as do not contain azote. In the putrefaction of animal matters, the hydrogen, inſtead of eſcaping in a ſeparate ſtate, combines with the azote, and forms volatile alkali. The hydrogen gas alſo diſſolves a part of the carbon, the ſulphur, and the phoſphorus, all which ſubſtances enter into the compoſition of animal matter; with theſe, it forms compound æaeriform fluids, which have obtained the following names, carbonated hydrogen gas, ſulphurated hydrogen gas, and phoſphorated hydrogen gas. The two latter of theſe gaſſes have a peculiar, diſagreeable odour, and, together with the volatile alkali, occaſion the penetrating and qffenſive exhalations which proceed from putrid matters. Sometimes volatile alkali predominates; which affects the eyes; ſometimes, as in feculent matters, the ſulphurated gas is moſt prevalent ; and ſometimes, as in purrid herrings, the phoſphorated hydrogen gas is æ Prieſtleys Hiſt. of Optics, ꝑ. 579F moſt abundant. Carbonic acid gas is alſo diſengaged. It appears highly probable, that water, which is ſo neceſſary to putrefection, is decompoſed during that proceſs, and that its component principles, oxygen and hydrogen, contribute to the great quantity of gaſſes which are produced. Oxygen ſeems alſę to be abſorbed from the atmoſphere, ſince putreſaction ĩs expedited by vital air. M. Fourcroy and M. Thouret have obſerved ſome peculiar phenomena in dead bodies, buried at a certain cepth, ænd preſerved to a certain degree from contact of air: having found the muſcular fleſh converted into true animal fat. This muſt have ariſen from the diſengagement of the azote by ſome unknown cauſe, leaving only the hydrogen and charcoal remaining, which are the elements of fat or oll. This obſervation, M. Lavoiſier remaerks, may at ſome future period lead to diſcoveries of great importance to ſociety, by enabling the chemiſt to convert into oil ſubſtances which conſiſt of nearly the ſame principles, but which are at preſent of no value. The decompoſition of vegetable matters by fire, was noticed in treating of inſlammable ſubſtances, in the chapter on carbon or the carbonaceous principle; and the mode of extracting from the aſhes of certæin plants that uſeful ſubſtance the fixed alkali, has been alſo deſcribed. There is perhaps no proceſs of nature better onderſtood than rhat of fermentation, and yet there is not any more calculated to exceite our atonihment; there is not any inſtance within my recollection ſo ſtriking, of the ſurprizing change which combination produces in bodies; and it is the more wonderful, when we conſider, that different proportions of the ſame ingredients produce fluids eſſentially diſtinct in all their leading characterss. He that  made a weight for the winds, and weigheth the waters by meaſure; how excellently has he ordered all things for the benefit of his creatures! The undevout aſtronomer is mad, is the ſtrong expreſſion of a ſublime writer; yet, if the wiſdom and providence of God is evident in thoſe immenſe bodies, of the ſtructure oſ which we are in a great meaſure ignorant, ſurely it is much more ſo in theſe minute operations, which are the immediate objects of our ſenſes, where every thing is plainly the effect of intelligence and deſign; and, however ignorant and ſuperficial obſervers may wander from the path of truth, the naturaliſt at leaũt DBoo& Ix OF 4 N I M 4LS. Cuan I oFr ANTMAL MATTER IN GEN ERAL. Ii v Gantral Remar 1 on tmit Bodies. produsts fr om the Dipiliation of Aiimal MatierElunentar  Printiples vhich enter into ihe Compoſiticn cf Animal MatterAnimal Acids.Difſerent Form⸗ cf Aaimal Matter.ellyGlueLymphFurther Products Vat.Fibrous Parts. N treating of organized bodies, as introductory to an account of the vegetable ſyſtem, ſome obſervations were made, which are alſo in a great meæſure applicable to animal nature. The elementary principles, however, which enter into the compoſition of animal bodies are more numerous than thoſe which are found in vegetable matter; and at the ſame time the ſtructure of animals is much more complex than that of plants. In both, the growth and increaſe is provided for by a curious kind of chemical apperatus, adapted for effecting thoſe wonderſul changes, diſſolutions, and combinations of maſter, which are eſſential to their reſpective natures. All, however, that we have been able to diſcover in vegetables, is ſome traces of a vaſcular ſyitem, whereas, in animal nature, there is not only a moſt elaborate ſyſtem of veſſels, but means provided for the augmentation of the temperature, and for the fulfilling of thoſe functions which belong to a creature, endued with a power of voluntary motion, and of thought, To deſcribe with accuracy the ſpecific characteriſtics of diſferent animals, to enter into the detail of what is called comparative anatomy, would employ an immenſe and elaberate treatiſe; and indeed to acquire the neceſſary knowledge for ſuch an undertaking would occupy a long lifece. As the object, however, of the preſent work is to give a general view of nature, rather than to enter into that minuteneſs of diſquiſition which is chiefly neceſſary for technical purpoſes, or for thoſe inquirers whoſe leiſure and patience far exceed thoſe of the majority of mankind, it will be neceſſary to confine the preſent ſubject within reaſonable limits. And ſince it would be impoſſible, in ſuch a work, to treat of the ſpecific organization of every animal, I have made choice of that one, whoſe parts and functions are found to be the moſt perfect; and as it is eaſier to look down from an eminence than to aſcend the heights of creation, from what will be ſtated in the ſucceeding pages on the economy of the human body, it vill not be a matter of great diſiculty to comprehend that of other animãls ?2. The plan which will be purſued in this part of the work, will no: be materially different from that which has been adopted in the preceding. After a ſew obſervations on the component principles of animal matter, I ſhall proceed to conſider the ſtructure of thoſe organs which conſtitute the animal machine; and laſtly, the functions to which thoſe orgæns are ſubſervient.  The moſt ſtriking and characteriſiic diſferences in the fabric of different animui- are however noticed; but to deſcribe minutely the rnatural economy of every diſtinct race of animals, would require an immenſe treatiſe, and indeed has never yet been done. When animal matter is diſtilled with a ſtrong heat, we obtain a watery ſluid, holding in ſolution ſome fal ammoniac, ſuperſaturated with volatile alkali; a light cĩl, and a ponderous dark oll, mixed with concrete volatile alkali; a ſpongy coal remains in the retort, of diſficult incineration, and which contains ſea-ſalt, mild foſile alkali, iron, and calcareous earth, combined with phoſphoric acid. Such are the products afforded by the diſtillation of all animal matters, except that the proportions vary, æccording to the degree of ſolidity in the part ſubmitted to diſtillation. The moſt characteriſtic mark of animal matter, is its containing azote, which conſiderably alters its products, both by putrefaction and diſtillation, and which in both theſe proceſſes combining with hydrogen produces volatile alkali. As vegetables and animals, however, paſs by inſenſible degrees into each other, ſo there are ſome vegetables which afford volatile alXali, and which conſequently contain azote; though in fer leis quantity than any animal matter. The elementary matters which enter into the comroſition of the oſ paris of animals, are carbon, hydrogen, azote and oxygen; the bones are compoſed of calcareous earth and phoſphoric acid: a very ſmall quantity alſo of iron, anu oſ ſome neutral ſalts, particularly ſuch as are compoſed of the mineræl and volatile alikalies, and lime, combined with the muriatic, phoſphoric and carbonic acids, are diſrovered by cæreful anelyſiss. By the application of heat, the elementary matters above mentioned aſſume new arrangements and combinations; hydrogen and oxygen uniting, form water; hydrogen and carbon, oll; hydrogen and azote, volatile alkali; oxygen and carbon, cretaceous or carbonic acid: ſome of the gaſſes alſo eſcape in a ſeparate ſtate, and part of the carbon remains behind with the earthy matter. Lavoiſier, aſter having treated of the decompoſition oſ vegetable matter, obſerves:  Animal ſubſtances, being compoſed nearly of the ſame elements with cruciferous plants, give the ſame products in diſtillation, with this diſference, that, as they contain a greater quantity of hydrogen and azote, they produce more oil and more ammoniac. I ſhall only produce one fact, as a proof of the exactneſ vin which this theory explains all the phenomena which occur during the diſtillation of animal ſubſtanceswhich is the rectification and total decompoſition of volatile animal oil, commonly known by the name oſ Dippel's oil. When theſe oils are procured by a ſirſt diſtillation in a naked fire, they are brown, ſrom containing a little charcoal almoſt in a free ſtate; but they become quite colourleſs by rectification. Even in this ſtate the charcoal in their compoſition has ſo ſlight a connection with the other elements, as to ſeparate by mere expoſure to the air. If ve put a quantity of this animal oĩl, vell rectified, and conſequently clear, limpid, and tranſparent, into a bell glaſs filled with oxygen gas over mercury, in a mnort time the gas is much diminihed, being abſorbed by the oil; the. oxygen, combining with the hydrogen oſ the oil, forms water, which ſinks to the bottom; at the ſame time the charcoal which was combined with the hydrogen being ſet free, maniſeſts itſelf by rendering the oil black. Hence the only way of preſerving theſe oils colourleſs and tranſparent, is by keeping them in bottles perfectly full, and accurately corked, to hinder the contact of air, which always diſcolours them.  Succeſive rectifications of this oil furniſh anothe lation a ſmall quantity of charcoal remains in the retort; and a little water is formed by the union of the oxygen contained in the air of the diſtiſling veſſels with the hydrogen of the oll. As this takes place in each ſucceſive diſtillation, if we make uſe of large veſſels, and a conſiderable degree of heat, we at laſt decompoſe the whole of the oil; and change it entirely into water and charcoa. When we uſe ſmall veilels, and eſpecially when we employ a ſlow fire, or a degree of heat litte above thut of boiling water, the total decompoſition of theſe oils, by repeated diſtillation, ĩs greatly more tedious, and more difficultly accompliſhed? Animal matters are compound ſalifiable baſes brought to the ſtate of oxyds by combination with oxygen, and which, by the further addition of that principle, are capable of becoming acids. Several animal acids have been diſcovered, ſome of which approach very near to the vegetable acids. Their baſes have not been aſcertained with accuracy, but are ſuppoſed to be diſferent combinations of carbon, hydrogen, and azote. The animal acids at preſent known, are the ſollowing: Lactic acid, obtained from milk. Saccho-lactic, from ſugar of milk. Formic, from ants. Bombic, from ſilk-worm:s. Sebacic, ſfrom ſuet. Lithic, from urihary calculus. Prũſc, extractcd from blood, or other animal matter, by means of fixed alkali ignitel with theſe matters. Having mentioncd the principles afforded by the complete decompeſition of animal matter, it will be proper to notice certain matters into which the ſoft parts of anmal: moy be reſolved by the action of menſtrun. Iſa part oſ an animal ĩs boiled in water, ĩt is gradually diſiolved, and a matter is extracted, which forms a ſclid but tremulous maſs when cold, and which is called jelly. This is found moſt plentifully in the white parts of animals, but may be obtained in a ſmaller or greater proportion from all. It is nearly inodorous and inſipid, and is ſoluble both in cold and hot water, but more eaſily in the latterr. When its watery parts are more fully evaporated, it forms glue. The jelly of animals is very analogous to the gum of vegetables, except that the latter does not contain azote, and of courſe is leſs prone to the putrefactive fermentation, and is incapable of affording volatile alkali. The glue obtained by boiling animal matters, differs in ſome meaſure according to the firmneſs or laxity of the ſubſtance from which it is obtained; thus the ſkins, tendons, cartilages, and ligaments afford the ſirmeſt glue. The ſ&ins of eels are the baſis of gold ſize; and from old white leather gloves and parch ment is made a kind of glue uſed by painters. Glues diſfer ſfrom each other in their conſiſtence, taſte, ſmell, and ſolubility: there are ſome which readily become ſoſt in cold water; others are not diſſolved but in boiling water; but the preparation of the latter is not generally known. The beſt glue is tranſperent, of a vellow browniſh colour, without ſmell and taſte, and entirely ſoluble in water, with which it forms a viſcid uniform fiuid. Animal jelly differs ſrom glue, only in poſſeſiing a leſs degree of conſiſtence and viſcidity. The firſt is more eſpecĩally obtained from the ſoſt and white parts of animals, and is far more abundant in thoſe which are young. Glue is obtained in greateſt perfection from the tougheſt parts of older animals. Jelly and glue are inſoluble in ſpirit of wine. Lymph or ſerum conſtitutes the greater part oſ the fluids of animals, and will be aſterwards treated oſ as a conſtituent part of the blood. Spirit of wine, when applied to animal matters, diſſolves an extractive ſubſtance, which ĩs depoſited on the evaporation of the fluid; this matter is alſo ſoluble in water. It ſwells and liquiſies by heat, and emits a ſmell ſomewhat reſembling that of burned ſugar; it ĩs chieſly this fubſtance which covers the ſurface of roaſted meat, in the form of a brown cruſt. The f:t of animals approaches very nearly to the nature of the fat oils of vegetables. The globules which riſe to the ſurface of water in which meat is boiled, conſiſt of the ſatt. The fat of animals, as well as the fat oils of vegetables, aſfords a peculiar acid, which ĩs called the ſebacic acid, or acid of ſuet. Aſter all theſe matters are extracted, there remains nothing but a white fibrous matter, inſipid, and inſoluble in water. This matter has all the characters of the fibrous part of the blood, which I ſhall treat of in the Cu ar. II. OF THE BL OOD. Sanguiusous and exſanguinecus Animals. Iarm and cold llooded AuimalsSerum and CraſſamentumPolypuſes. Analyſis of Blcod, Lymph —lIron in the BloodCauſe of the Red Colour,Rei GlobulesHeacſcn's Experiments. HIS ſluid, which is ſo eſſertial to life, varies conſiderably in different ſpecies of animals. In man, and other large animals, it is of a red colour, but in ſome ſmaller animals the circulating fluid is nearly colourleſs, and therefore ſuch animals are called exſanguineous; though with little propriety, as their circulating fluid appears to anſwer all the purpoſes of blood, and there ſeems no reaſon to aſfirm that nothing can be blood, which is not ofa red colour. The moſt remarkable diſference in the blood of animals, is with reſpect to the temperature. The blood of man, quadrupeds, and birds, is hotter than the medium they inhabit; they are therefore called animals with varm blood.. In fiſhes and reptiles it is nearly of the temperature of the medium they inhabit; and theſe are thereſore called animals with cold blood. The temperature of the blood, as well as the change of colour to a brighter red, which the blood undergoes in paſſing through the lungs, will be treated of in a future chapter on reſpiration. When blood is firſt drawn from a vein, it appears to be an homogeneous red fluid: it then conſolidates into one uniform maſs; in a little time a yellowiſh watery liquor begins to ſeparate from it, which is more or leſs in quantity, according to the ſtate of the blood; the red maſs, in the mean time, contracts greatly in its dimenſions, expelling the watery liquor from its pores, and conſcquently increaſing in firmneſs and denſity. This ſeparation happens in the body aſter death, and produces thoſe concretions in the heart, and large veſſels, thoſe adheſive maſſes called polypuſes, which vere formerly ſuppoſe? to have exiſted during life, and ſometimes to have been the immediatæ cccaſion of death. By agitation, blood continues fluid; but a conſiſtent ſibrous matter adheres to the ſlick or inſtrument made uſe of to ſtir it, which by repeated ablution in water becomes white, and appears to be very ſimilar to the fibres oſ animals obtained by waſhing away the other adhering matters. Received from the vein in warm vater, Blood depoſits a quantity oſ tranſparent filamentous matter, the red portion continuing diſſolved in the water. On evaporating the fluid, a red ſubſtance in the ſorm of powder, or eaſily reducible to it, is leſt. Blood inſpiſſated to dryneſs leaves a dark coloured maſs, amounting at a medium to about one fourth pert of iĩts eight, of a bitter ſaline taſte, eaſily inſlammeble, and burning with a blueiſh flame. The exſiccated blood is not ſoluble in acid or alkaline liquors, but gives ſome tinge to water and to ſpirits of wine; and is more poverfully acted on by dulcified ſpirit of nitree. Recent blood is coagulated by the mineral acids, and by mot of the combinations of them with earthy and metallic bodies. With vegetable acids, and with ſolutions of neutral ſalts, it mingles equally without coagulation. Alkalies, both fixed and volatle, render it more fluid, and preſerve it from cocgulating. Blood by ciſtillation affords the ſame reſults as other animal matters. Six pounds of hunan duced to a pound and an half; after which the maſqæ was urged with a graduated fire, till the retort at Iaſt became red hot. The produce was ſeventeen ounces of liquor, twelve oſ vhich were a red and very empyreumatic volatile and alkaline ſuid, and the other five were oll. What remained in the retort was a light coal, weighing four ounces and a half. It has been already mentioned that blood ſpontaneouſly ſeparates into two parts, a coherent maſs called the craſſamentum, and an æqueous liquor called the ſerum, with which the craſſamentum is ſurrounded. Lymph or ſerum, which is ælſo called the albuminous matter, from its coagulating into a white maſs by the application of a heat equal to 156 degrees of Farenheit's thermometer, is very analogons to the white of egg. Serum ĩs alſo coagulated by acids and by ardent ſpirit; alkalies render it more fluid. It converts ſyrup of viclets to a green. Its colour is yellowiſh, inclining to green; its taſte is ſaline, and it feels between the fingers in ſome degree unctuous and adheſive. By diſtillation it affords the ſame principles as animal matters in general. Serum, expoſed to a warm temperature in the open air paſſes quickly to putrefaction. It unites with water in all proportions, but they are kept ſeparate by their diſſerent denſities, unleſs agitated together. Serum poured into boiling water for the moſt part coagulates inſtantly. The coagulation formed in ſerum by the addition of an acid, diſſolves very quickly in volatile alkali, which is the true ſolvent of the albuminous part; but it is not at all ſoluble in pure water. The coagulation formed by ſpirit of wine, on the contrary, is ſoluble in water, as M. Bucquet has diſcovered. This liquid, M. Tourcroy concludes, is an aiimal mucilage, compoſed of water, acidifiable oily baſes, marine ſalt, chalk of ſoda, and calcareous phoſphat; this laſt appears to produce the roſe-coloured precipitate, obtained by pouring the nitrous ſolution of mercury into ſerum. Though the liquid is ſcarcely coloured, the addition of nitrous acid, and more eſpecially of mercurial nitre, produces a roſe or light ſleſhcolour, hich M. Fourcroy has often obſerved in many other animal liquors. li The craſſamentum, when well waſhed in water, is ſeparated into two very diſtinct ſubſtances, one of which is diſſolved, and tinges the water of a red colour, while the other remains behind in the ſtate of a vhite fibrous matter, the ſame as that which adheres to the ſtirrer with which recent blood has been agitated, in order to prevent its coagulation. The water in which the red part is diſſolved, when heated with different menſtrua, exhibits all the characters of ſerum; but it contains a much greater quantity of iron, which may be obtained by the incineration of the coal, and ſubſequent waſhing to ſeparate the ſaline matters. The reſidue of this waſhing is a yellow calx of iron, of a beautiful colour, and uſually attracted by the magnet. The red colour of the blood is therefore vith ſome appearance of reaſon attributed to this metal. Iron has been obtained from the blood in conſiderable quantity by Menghini, Roucile, and Bucquet. The ſame chemiſts found that iron was capable of paſſing into the blood from the inteſtines, ſince patients vho were under a courſe of martial medicines are lnovn to diſcharge a part of it by the urinary paſſages. Iron is obtained from the red particles of the blood, but not from the waſhed coagulum. Theſe facts, togetherV ii the increaſed redneſs of the blood by th paiing through the lungs, where it may be ſuppoſed E ã o ſuſfter a : of calcination from the abſorption Chap. 2.] Microſcopical Appearance of the Blood. 85 of oxygen, render the above opinion highly probable. The fibrous part of the blood, when thoroughly waſhed, is white and inſipid; by diſtillation, like other animal matters, it aſfords water, oil and volatile alkali. Expoſed to a gentle heat, ĩt is much hardened; when ſuddenly expoſed to a ſtrong heat, it ſhrinks up like parchment. It putreſies very rapidly, and affords much volatile alkali. It is inſoluble in water, and when boiled in that fluid hardens, and aſſumes a grey colour. Acids unite with it, and in particular the nitrous acid diſolves it, and extricates azote and nitrous air; while the reſidue by evaporation affords acid of ſugar in cryſtals, a peculiar oil in flocks, and the phoſphorie ſalt of lime. Marine acid forms a green jelly with the fibrous part of the blood. The acid of vinegar diſſolves it with the aſſiſtance of heat; water, and more particularly alkalis, precipitate the fibrous matter when diſſolved in acidss. The animal ſubſtance is decompoſed in theſe combinations; and when ſeparated from the acids by any method, it no longer retains its former properties. he microſcopical appearances of the blood have attracted great attention. Various accounts have been publiſhed on this ſubject, moſt of which ſeem to have been framed more on theory and pre-conceived opinion, than actual obſervation. Theſe falſities have been detected by Mr. Hewſon, whoſe microſcopical experiments on the blood are the lateſt which have been made, and remain at preſent (as far as relates to the compoſition of the blood) uncontradicted. I ſhall therefore tranſcribe the following particular account of them, given by himſelf in a Ietter to Dr. Haygarth, phyſician, in Cheſter. . The red particles of the blood, improperly called globules, are flat in all animals, and of very different ſizes in different animals. In man they are ſmall, as flat as a ſhilling, and appear to have a dark ſpot in the middle. In order to ſee them diſtinctly, I dilute the blood with freſh ſerum. My predeceſſors, not having thought of this, could not ſee them diſtinctly. And Lewenhoeck in particular, imagining a round figure fitteſt for motion, concluded they muſ©t be round in the human body; though he and others allowed that in frogs, &c. where they viewed them diſtinctly, from the blood being thinner, they were lat. Now I prove that they are flat in all animals. In the human blood, where theſe particles are ſmall, ĩt is difficult to determine what that black ſpot is, which appears in the center of each. Some have concluded that it was a perſoration; but in a frog, where it is ſix times as large as in a man, it is caſy to ſhew that it ĩs not a perforation, but on the contrary, is a little ſolid, which is contained in the middle of a veſicle. Inſtead, therefore, of calling this part of the blood red globules, I ſhould call i it red veſicles; for each particle is a flat veſicle, with æa little ſolid ſphere in the center. e I find that the blood of all animals contains veſicles of this ſort. In human blood there are millions of them, and they give it the red colour; but in inſects they are white, and leſs numerous in proportion than in man and quadrupedss. As they are flat in all animals, I ſuſpect that ſhape is a circumſtance of importance, but can be altered by a mixture with different fluids. And I find, that it is by a determinate quantity of neutral ſalt contained in the ſerum, that tHis fluid ĩs adapted to preſerving theſe veſicles in their flat ſhape: for if they are mixed with water, they become round, and diſſolve perfectly ; bũt add a little of any reutral ſalt to the water, and they remain in it without any alteration in their ſhape, and without diſſolving. c Nov, vhen it is conſidered that the blood of all animals is filled with theſe particles, we muſt believe that they ſerve ſome very important purpoſe in the animal ;œconomy; and ſince they are ſo complicated in their ſtructure, it is improbable that they ſhould be formed by mechanical agitation in the lungs or blood-veſſels, as has been ſuſpected, but probably have ſome organs ſet apart for their formation. This I ſhall endeavour to prove, when I have explained their ſtructure a little more particularly, and mentioned the manner in which I exhibit it. I take the blood of a toad or ſrog, in which they are very large; I mix it with the ſerum of human blood to dilute it; I find them appear all flat, ſo they do in the blood-veſſels of this animal, as I have diſtinctly ſeen in the web between its toes, whilſt the animal was alive, and fixed in the microſcope. Their appearance in theſe animals is not unlike ſlices of cucumber. I next mix a little of the blood with water, which immediately makes them all round, and then begins to diſſolve them whilſt they are round. I incline the ſtage of the microſcope, ſo as to make them roll down it; and then I can diſtinctly ſee the ſolid in the middle fall from ſide to ſide, like a pea in a bladder. A neutral ſalt added to them at this time brings them back to their flat ſhãpe; but if the ſalt is not added, the vater gradually diſſolves away the veſicle, and then the little ſphere is leſt naked. Such is the compoſition of theſe particles. I have exhibited theſe experiments to a conſiderable number of my acquaintance, who all agree in their being ſatisfactory.  The microſcope I uſe is a ſingle lens, and therefore as little likely to deceive us as a pair of ſpectacles, which, as is allowed by all who uſe them, do not diſfigure objects, but only repreſent them larger. It is unneceſſary to follow Mr. Hewſon into his ſpeculations with regard to the uſe of the thymus and lymphatic glands, which he thinks are deſigned to fabricate the middle ſolid particles of the blood vhich are aſterwards to be furniſhed with veſicles in the cells of the ſpleen. Theſe inquiries may ſhew the ingeruity of their æuthor, but will not anſ7er our purpoſe, vhich is to deteil with conciſereſs what has been aſcert2ined C u a r. III. STRUCTURE OF ANIMALS. l Sixe of ManHis erect Poſture.Varictics in the Structure of Auimals.Parts of the Animal Body. lb taking a general view of the ſormation of Man, a circumſtance of importance is his ſize, conſidered in relation to the force of gravitation. If the ſize of man vas much greater than it is, ſuppoſing his ſtrength to be only in proportion, his motions would be much ſlower, and more laborious; nor would his increaſe of ſize be entirely compenſated by a diminution in the force of gravitation, for this would expoſe him to inconveniences, on account of the various relations in which he ſtands to other objects. On the contrary, was man much ſmaller, though he would gain in celerity what he would loſe in force, yet his weakneſs vould incapacitate him for acting with advantage on conſiderable maſſes of matter. On the whole, it ſhould ſeem, that neither an increaſe of ſize with an increaſe of gravitation; nor a diminution of ſize with a diminution oſ gravitation; nor an increaſe of either vith a diminution of the other, would in general ſo well ſuit. the conveniences oſ man, and his relation to other beings, as the ſtate in which he at preſent ſubſſis. The moſt ſtriking difference of ſtructure between man and the other animals is his erect figure, excellently adapted to the more extenſive views which he vas deſigned to take of nature; and which, inſtead oſb eing a maer, as a French writer pretends to think, of Buman arrogance, in departing from the horizontal poſture, which was allotted to man in common vith other quadrupeds, is one proof of the diſtance which the Deity meant to interpoſe between him and the reſt oſ the animal creation. That author, hovever, deſes the ſuperiority of man in every reſpect; and maintains, that the mental acquirements of a horſe would not be inferior to thoſe of a man, if the former was furniſhed with fingers, and endued with the ſame exquiſite ſenſe of feeling which the latter enjoys Ve may grant that all our ſimple ideas are derived ſrom the inſormation of our ſenſes; but we would aſk what experiments this philoſopher or his adherents have made, to aſcertain, that there can be no differences in the ſtructure of intellectual organs? and upon what authority they conclude, that all the varieties we obſerve in mental encowments, among individuals of the ſame rce, as vell as among different races of animals, are ſolely to be referred to differences in the organs of ſenſe? But granting all that he requeſts, how arme man to have fingers and horſes none, if they were equally deſigned to gll op through the foreſt? Dhe muſt either have made ſingers ſor himſelf, or he muſt have been originally ce ſigned by his Maker for nobler cccupations. The ſtructure of men, moreover, ſn ſeveral other particulars, entirely conſutes the aſſertions of this contemptible viſiorary; but without attending to other circumſtances, it will be ſuficient to mention the formation of the lover extremities in man, ſo different from the hind legs of quadrupeds, and ſo admirably ada apted to the erect poſture. By ſome n⸗ toralit| the OurangOutang is conſidered as the original ſtock of the human race. His claims to humanity are founded upon his being able to walk upright, being ſurniſhed with ſuch muſcles as are requiſite for that purpoſe. The form of his heart, lungs, breaſt, brain, and inteſtines are ſimilar to thoſe of a man. He can ſit upright with eaſe, and can handle a ſtick with dexterity. That his race is diſtinct, however, from that of man, is evident from his having thirteen ribs on each ſide, whereas man has but twelvee. He has not the faculty of ſpeech, æand articulation is impoſſible to him, on account of the ſtructure of the parts about the lerynx. Wihile, hoever, we diſſent from theſe authors, in ſinking man to the level of other animals, let us reflect that the purpoſe of nature ſeems to be, to diffuſe life and enjoyment wherever they can exiſt; and let us avoid the oppoſite, narrow-minded, and, if poſſible, ſtill more abſurd notion, that the happineſs of man is the ſole object of creation. In the animals which more commonly ſall under our obſervation, the ſurface is ſoſt, and the bones are deeply ſeated; but in others the reverſe happens, and we obſerve the bones forming a caſe to the ſoſter parts. We ſee ſome animals furniſhed with wings, to ſport in the regions of the atmoſphere; ſome immerſed by means of a heavy ſhell, during the whole of their exiſtence, in the depths of the ocean; and others furniſhed with organs, to perforate their dark paſſage through the bowels of the earth. In general the bones of animals are filled with marrow, but in many kinds of birds they are excavated for the reception of air, fitting them for floating more eaſily on the ſurface of water, and at the ſame time, when neceſſity requires, for remaining longer beneath its ſurface. In ſome animals, even the brain and heart eſcape our moſt careful reſearches; and ſome, like vegetables, may be multiplicd from the limbs of their parents. So endleſs indeed are theſe differences, that rhere is perhaps no one circumſtance of ſtructere or function common to all animals. But let us return from theſe extenſive proſpects to the conſideration of the ſtructure of our own ſpecies. Before we proceed, however, to conſider the ſtructure of the body, it will be proper to premiſe a few very brief definitions of the moſt remark able parts of which ; it conſiſts. Bones are hard ſubſtances, which form the baſis of the body. Cartilages are firm, ſmooth, elaſtic bodies, which cover the ends of the bones. Muſcles are contractile organs, which are attached to bones, and perform the motions of the body. Tendons are tough cords, by means of which muſcles are attached to bones. Ligaments are ſtrong fibres or membranes, which connect bores to each other. Blood-veſſels are membranous flexible tubes, which convey the blood to and from the heart. Lymphatics are tranſparent tubes, which perſorm abſorption. Nerves are white cords connected with the brain, and are the inſtruments of ſenſation and voluntary motion. Glands are organic maſſes, deſtined for the purpoſæ C uar. IV. STRUCTURE OF THE BONES. Bones consiſt of Fibres; cellular7he Marroav.Waſle of Bone in old Age. piphyſes Perioſteum.pProgręſi of Qſification Articulation. H E body, as Hippocrates long ago remarked, is a circle; and therefore at whatever point we were to begin the deſcription, we ſhould ultimately be equally led, by the connexion of parts, to the conſideration of the whole. Since the bones, however, may be conſidered as the baſis oſ the body, on which the other parts depend for ſituation and fupport, it appears moſt eligible in the firſt place to conſider their ſtructure and uſes. The bones conſiſt of ſibres, diſtributed in lamellæ or plates; theſe plates are not cloſely applied to each other, but, with the intervention of tranſverſe fibres, conſtitute cells. The cells are diſtributed through the ſubſtance of all the bones, but are uniſormly moſt remarkable in the center, and on the ſurface of the harder bones are ſo ſmall as not to be diſtinctly perceptible vithout the aid of glaſes. The marrow which ſills the cavities of the bones is a ſat oily ſubſtance, contained in a fire and tranſparent membrane, which receives numerous blood-veſſels, and is ſupported by the filaments of the reticular ſubſtance of the bones. If the diſferert parts of a bone nre obſerved, it is found that where the diameter of the bone is the ieaſt, there the ſides are thickeſt and moſt compact; where the diameter is greateſt, which is in general towards the ends of he lorig bones; their ſtructure is very cavernous throughout. The marrow pervades the whole ſubſtanẽe of the bones, but is moſt remarkable in the middle part of the cavities of the long bones. Its a;pearance and nature alſo differ in diſferent bones, or in the ſame bone in the progreſs c of life. Thus the marrow is bloody in chiidren, oily in adults, and thinner and more vatery in aged people. £t the time of birth, the bones are very imperſec; porticularly thoſe of the head; ſo that by being moveable in this part, and folding over each other during the time of delivery, an eaſicr paſſage is procurẽd for the infant. There are many projections from the bones, which in infancy are ſoſt, but Which' in the adult ſtate are bony; and the ſame tendency to the formation of bone increaſing with our years, bones which vere ſeparate in the prime of life concrete in old age. In the decay of the body, hovever, the bones are diminiſhed with the other parts, ſo as in extreme old age to eigh a third leſs than in the middle periods c of life. To far the greater number of bones whoſe ends are not joined to other bones by immoveable articulation, are annexed, by the intervention of cartilage, ſmaller bones, called epiphyſes or appendages. In young ſubjects theſe are eaſily ſeparable, but in adults the point of conjunction is not very perceptible. The bones are furniſhed with a tough membrane, called the perioſteum, which is ſpread on their ſurface;, and the principal uſe of which ſeems to be to convey blood- veſſels for their nouriſhment; theſe blood-veſſels are very numerous and remarkable in the bones in the infant ſtate, but become gradually leſs ſo in the progreſs It has been ſuppoſed that the bones were forried by the ſucceſſive oſſification of layers of the perioſteum. This opinion, however, is contrary to what is obſerved on examining bones in the progreſs of their formation: and is alſo diſproved by ſome experiments, in which animals were fed with madder. Their bones were found to be tinged in proportion to the length of time that they were ept on this food; but neither the perioſteum nor the cartilages were altered from their natural colour. The moſt general diviſion of the bones is that into the long and cylindrical, and the ſlat and the broad. The oſſification in both theſe kinds of bones begins in the middle, at ſeveral points at a time, and gradual lly extends towards the endls of the long bones and the circumference of the broad. The ends of the long bones, where they are united to each other, are larger than their middle part, and ſeveral advantages attend this ſtructure. By theſe means the ſurſace oſ contact between the two bones oſ an articulation ĩs increaſed, their corjunction conſequently becomes firmer, there is more ſrace for the connection of muſcles, which alſo act more powerfully from their axes being further removed from the middle of the joint, or the center of motion. The bones are united to each cther, either moveably or immoveably. They are moveably articulated in three ways:iſt. By a ball and ſocket, which admits of motion in all directions, as in the ſnoulder. ædly, By a hinge, which allows motion in only two directions, as in the knee; and 3dly, By a long proceſs of one bone received into the cavity of another, which admits of a rotatory motion, as in the articulation of the firſ©t and ſecond vertebræ of the neck. The immoveable merous proceſſes of two bones, like the teeth of ſas, are mutually received into each other, as in the bones of the head; and 2dly, by the growing together of bones with the intervention of cartilage, as in the union of the os ſacrum with the oſſa innominata. The ends of bones which move on each other are tipped with ſmooth cartilage; and the ſriction ĩs ſtill further diminiſhed by æ fluid, much more ſlippery than oil itſelf, which is called the ſynovia. The moveable joints are alſo furniſhed with ſtrong membranes, called ligaments, which paſs from one bone to another, aſfording ſtrength, and retaining the heads of the bones in their cavities. For the purpoſes of articulation, and the connection of muſcles, bones are unevæn on their CH Aar.V. DIVISION OF THE SKELETON, WITH THE BONES OF THE HEAD. The Steleton brieſly deſcribed. Bones F the Cranium—ZBones of the Face—of the Noſeof the PalateThe Upper and Under Jao. Form and Proportion of the Head. Subjtance and Structare of the Bones of the HeadSutures. H E ſeleton, by which is underſtood all the bones of the body in their proper ſituations, is divided into the head, trunk, and extremities. When the bones are put into a natural ſituation, ſcarcely any one of them will be found to have a perpendicular bearing on another; though the fabric compoſed of them is ſo contrived, that in an erect poſture a perpendicular line from the common centre of gravity falls in the middle of their common baſe. On this account, we can ſupport ourſelves as firmly, as if the xis of all the bones had been a ſtrait line, perpendicular to the horizon; and we have much greater quickneſs, eaſe, and ſtrength, in ſeveral of the neceſſary motions, as well as other advantages in the ſituation and protection of the viſcera. It is true, indeed, that wherever the bones on which any part of the body is ſuſtained, decline from a ſtrait line, the force of the muſcles required to counteract the gravity is greater than would be otherwiſe neceſſary; but this is more than compenſated by the advantages above mentioned. j The bones of the head are divided into thoſe of the cranium and facec. The cranium, or that bony caſe which ſurrounds and protęcts the bra⸗ conſiſts of eight pieces of bone. At the fore part is placed the os frontis; at the back part the os occipitis; at the upper and ſide parts the oſſa parietalia; at the under and ſide parts, the oſſa temporalia; in the fore part of the baſe the os ethmoides; in the middle of it the os ſphenoides. Theſe two latter bones are common to the cranium and face. The os frontis is ſo called from being the only bone of the forehead, though it extends conſiderably farther upwards. It has ſome reſemblance in ſhape to the concha bivalvis, commenly called the cockle. The greater part of ĩt is convex externally, and concave internally, with a ſerrated circular edge. The upper art of the os frontis, where ĩt is connected to the parietal bones, is very ſmooth and convex, but below it has ſeveral inequalities, where it contributes conſiderably to the formation of the cavities, in which the eves are lodged. In the part of the os frontis which correſponds with that part of the forchead immediately above the cye-brows, the two tebies of the bone ſeparate by the external being protruded outward:, to form two large cavities, called frontal ſinuſes. Theſe cavities communicatc with the external air by means of the noſe. The ſruntal bune ſerves to ſupport and protect the anteri r lobes oſ the brain. The falx ofſ the dura mater, of which I ſhall have occaeſion to ſpcak more fully hereaſter, is atteched 1o a ridge or ſurrow at the middle and internal part of this bone. The os frontis is plerced with ſome ſmall holes for the paſſage uf blocd- veſſels. Each of the two oſſa parietalia ĩs an irregular ſquare, its upper and ſore ſides being longer thæn that behind or below. The inſerior ſide is a concave arch; the middle of it receiving the upper and round part of the temporal bone. The external ſurface of each paiietal bone is convex. On their inner concave ſurſace we obſerve a number of deep furrows, diſpoſed like the branches of trees, which receive the blood-veſſels oſ the dura mater. On the inſide of the upper edge of the oſa parietalia, there is a large ſinuoſity, where the upper part of the falx is faſtened, and the ſuperior longitudinal ſinus is lodged. The oſſa parietalia are the moſt equal and ſmooth, and are among the thinneſt bones of the cranium; and yet the diviſion of their ſubſtance into two tables and a diploe is no where ſo remarkable. Theſe bones are joined before to the os frontis by the coronal ſuture; at their long inferior angles, to the ſphenoid bone, by part of the ſuture of this name; at their lower-edge, to the oſſa temporum, by the ſquamous ſuture; behind to the os occipitis, by the lambdvidal ſuture ; a and above to one another, by the ſagittal ſuture. In a child born at the full time, none of the ſides of this bone are completed, and the brain is in general not completely ſurrounded by a bony caſe, till ſix or ſeven years of age. The oſſa temporum are equal and ſmooth above, where they terminate in a thin ſemicircular edge, which is laid over the inferior part of each of the oſſa parietalia, as the ſcales of fiſh are placed over each other, forming a juncture, which is on this account called ſquamous. Behind this, the upper part of the temporal bone is thicker, and more unequal. Towards the baſe of the ſkull, the temporal bone ĩs very irregular and unequal, and becomes contracted into an oblong very hard ſubſtance; and being extended forwards and inwerds, becomes ſmaller, and is called the os petroſum, which contains the internal parts of the organ of hearing. This bone has three remarkable proceſſes. The Art placed at the lower and poſterior part of the bone, is from its reſemblance to a nipple called maſHæ toides or mamillaris. Within iĩt is compoſed of ſmall cells, vhich have a communication with the organs oſ hearing. About an inch ſarther forward, the ſecond proceſs begins to riſe from the bone; and having its origin continued obliquely downwards and forwards, it becomes ſmaller, and is at length united with a correſponding proceſs of the os malæ, or cheek-bone. In this manner is formed a bony jugum or yoke, under vwhich the temporal muſcle paſſes. Hence this proceſs of the temporal bone has been called Zigomatic. From the inferior unequal part of the os temporum the third proceſs ſtands out obliquely forwards; the ſhape of it has been thought to reſemble the ancient ſtylus ſcriptorius, and iĩt is therefore called the ſtyloid proceſi, The chief uſe of theſe proceſſes is to afford attachment to muſcles. Numerous ſinuoſities or depreſſiuns of this bone, by increaſing the ſurface, anſwer the ſame purpoſe. This bone has alſo ſeveral perforations, one of which, ſituated between the zigomatic and maſtoid proceſſes, is the orifice of a large funnel or canal, which leads to the organ of hearing. The os occipitis, ſo called ſfrom its ſituation at the back part of the head, like the other bones of the cranium, is externally convex, and internally concave. Its figure is an irregular ſquare, or rather a rhomboid; of which the angle above is generally a little rounded; and the lower angle is extended to the inferior part of he cranium, in the formof a wedge, and is thence called the cuneiform proceſs. At the baſe of this triangular proceſs, on each ſide of the great foramen, through which paſſes the ſpinal marrow, are obſerved two large oblong proceſſes, called the condyles, which ſerve for the articulation of the cranium with the firſt vertebra of the neck. Around the great foramen, the edges cular ligament which paſſes from the circumſerence of the foramen to the firſt vertebra. On the inſide of the occipital bone 'are ſeveral ridges and furrows; to one of the ridges is fixed the poſterior part of the falx, and the furrows receive the ſinuſes which run in this part of the cranium. The ridges of this bone form a croſs, and round the middle of the croſs there are four large depreſſions, ſeparated by its limbs; the two upper depreſſions being formed by the poſterior part of the brain, and the two lower by the cerebelluom. The inner ſurſace of the cuneiſorm proceſs is hollowed for the reception of the medulla oblongata and the baſilar artery. Beſides the great foramen, there are ſeveral other perforations in this bone, or between it and the adjoining bones, for the paſſage of nerves and bloodveſſels. The occipital bone at its upper part, where it is chieſly expoſed to injury, is very thick and ſtrong, but lower down, where it is protected by the ſtrong and thick muſcles hich are inſerted intoſt, it is oſten very thin. The occipital bone is connected above to the oſſa parietalia by the lambdoidal ſuture; laterally to the temporal bones by a continuation of the ſame ſuture; below it is firmly connected by an union of ſubſtance to the ſphenoid bone, by means of the cuneiform proceſs. The os ethmoides, or ſieve- like bone, derives ĩts name from the numerous ſmall apertures with which it is pierced at its fore part. From the middle of the internal ſide of the lamella, which is ſo full of holes, a thick proceſs riſes upwards; and being higheſt at the fore part, gradually becomes lower as it is extendeqd backwards. From a fancied reſemblance of this proceſs to a cock's comb, it has been called the criſtagall. The falx is connected to its ridge, and to the unperforated part of the cribr&Lrm plate. All the proH minences, cavities, and meanders of the ethmoid bone are covered with a continuation of the membrane of the noſtrils. The uſes of this bone are to ſuſtain the anterior Iobes of the brain; to give paſage to the olfactory nerves, and attachment to the falx; to enlarge the organ of ſmelling, by allowing the membrane of the noſe a greater extent; to form a part of the orbit of the eyes, and the ſeptum varium. The os ſphenoides, or wedge like bone, which is ſo called from its ſituation in the middle of the bones of the cranium and face, is of a very irregular figure, and bears ſome reſemblance to a bat, with its wings extended. This bone is generally divided into a body, and two ſides or wings. When we view the external part of the os ſphenoides, two or three remarkable proceſſes from each ſide of it may be obſerved, which are all of them again ſubdivided. The firſt pàir conſiſts of the two large lateral proceſſes or wings; the upper part of each of which is called the temporal proceſs, becauſe they join with the temporal bones in forming the temples: that part of the wings which projects towards the inſide, ſomewhat lower than the temporal proceſſes, and is ſmooth and hollowed, forms part of the orbits. The loweſt and back part of each wing runs out with a ſharp point, called the ſpinous proceſs, to meet the point of the pars petroſa of the temporal bone. The ſecond pair of external proceſſes of the ſphenoid bone are the aliform or pterygoid, and which ſtand out almoſt perpendicular to the baſe of the ſkull. Each of them has twt plates and a middle foſſa at the poſterior ſurſace. OF theſe plates, the exterior is the broadeſt; the interior are long⸗ſt, and terminate in a hook- like proceſs. Another pair of proceſſes may be mentioned, viz. the little triangular thin proceſſes which come from each ſide of the ſphenoid bone, where the pterygoid procèſes riſe from it; theſe are extended to join the ethmoid bone. The external ſurface of this bone is every where covered with depreſſions, ſinuoſities, and foſſæ. Within there are three remarkable foſſæ; two of theſe are ſeated in the internal part of each wing of the ſphenoid bone, for receiving the middle part of the brain The third, which is ſmaller, is ſeated on the top of the body of the bone, which from its reſemblance to a Turkiſh ſaddle is deſcribed under the name of ſella turcica. In this foſſa a gland called the pituitary is placed; behind and before it are the clinoid proceſſes. The holes on each ſide of the os ſphenoides are ſix proper and three common. The firſt is a round aperture, immediately below the anterior clinoid proceſſes, which tranſmits the optic nerve and ocular artery. The ſecond, which is a large ſlit, and is called the foramen lacerum, tranſmits the third, fourth, ſixth, and the firſt branch of the ſifth pair oſ nerves. The third hole, ſituated a little lower, is called rotundum from its ſhape, and tranſmits the ſecond branch of the fifth pair of nerves. The fourth is the foramen ovale, about half an inch behind the foramen rotundum; through it paſſes the third branch of the fifth pair. Very near the point of the ſpinous proceſs is the fiſth hole of this bone, which is ſmall and round, and gives paſſage to the largeſt artery of the dura mater. The ſixth proper hole cannot well be feen till the cuneiſorm bone is removed from the other bones of the cranium—for one end of it is hid by a ſmall protuberance of the internal plate of the pteryg⸗id proceſ, and by the point of the proceſſus petroſus of the temporal bone: Through it a conſiderable branch of the fifth pair of nerves is reflected. The firſt of the common apertures is that unequal fiſſure at the ſide of the ſella turcica, between the extreme point of the os peH troſum and the ſpinous proceſs of the cuneiform bone. This perforation only appears aſter the bones are boiled; for in a recent ſubject, its back part is covered by a thin bony plate, which lies over the internal carotid artery, and farther forward it is filled with a cartilaginous ligament, under which the cartilaginous part of the euſt2chian tube is;ced: it was by this paſſage that the ancients beheved the ſlimy; matter was conveyed from the glandula pituitaria io the fauces. The ſecond aperture is a large diſcontinuation of the external ſide of the orbit, leſt between the orbitar proceſſes of the ſphenoid bone, the os maxillare, malæ, and palat. The third common aperture is formed between the baſe of this bone and the root of the orbitar proceſs of the palate bone of each ſide. Under the ſella turcica, within the ſubſtance of the ſphenoid bone, are two ſinuſes, ſeparated by a bony plate, which are lined with a membrane, and open into the noſtrils. The ſ; heroĩd bone is joined to all the bones of the cranium, and likewiſe to the oſſa maxillaria, oſſa malorum, oſſa palati, and vomer. The face is divided into the upper and under maxillæ or jaws. I'he upper jaw is the immoveable part oſ the face, which conſiſls of ſix bones on each ſide, and a thirteenth in the middle. The thirteen bones are, two oſſa naſi, two oſſa unguis, two oſſa malarum, two oſſa maxillaria, two oſſa palati, two oſſh ſpongioſa inferiora, and the vomer. The oſſa naſi are placed at the upper part of the noſe; the oſſa unguis are the internal canthi of the orbits; the oſſa malarum form the prominence of the cheeks; the oſſa maxillaria form the ſide oſ the noſe, with the whole lower and fore part of the upper jaw, and the greateſt part of the roof of the mouth; the oſſa palati are ſituated at the back part of the palate, noſtrils, and orbit; the oſſa ſpongioſa are ſeen in the lower part of the noſtrils; and the vomer helps to ſeparate theſe two cavities. The bones of the face, beſides being connected to the bones of the cranium by ſutures, common to them with the bones of the cranium, are joined to cch other by fiſteen ſutures, which it would be tedious to deſcribc. Neither does a deſcription of the form and connection of each of theſe ſmall bones fall in with the general view of the ſtructure of the body hich I propoſe to take, The lower jaw in the adult conſiſts of only one bone. In form it reſembles a horſe- ſoe, the convex part of vhich is turned forwards, and forms the chin. At its back part this bone is bent upwards, and terminates in two proceſſes. The anterior of theſe, which riſes higheſt, is a thin point, into which muſcles are inſerted. The poſterior proceſs terminates in an oblong ſmooth head tipped with cartilage; ĩt is called the condyloid, and is received into a foſſo of the temporal bone, where it is capable of very extenſive motion. There ĩs a cavity through the ſubſtance of this bone, which receives a large twig' of the third branch of the fifth pair of nerves. This begins at the bottom of each coronoĩd proceſs, and terminates externally near the chin. This bone is furniſhed with an outer and inner bony plate, called the alveolar proceſſes, for retaining the teeth vith firmneſs. In each of the jaws are placed ſixteen teeth; ſo that the head, if ve include the os hyoides, a ſmall bone ſituated under the chin, conſiſts in the adult of ſixty-three pieces, Vith reſpect to the form of the cranium, when feen from above, and when the forehead is placed next the eye, it very much rãembles that of an egg, the os frontis correſponding to the ſmaller end of it, and the os occipitis to the greater. When ſeen in any other point of view, however, this reſernblance is not perceptible. The ſides of the head are flat, and the lower part is flat and irregular. The bones of tlie face conſtitute an imperfect triangle. The ſize oſ the head, in a well-formed perſon, is to the reſt of the body as one to nine. The, ſubtance of the bones oſ the cranium is in general made up of two tables or plates, with the interpoſition of a ſpongy cavity. The external table is thicker, ſmoother, and covered with the perioſteum; the internal is thinner, more uneven, moræ brittle, and is lined with a thick vaſcular membræne, called the dura mater. The bones of the head are united to each other by a number of tooth-like proceſſcs; and theſe joinings are called ſutures. The coronal ſuture runs acroſs the head, and connects the ſrontal bone to the purietal bones. The ſagittal ſuture divides the upper part of the head into two equal parts. It connects the two parietal bones to each other, and paſſes from the middle of the frontal to the middle of the occipital bone. The lambdoid ſuture ĩs interpoſed between the back and fore parts of the eranium, or between the occipital and two parictal boness. The two ſquamoſe ſutures connect the temporal bones to the parietall There are alio many leſs remarkable ſutures, which C n A P. VI. THE TE ETH. General Deſcription f the Teeth lInciſoresCaniniMolares Enamel of the Teeth.Groth of the Tecth7he Face lengthened after Eight Years of AgeVavieties in ihe Teeth of different Animuals. r7HE teeth, both of the upper and lower jaw, I are fixed in ſockets of the jaw- bones, formed of thin bony lamellæ. That part oſ the teeth which projects beyond the gums, is called their body; the external termination of the body, the corona or crown; and that which is hid, and which terminates in a wedgelike point, is called the radix or root. The roots of the teeth are perforated at their extremities, for the reception of nerves and blood- veſſels. The teeth are divided into three orders. The four front cutting teeth, are called inciſores. Next to theſe is placed on each ſide a tooth, called from its form the canine or dog- tooth; and laſtly, on each ſide five molares or grinding teeth. The laſt tooth on each ſide, from its not being cut till aſter the age of puberty, is alſo called dens ſapientiæ, or the tooth of wiſdom. The four inciſores are ſmaller and narrower in the lower than in the upper jav. The corona of the inciſores is broad and ſharp, and in children is much notched. The roots of the inciſores are ſhort, and terminate in a ſingle bluntapex. The canine teeth are ſtronger, more acute, and more deeply rooted than the inciſores. They are convex before and concave behind, and are fitted for tearing our food to pieces. The molares, by the eminences on the corona, and by their broad upper ſigned for the grinding of the food. The aænterior molares are ſmaller and leſs uneven on the corona than the poſterior; the ſtrongeſt being placed neareſt the articulation of the jaw bone, becauſe there we can exert the greateſt force. The roots of the molares are long and pointed; each tooth has two, three, four, and ſometimes, though very rarely, five roots. The roots ſometimes ſtand ſe parate, ſometimes are concreted together; ſometimes they are ſtrait, ſometimes crooked. The ſubſtance of the teeth is compact. The corona is covered with a curious ſubſtance, called the enamel. This is thin, white, ſhining, and, being the hardeſt and moſt compact ſubſtance in the body, is admirably adapted to the purpoſes of maſtication. It ĩs ſcarcely neceſſary to remark, that in eating ve only move the lower jaw, and that the upper is on all occaſions fixed and immoveable, In the infant ſtate, two ſets of teeth are already obſervable in the jaw-bones. In the cutting of the teeth, the inciſores firſt make their appearance, in general about the eighth month; and afterwards, at about two years of age, two molares and the dog-tooth. The firſt ſet of teeth when complete is but twenty in number, viz. eight inciſores, eight molares, and four canini. In the ſecond ſet are added twelve molares, viz. three on each ſide in each jaw, making the complete ſet in the adult thirty-tvo. To make room for this addition, the jaws undergo a gradual elongation. Hence the face is ſo much lengthened from cight to eighteen years of age. About the ſeventh year the ſecond ſet begins to ſupply the place oſ the firſt, which by this time become looſe, by the waſte oſ the ſockets and the growth of the teeth below. If we extend our views to the lower animals, ve ſhall find no part of the body more various among different races than the teeth. This circumſtance is ſo remarkable, that Linnæus has employed it in the diſtribution of the firſt claſs of animals (the mammalia) into its ſeveral orders. To enumerate all the varieties of teeth would be impoſſible, and at preſent it would be ſuperſluous. Let it be remarked, however, that they are not without their uſes, and that every animal C u A P. VII. BONES OF THE TRUNEX. Srine or Bact Bone. Hcv iFe Head is moved. The TChorax. The PelvspPrincital MMarts of Dtiuction betavecu ibe Male andt Femul? Steleton. HE bones of the trunk are divided into thoſe of the ſpine or back-bone, the thorax or cheſt, and the pelvis. The ſpinæ conſiſts of twenty- ſour pieces of bone called the vertebræ; ſeven of theſe belong to the neck, twelve to the back, and five to the Ioins. The thorax corſiſts anteriorly and latterly of twelve ribs on each ſide of the ſternum or breaſtbone, and part of the ſpine behind. The pelvis is compoſed of four bones; two oſſa innominata or hipbones; the os ſacrum, and the os coccygis. That ſeries of bones callcd the ſpine forms a column larger below than æbove, ſmooth and round before, very rough and uneven behiind, æand hollow vithin. The bones of the ſpine are joined to each cther by cartilages, in the centre of each of which is contained a fiuid; a curious circumſtance of ſtructure firſt diſcovered by the late Dr. Monro of Edinburgh. The chieſ advantage of this ſtructure is, that this fiuid, when confined, has all the reſiſtance of æ ſolid bocy, without its hardneſs, which in this part might be attended with very bad conſcquences. The head is connected to the upper vertebra of the neck by two ſmooth projections of that vertebra, which are called the condyls, being received into two correſponding cavities in the under part oſ the cra797?73 nium. By means of this joint we move the head backwards and forwards on the ſpine, or perform the action of nodding. As it ĩs neceſſary, however, for the head to have alſo a rotatory motion, we here find a peculiarity of ſtructure to which there is nothing ſimilar in any other part of the body. In the upper ſurface of the ſecond vertebra of the neck there is a long tooth like proceſs or projection, which is received into a perforation of the firſt vertebra. This proceſs is rendered ſmooth by a covering oſf cartilage; it paſſes quite through the vertebra above it, and is connected to this as well as to the cranium by ſtrong ligaments, which give ſtrength to the connection, and guard againſt the eſſects oſ a too extenſive motion. The rotatory motions oſ the head, therefore, are not performed on the firſt vertebra of the neck, but on the ſecond; the firſt vertebra, with the head, moving on the tooth- like proceſs of the ſecond vertebra, a3 a wheel moves on ĩts nave. The ſpine, however, though it forms a column, dors not form by any means an upright column. The ſpine, vieved ſdevays, if the os ſacrum is conſidered as a continuation of ĩt, is bent very much in the form of the letter. In the neck it projects ſomewhaet forwards, lower down it takes a curved direction backværds, to make room for the heait and lung:s. In the loins it a lvances ægain forwards under the center of gravity, ſo as to ſupport the abdominal viſcera; and in the pelvis ĩt recedes backwards, ſo as conſiderably to enlarge thet cavity. Each vertebra is divided into a body and ſeven projections, apophyſes or proceſſes. The body is placed beſore, it is ſimooth, of a roundiſh form, and a remarkably ſpongy texture. The proceſſes are of a much ſirmer texture, and pręject backwards. Two oſ theſe proceſſes are called the ſuperior &blique, and aſcend obliquely from the upper part of the vertebra; two are called the inferior oblique, and deſcend obliquely from the lower part; two are called the tranſverſe, and project ſideways; and one is called the ſpinous, from its reſemblance to a thorn, which projects directly backwards. Of theſe proceſſes the ſpinous and tranſverſe are the moſt prominent. The oblique proceſſes ſeem chieſly deſigned for the articuIation of the vertebræ with each other, and are thereſore alſo called articular proceſſes. All the vertebræ are perforated for the reception of the ſpinal marrow, and alſo have notches for the tranſmiſſion of nerves. The uſes of the ſpine are to ſupport the body in an erect poſture, and at the ſame time, by the number of joints with which it is furniſhed, to admit of a ſree motion, without danger of compreſſing the ſpinal marrow, which it is deſigned to protect. It is formed larger below thæn above, becauſe the lower parts of it have a greater weight to ſupport than the upper; and Brcauſe, when the body is bent, that weight acts with the longeſt lever againſt that part of the ſpine which is fartheſ removed from it. In very young children, each vertebra conſiſts of three pieces of bone urited by cartilage. As the ſpine contains ſo important a part as the ſpinal marrow, we obſerve a ſolicitous care taken by Providence, that the vertebræ ſhould not be disjointed. Beſides being connected by ſtrong ligaments, proportioned to the forces which are to be reſiſted, the vertebr/ of the neck enter into each other, thoſe of the buck are propped by the ribs, and thoſe of the loins have ſo large a ſurface of contact, as to render their ſeparation 2lmoſ impracticable. The thorax is a bony cavity, narrow above, wide below, and arched behind and at its ſides. The ſternum or breaſt-bone, which forms the anterior part of the thorax, is of a ſpongy conſiſtence, and of a flat and nearly triangular form; in infancy it conſiſts of many parts, in the aædult ſtate of only two, or ſometimes three. The upper part is broad and thick, the lower narrow æand thin. The loveſt part of the ſternum, from its reſemblance to a dagger, and its cartilaginous nature, is called cartilago enſiformis. The upper part of this bone is notched for the ſaſſage of the wind-pipe, and there are two cavities in its ſides for the articulation of the clavicles or collar-bones. There are alſo ſeven ſmall holes on each ſide, for the articulation of ſeven ribs. Its uſes are to ſupport the ribs, to protect the lungs and heart, and to furniſh connection to a muſcular organ, which will be afterwards conſidered, called the diaphragm. The ribs which conſtitute the greater part of the cavity of the thorax, are ſomewhat oſ a ſemicircular form; they paſs from the ſpine towards the ſternum; they are not connected, however, to the vertebræ themſelves, but to the cuartilagino- ligamentous ſubſtance which connects the vertebræ to each other. At the poſterior part the rib has two proceſſes; cne of theſe, by which it is connected between two vertebræ, is called its head; another is articulated with the tranverſe proceſs of the vertebræ immediately below, and is called its tuberoſity. Advancing farther on this external ſurface, we obſerve on moſt of the ribs another ſmaller tubercle, into which ligaments connecting the ribs to each other, and to thtranſverſe proceſſs of the vertebræ, and portions of thę Jongiſſimus dorſi, are inſertedc Beyond this the ribs make a conſiderable curve, fometimes called their angle. The ribs then begin to become broad, and continue ſo to their anterior end, whereas near the ſpine they are nearly round. To the fore end of each rib a long broad and ſtrong cartilage is fixed, and reaches thence to the ſternum, or is joined to the cartilage of the next rib. The ribs are twenty- four in number, twelve being placed on each ſidec. They are divided into the true and the falſe ribs; the ſeven uppermoſt on each ſide, which are connected to the ſternum, being called rrue, and the remaining ſive falſe. The upper rib is ſo placed, that its connection with the ſternum is ſomewhat higher than that with the ſpine, and the two connections of the ſecond rib are about horizontal; all the other ribs, however, point obliquely downwards, as they approach the ſternum, and this obliquity increaſes as we advance lower. A neceſſary conſequence of this ſtructure is, that when the ribs are raiſed, they muſt be brought nearer to a right angle with the ſpine, and that the cavity of the cheſt muſt be enlarged. The upper rib is fixed, but the, ſecond and every ſucceeding rib is gradually more moveable than that placed immediately above it. The ſeven upper ribs, called the true ribs, are, as was before remarked, connected to the ſternum; the three upper of the ſalſe ribs are not connected to the ſternum, but adhere to each other, and to the cartilaginous anterior part of the loweſt of the true ribs. The two loweſt of the falſe ribs are only connected to the ſpine by one articulation, and have their cther end no ctherwiſe ſupported than by the muſcles and membranes with which they are ſurrounded. By this ſtructure the trunk of the body is rendered more flexible at its lower part, where moſt motion is required. The uſęs of the ribs are to ſorm the lateral parts oſ the thorax; to render the cavity oſ the thorax larger or ſmaller in breathing; to protect the viſcera of the thorax; to give origins and inſertions to a variety of muſcles; and to ſupport the mammæ or breaſis. The pelvis, ſo called from its reſemblance to a baſin conſtitutes the Ioweſt part of the trunk. Iis poſterior part is formed by the os ſocrum, and its latæral and anterior parts by the oſſa innominata. The os ſacrum may be conſidered as a continuation oſ the ſpine; and ſome anatomiſts have called both this bone and the os coccygis by the neme of the falſe vertebræ. The os ſacrum is a large thick bone, of æ triangular form; its broadeſt part is placed uppermoſt, and its narroveſt is turned downwards and inwards. The poſterior ſurface of this bone is conver, the anterior concave. The two lateral margins of it are incruſted with cartilage, by the help of which it is immoveably connected with the oſſa innominata. In the middle of this bone there ĩs a canael for the ſpinal marrov, correſponding with that in the vertebræ of the ſpine; and on the anterior ſurſace there are ten perforations, for the paſſage of as many nerves. On the poſterior part there are many projubences, which, lile the pioceſſes of the vertebræ, ſerve for the inſertion of muſcles. The os coccygis is a ſmall bone of a pointed ſhape, adhering to the lower part of the os ſacrum. The os coccygis is in infancy compoſed of ſeveral pieces of bone, which coaleſce, however, in the ædult ſtate. It may be conſidered as a continuation of the os ſacrum, and is bent in the ſame direction with that bone. The oſſa innominata, which form the ſides and fore part of the pelvis, are two large broad bones, which in infancy conſiſt each of them of three diſtinct pieces; hut as we advance in life, the intermediate crtilages gradually oſiify, and the marks of the original ſeparation diſappear, ſo that they become one irregular bone. They ſtill, however, retain the names of ileum, iſchium, and pubis, by which their diviſions were originally diftihguiſned, and are deſcribed as three different bones, by rhe generality of anatomiſts. The oſſa innominata are connected poſteriorly to the os ſacrum, by a firm cartilaginous ſubſtance. The os ileum or haunch-bone, forms the higheſt and moſt conſiderable part of the os innominatum. The external ſide of the ileum is unequally convex, and is called its dorſum: the internal concave ſurface is by ſome authors named its coſta. The ſemnicircular edge at the higheſt part of this bone, which is tipped with cartilage in the recent ſubject, is named the ſpine. This has two conſiderable projections; one anterior, and the other poſterior, which is the larger of the two. Theſe ends of the ſpine being more prominent then the ſurface of the bone below them, are therefore called the anterior and poſterior ſpinous proceſſes. Below the anterior ſpinous proceſs another protuberance projects, which by its ſituation may be diſtinguiſhed from the former, by adding the epithet of inferior. Between theſe two anterior proceſſes, the bone is hollowed. Below the poſterior ſpinal proceſs a ſecond protuberance of the edge of this bone is alſo to be obſerved, which iĩs cloſely applied to the os ſacrum. Under this laſt proceſs a conſiderable niche is obſervable in the os ileum; between the ſides of which and the ſtrong ligament wvhich is ſtretched over from the os ſacrum to the ſnarp-pointed proceſs of the os iſchium of the recent fubject, a large hole is formed, through which the muſculus pyriformis, the great ſciatic nerve, and the poſterior crural veſſels, paſs, and are protected from compreſſion. he internal ſurface of the os ileum is concave in its broadeſt fore part, whence a ſmall ſinuoſity is continued obliquely forwards, at the inſide of the anterior ſpinous proceſs. This ridge is continued ſrom the os ſacrum, and correſponds with a ſimilar prominence, both of that bone and of the iſchium, and forms, with the inner part of the os pubis, what ĩs called the brim of the pelviss. The poiterior and lower part: of the oſſo ileum are thick; but at their middle, where they are expoſed to the actions of ſeveral ſlrong muſcles, and to the preſſure of the abdominal viſcera, they are exceedingly thin and compact. The oſſa iſchii or hip bones, form the lower and lateral parts of the pelvis: each is commonly divided into its body, tuberoſity and ramus. From the body of the iſchium the ſharp ſpinous proceſs ſtands out backwards, to which the ænterior or internal ſacroſciatic ligament is fixed Between the upper part of the ligament and the bones, it was formerly obſerved that the ſciatic nerve, &c. paſs out of the pelvis. The tuberoſity, or loweſt part of the iſchium, is large and irregular, aſfords an origin to ſeveral muſcles, and ĩs the part on which the body reſts in the poſture of ſitting. Trom the tuberoſity the bone becomes thinner and narrower; and paſſing forwards and upwards, concurs with the ramus of the os pubis, to form a large hole, called the ſoramen magnum iſchii, or thyroideum. This hole, which in the recent Iubject is cloſed with a ſtrong membrane, called the obturator ligament, affords through its whole circumference attachment to muſcles. The oſſa pubis conſtitute the anterior, or, when the body is erect, the lower part of the pelvis. They are of an irregular form, and as well as tne other parts of the oſſa innominata have a ſhare in ſorming the acetahulum. The two oſſa pubis are joined rogether by I ccartilage cartilage at the ſore part of the pelvis, vhich ĩs called the ſymphyſis pubis. In each os pubis e may obſerve he body oſ the bone, its angle, and ramus. The body or outer part is united to the os ſleum; the angle comes ſurwards to ſorm the ſy mphyſis, and the ramus is a thin proceſs which unites with the ramus of the iſchium to form the ſoramen thyroldeum. The acetabulum, or ſocket of the rhigh-bone, vhich is partly formed by all the three bones which conſlitute the oſia innominata, ĩs placed at the under part of the pelvis, and Is turned obliquely outwards. The acetabulum is not a perfect circle in the ſkeleton, the under part being ſupplied in the recent ſubject by cãrtilage. The os pubis conſtitutes about one-fifth of the acetabulum, the os ileum makes ſomething leſs than twofiſths, and the os iſchium as much more than twofifths. The pelvi? has two openings, one above and one below; that above, when we ſtand in the erect poſture, pointing almoſt directly forwards, that below, al lmoſt directly backwards. The chief differences between the male and female ſkeletons are in the proportions of the bones of the pelvis. The cavity of the male pelvis is an irregular circle; that of the female is much larger, and of an oblong ſhape; the longeſt diameter being from ſide to ſide, and the ſhorteſt from the os ſacrum to the oſſa pubis. Hence women are much wider acroſs the hips, in pròportion to their height, than men. The os ſacrum is broader, and turned more backwards for enlerging the pelvis. The os coccygis is more moveable, and much leſs bent forwards, to faciltate delivery. In conſequence of the pelvis being be farther removed from each other, hem a different gait from men in runmuſt throw the weight of their bodies ſide to ſide in order to bring it over the ity. The bones in general are much 5 robuſt in the female than in the male the collar-bones are leſs curved. The ſome of the bones is alſo in women pal uſes of the pelvis are to form an the trunk of the body and the Iower excontain and protect the urinary bladder, C n a r. VIII. THE BONES OF THE INFERIOR EXTREMITY. he Os Feroris  Dones of the Leg./The Foot. HE bones of the lower extremities are divided Ainto the thigh- bone, the bones of the leg, and the bones of the foot. The os ſeroris, or thigh-bone, is the Iongeſt bon in the body, and is the largeſt, thickeſt, and ſtrongeſt of the cylindrical bones. The lower extremities are connected to the trunk by the head of the os femoris belng received into the acetabulum. The thighbore is not placed in a perpendicular direction. the upper ends of the tnięn- bones being much farther apant than the lower; and from the greater width of the pelvis in vomen, this difſcrence is much more remarkable in them than in men. The body of this bone is ſomewhat of a triangular form; it is corvex before and flat behind, and is marked particularly behind by bony ridges, which ſerve for the connection of muſc.es. This bone is perforated at one or two places ſor the rece eption of blood veſſels. The os femoiis is not a ſtrait bone, but is arched conſiderably ſorwards. Its head is turned inwards, and the neck is almoſt horizontal, conſidered with reſpect to ĩs ſituation with the body of the bone. Throughout two-thirds oſ the length of the thighbone, at its poſterior part, we obſerve a ridge called the linea aſpera, which originates from the trochanters, and aſter running ſome way, divides into two ſmaller ridges, which terminate atthe condyls*. The head of the os femoris is nearly round, and is marked in the center with a round pit, intn which a ligament, which ſerved to keep ĩt fixed in the ſocket, was inſerted. The neck is narrower above ænd thicker below, and is terminatd by a rſdge, to which thæ capſular ligament or the joint was attached. Below this ridge are two remarkable proceſſes called the trochanters. The lager of the trochanters Is directed outwards, and is placed at the other ſide of the thighbone; the other is placed behind, but points inwards. The ſurfaces of both the trochanters are very rough, for the inſertion oſ muſcles From the muſcles inſerted into theſe two proceſſes being the principal inſtruments of the rotatory motions oſ the thigh, they are called trochanters. The lower extremity of the thigh-bone &s thick, and terminates in two condyls vhich are very cloſe to each other before, but conſiderably removed behind, where there is formed a ſafæ canal, through which a large artery paſſes to arrive at the leg. Behind are alſo two cavities which receive ligaments croſſing each other for ſtrengthening the connection of the os femoris with the lurger bone of the leg. The os femoris is united to the trunk by that kind of joint which admits of motion in all directions; but here this motion is in ſome directions much limited by the capſular ligament of the joint. The ſubſtance of this bone, as of all the cylindrical bones, is firm in the middle, and ſpongy towards the extremitſes. * By the vord condyl is meant the large extremity of a bone, reſęmbling the knob of a clubbeò ſtick. 122 lE Bones of thæ Leg. IBook IX. The leg has three bones, the tibia, the fibulæ, and the patella. The tibia, which is the principal bone of the leg, is a cylindrical bone of a triangular form, Iarger above than below. The upper end of the tibia is large, bulbous, and ſpongy, and is divided into two cavities by a rough irregular protuberance, which is hollow at its moũ prominent part, as vell before as behind. The two broad cavities at the ſide of this protuberance are not equal; for the internal is oblong and deep, for receiving the internal condyl of the os femoris; while the external is more ſuperficial and rounder, for the external condyl. The circumſerence of theſe' cavities is rough and unequal, for the firm connection of the ligaments of the joint. In this manner is formed a hinge or joint, which admits of motion in only two directions. At the back part of this bone the ſame canal is conrinued between the condyls, for tranſmitting bloodveſſels and nerves, as in the os ſemoris; and there are two eminences for the inſertion of the other ends of the crucial ligaments. At the interior part of this bone ĩs a cavity for the reception of the patella, which correſponds with one between the condyls of the os fernoris. Below the external edge oſ the upper end of the tibia is a ſlat ſurface of cartilage, for the connection oſ the fibula; and at its lower end therq is a longitudinal cavity on the outſide, for receiving ihe lower part of the ſame bone. On the internal part of the bottom of the tibia is a proceſs, which forms the inner malleolus or ankle-bone. Still lower, at the extremity of the tibia, is a tranſverſe articulating cavity, covered with cartilage, and divided by a ridge, which receives a bone of the foot called the aſtragalus.. The body of the tibia has three angles, ard as many flat ſurfaces. One of the fat ſurfaces is turned directly backwards, and one of the angles is placed directly at the fore-part of the bone, and is that ſharp ridge which is felt by the finger, being only covered by the common Integuments of the body. Another angle is called the poſterior and internal, and terminates in the inner ankle-bone; and the third is called the poſterior and external angle, and gives connection to the interoſſcous ligament, which paſſes from this bone to the fibula. The fibula, which is nearly oppoſed to the laſtmentioned angle of the tibia, is a triangular and very thin bone, nearly as long as the tibla. Its ſuperior extremity is united to the head of the tibia by means of cartilage. Tts head does not riſe quite ſo high as that of the tibia, and has thereſore no connection with the os ſfemoris; its lower extremity is ſlightly connected to the aſtragalus, and forms the external ankle. Its chief uſes are to aſſord room for the connection oſ muſcles, to extend the interoſſeous ligament, and to give greater ſirmneſs to the connection of the tibia with the foot. The patela, rotula, or knee-pan, is a ſmall ſlat bone of a ſomewhat triangular form, which is placed at the fore part of the leg, where the tibia is connected vith the os ſemoris. The anterior convex ſurſace of the patella is pierced by a great number of holes, into which enter fibres oſ the ſtrong ligament which is ſpread over it. Behind, its ſurface is ſmooth, covered with cartilage, and divided by a middle convex ridge into two cavities, both of which are exactly adapted to the pulley of the os femoris. The ſubſtance of the patclla is celiular, but the cells are ſo ſmall that it is a very ſtrong bone. Its uſes are to protect the joint, and to anſWer the purpoſe ofa pulley to the muſcles which extend theã. The ſoot is compoſed of the bones of the tarſus. metatarſus, and toes. It is convex above, concave below, and has a conſiderable projection behind. The tarſus, which is connected with the bones of the leg, conſiſts of ſeven pieces of bone, the aſtragalus, the os calcis, the os naviculare, the os cuboideum, and the three oſſa cuneiformia. The aſtragulus occupies the poſterior and upper part of the foot, and is the bone on which the bones of the leg immediately deperid for ſupport. The os calcis ſorms the projection of the heel; it is of a very irregular form, and is divided into the body, which points backwards, and an anterior proceſs by which it is coniected with the aſtragalus and the os cuboideum. The os naviculare is placed before the aſtragalus, and towarũs the inſide of the foot; it derives its name from its ſuppoſed reſemblance to a boat. The os cuboideum is placed beſore the os calcis, and towards the outſide of the foot. The three oſſa cuneiformia are placed before the os naviculare, near to cach other, and are ſo called from their appearing like wedges driven in among the other bones oſ the foot. The ſubſtance of the oſſa terſi is ſpongy, and they are ſo connected together by cartilage as not to admit of much motion upou each other. The metatarſus conſiſts of five cylindrical pieces of bone, interpoſed between the tarſus and the bones of the toes. Their upper ſurface is convex, their lower ſurface concave; their poſterior extremity is concave where they are connected vith the tarſus, and their anterior extremity is furniſhed with condyls, by which they are ſaſtened to the bones of the toes. The bones of the tees. are connected t6 thoſe of the metatarſus. The great toe has only two joints, the reſt three, and in this Teſpect they re ſembie the fingers and the the thumb. There are ſometimes found ſm⸗ll bones, which are called oſſa ſeſamoidea; theſe chiefly occur between the firſt and ſecond joints of the great toe and thumb, and as they anſwer the ſame purpoſes, viz. that oſ removing the tendon further from the axis of motion, may be conſidered as ſmall patellæ?. They are almoſt excluſively found in perſons advanced in life and inured to hard labour, and therefore are by ſome C u a r. IX. THE BONES OF THE SUPERIOR EXTREMITY; WITH A BERIEF COMPARISON OF THE HUMAN SEELETON WITH THAT OF BRUTES. Denes ef ihe HumerusOs Bracelii4æ tibracchiumEones f ihe HandReſembl e tetween the superior and inferior ExiremitiesCompariſin biteen the Human Steleion und ihat of Quadrupeds. l H E ſuperior extremity is divided into the hu-  merus or ſhoulder; the brachium or arm; the antibrachium or fore-arm; and the manus or hand. The humerus is compoſed of two bones, the ſcapula or ſhoulder-blade, and rhe clavicula or collarbone. The point where theſe to bones unite ĩs the top of the ſoulder. The ſcapula is a flat thin bone of a triangular ſnape. It is ſituated at the upper part of the back, and extends from the firſt to about the ſeventh rib. Ore of the ſurfaces of the ſcapula, which is concave, is applied to the trunk of the body; the other, which is convex, and more uneven, is turned outwards; ſo that the form of the bone may be plainly diſcerned in the living perſon. The external ſurface is divided by a projecting ridge oſ bone, called the ſpine of the ſcapula, into to parts, the upper of which is much narrower and ſmaller than the Iower. The ſcapula has three angles, and three ſides or margins. With reſpect to the margins, that which is placed rext the ſpine is by far the longeſt, and is thereſore ſometimes called the baſc of the ſcapula; that which forms the upper part of the bone is nearly horizontal, and is parallel to the ſecoRd rib, and is the ſiorteſt and thinneſt; the remaining maergin, which deſcends obſiquely ſrom the point of the ſnoulder to the inſerior angle, is by far the thickeſt and ſtrongeſt.The proceſies of this bone are the coracoĩd, ſo called from its reſemblance to.a crows beak, which riſes ſrom the anterior part of the ſuperior margin of the ſcapula; and the acromion, which is a broad and ſſat proceſs of the ſpine, placed at the top of the ſonlder, and is the whole thick bulbous fore part of the bone. Near the fore part oſ the ſuperior margin is a ſemilunar niche, from one end of which to the other a ligament is ſtretched; and ſometimes the bone is continued to form one or two holes ſor the paſſage oſ the ſcapular blood-veſſels and nerves. From the niche to e- termination of the foſſa cin vwhich a muſcle called the teres major is attached) the ſcpula A is narrower n . any where elſe, and this part has therefore been called its neck. The cavities of the ſcapula are the glenoĩd cavity, wider below than above, and covered with cartilage for the reception oſ the bone oſ the arm; and ſeveral ſmaller cavities for the connexion of muſcles, and other uſes. The texture of the ſcapula is firm, bur the bone s ſo thin as at moſt places to be tranſparent. It is connected by a ball and ſocket to the bone of the arm; by the intervention of cartilage to the clavicle; and with the head, the os hyoides, the ſternum, the ribs, and the back-bone, by means of muſcles. Its uſes are for the articulation of the arm bone, for the inſcrtion of a great number of muſcles, to add force and exenſiveneſs to the motions of the arm, and to be æ a defence to the poſterier part oſ the trunk. The clavicula, claviclc, or collar-bone, is a cylindrical bone, placed almoſt horizontally between the n The Collar Bone, & l Book IX. ſide of the ſternum and the acromion of the ſcapula. Is figure is ſomewhat like that of the letter ſ; and it received i its name from a ſuppoſcd reſemblance to the Eey uſed among the àancients. The clavicle, as well as other long cylindrical bones, is larger at its ends than at its middle. The end next the ſternum is triangular: the angle behind is conſiderably protruded, to form a ſharp ridge, to which the tranſverſe ligament, extended from one clavicle to the other, is fixed. It is for the moſt part convex without, and concave within. One end of the clavicle is connected by a ball and ſocket with the ſternum, and the other by cartilage to the acromion of the ſcapula.. Its uſes are to ſupport the ſoulder and other parts of the ſuperior extremity, 10 protect ſome large veſſels in their paſage to the arm, and to connect the ſcapula to the thorax. The os bra achĩi, or as it is ſometimes called the o3 humeri, is a cylindrical bone, the round head of vhich is received into the glenoĩd cavity of the ſcapula. It is larger and rounder at its upper part, and ſmaller and fatter below. It has three projecting lines, and as many ſlat ſurfaces, by which form it admits of a morẽ advantageous and extenſive connexion of muſcles, than if ĩt had been a ſimple cylinder, which is not the caſe w ith ⸗ any bone of the body, though all the long bones approach to that form. This bone has many circumſtances oſ ſtructure in common vith the os ſfemoris. Like that bone it is articulated by a round head, which is ſurrounded by a capſular ligament, and, like it, has proceſſes for the connexion of muſcles; but theſe proceſſes are much leſs remarkable in the os humeri than in the os femoris At the lower extremity of this bone we obſerve ſeveral proceſſes. and cavities. The moſt remarkable proceſſes are the two condyls of theſe the external i is the ſmalleſ, and i is of an irregular obli long ſhape. The internal is more protuberant, and ſerves, as well as the former, to give origin to many muſcles. Between theſe two condyls are two lateral protuberances, which, together with a middle cavity, form a kind of pully, on which the motions of the forearm are chieſly performed. The antibrachium, or fore- arm, conſiſts of to bones, the ulna and the radius. The ulna, which is the longer of the two bones, and is that by which the fore-arm is chiefly connected with the arm, is large above and ſmall below, and is of an irregular cylindrical form. At the ſuperior extremity of the ulna there are two proceſſes, a larger one called the olecranon, placed poſteriorly, and a ſmaller, called the coronoid, at the anterior part. At the upper end of the ulna, between theſe proceſſes, is a cavity divided by a projecting line, and covered with ſmooth cartilage, for the reception ofthe correſponding projections of the os humeri. There is another cavity at the ſide of the coronoid proceſi, covered with cartilage, on which the ſuperior end of the radius rclls in ſome of the motions of the hand. At the lower extremity of the ulna, which is much ſmaller than the upper, is a head with a ſlight excavation, and a ſmall proceſs called the ſtyloid, which forms a projection at the lower end of the fore-arm, on the ſame ſide with the little finger, not unlike the ankles. The ulna is firmly connected above, by a hinge joint, to the os humeri, laterally to the radius, and ſlightly below to the carpus, and its articulations are every where firmly ſecured with ligaments. The radius is a bone of nearly the ſame form, ſize, and appearance, with the ulna. As the larger end of the ulna is firmly connected with the os humeri, ſo that of the radius is connected to the carpus. On the contrary, the connexions of the ulna with the carpus, and of the radius with the os humeri, are very inconſiderable; the ſmaller end of the one bone being oppoſed to the larger of the other, and depending on it for ſupport and firmneſs. The ends oſ theſe two bones are cloſely joined together; their middle parts recede from each other, with the interpoſition of an interoſieous ligament, ſimilar to that between the tibia and fibula. At the upper end of the radius is a ſmall cavity, which receives the outer protuberance of the os humeri, and the projecting ridge ſurrounding this cavity rolls in a ſmaell ſinus at the upper end of the ulna, in which ſituation it is held by a ring of cartilage. At the bottom of the radius there is alſo a ſimilar ſinus, which reccives the lower end of the ulna. The radius is thereſore joined to the ulna by a double articulation; for, above, a tubercle of the radius plays in a ſocket of the ulna, whilſt below, the radius affords the ſocket, and the ulna the tuberclee The motion, however, performed in theſe two is very different; for, at the upper end, the radius does no more than turn round its axis, vhile, at the lower end, it moves in a ſort of cycloid upon the round part of the ulna; and as the hand is here articulated and firmly connected to the radius, they muſt niove together. The ulna, being cornected by a hinge joint to the os brachii, has ſcarcely any other motion han that of flexion ænd extenſion, in vhich it carries with it the radius. The motions of the hend, in which the palin is turned either upwards or downwards, are performed by thoſe of the radius on the ulna, carrying with it the hand. From theſe circumitances it appears, that the ulna more particularly belongs to the os hiumeri, and the radius to the carpus. The ulna ſometimes carries with it the radius, but the radius never moves the ulna, which, like the tibia is connected by a hi.ge-joint, and has motion only in two directions. The radius is ſo intimately connected with the hand, and is ſo much employed In its principal motions, that it has been called manubrium manus, or the handle of the hand. Without this peculiar mechaniſm, the motions of the fore-arm would be as conſined as thoſe of the leg; but providence, which has preferred the more firm and ſecure ſtructure in a part which was deſtined to ſupport the body, has adapted the fore-arm, by this beautiſul and admirable contrivance, for the perſormance of a number of motions, with which a hinge-joint would be quite incompatible. The bones of the hand are divided into thoſe of the carpus, metacarpus, and fingers. The carpus or wriſt is formed of eight bones, which are ſmall, of irregular ſhapes, and diſtinguiſhed into two ſeries. The form of the carpus is ſquare; that ſurface, which is contiguous to the palm of the hand, is concave, the oppoſite is convex. Each oſ the two ſeries of bones, which compoſe the carpus, conſiſts of four pieces. The firſt ſeries, or that which is placed next the bones of the fore-arm, conſiſts of the os naviculare, the os ſemilunare, the os cuneiforme, and the os piſiforme. The bones, which form the other ſeries, are the os multangulum majus, the os multangulum minus, the os capitatum, and the os cuneiforme. Theſe bones are covered with cartilage, and are variouſly articulated with the bones with which they are in contact. The principal uſe of ſo great a number of bones in the wriſt ĩs to render the hand more flexiblee. The back part of the hand is convex, for greater firmneſs and ſtrengths the palm concave, for containing more ſurely and conveniently ſuch bodies as we take hold of. The upper part of the hand has an obſcure motion in compariſon vwith the remainder, and ſerves as a baſe to the fingers. With reſpect to the metacarpal bones, and thoſe of the fingers, they are ſo nearly ſimilar to thoſe of the metatarſus and toes, that nothing need be added concerning them. The reader muſt undoubtedly have been ſtruck with the great reſemblance of ſtructure between the inferior and ſuperior extremities. The os humeri has many poirts of reſemblance to the os femoris, the tibia and fibula to the radius and ulna, and the bones of the carpus, metacarpus, and fingers to thoſe of the tarſus, metatarſus, and toes. Before the anatomy of the bones, however, is concluded, it will be proper to make a few general remarks on the ſkeleton of quadrupeds. In quadrupeds we obſerve the ſame general outlines of ſtructure in the oſſeous ſyſtem as in man. Their ſkeletons divide themſelves into head, trunk, and extremities; and each of theſe diviſions bears a ſtriking reſemblance to the ſame diviſion in the ſkeleton of the human body. The cavity of the cranium is much ſmaller in quadrupeds than in man, in proportion to the other parts, but the bones of the face are much longer; and with reſpect to this circumſtance, as well as many others, the monkey holds a middle place between mankind and quadrupeds. The ſpine, as in man, is connected to the cranium; but in quadrupeds, this bony column, inſtead of being placed vertically, is placed horizontally; in both, however, the ſtructure is the ſame, and the part is ſubſervient to the ſame purpoſes. The other parts of the trunk are alſo very ſimilar to the ſame parts in man; and the form and relative ſituation of the ſternum and ribs are nearly the ſainc. but the latter are more numerous in quadm;: æ ſame reſemblance is maniſeſteòd inVt pꝑelvis, exi cept that the os coccygis is continued beyond the other parts of the body, and forms the tail. The upper part of both extremities, as in man, is formed of one piece of hone, the lower part of two, and in many quadrupeds there are bones which correſpond with the carpus and tarſus, the fingers and the toes. The clavicula or collar-bone is in general, however, vanting in quadrupeds, and is only found in monkeys, ſquirrels, and ſome other animals, which are ſkilful in climbing, and which employ their fore legs ſor other purpoſes than that of travelling. In ſhort, the ſeleton of the quadruped is ſo ſimilar to that of man, that when the ſkeleton of the former is placed erect on the hind-legs, it may eaſily, by perſons unacquainted with anatomy, be miſtaken ſor that of the latter. The figure in Plate II. repreſents a ſront view of the human ſkeleton, with ſome of the ligaments and cartilages, which connect the bones to each other. H E AD and NE CE. a, Os frontis. b, Os parietale. Between a and b, part of the coronal ſuture. c, The pars ſquamoſa of the temporal bone. Between b and c, the ſquamous ſuture. Below the pars ſquamoſa, the zygoma; and, lower down, above f, the maſtoid proceſ. Between the pars ſquamoſa and the cavity, which contains the eye- ball, called the orẽit, the temporal proceſs of the ſphenoid bone is ſeen. , Os malæ. Above 4, a portion of the tranſverſe ſuture. ?, Os maxillare ſuperius, with the eight teeth of thę right ſide, The naſal proceſs of the ſuperior maxillary bone has the os naſi joined, by the lateral naſal ſutre, to its inſide; and at the outſide, within the o: bit, the os ungnis. The oſin nſi joincd- to each other before, by the enterior naſl ſuture. Os maxiilare inferius with ſixteen teeth; the foor anterior named iuciſores, the to corner ones coriii, aend the five poſterior on each ſide molares. Oproſite tof, the angle of the lower jaw; above ſ, the condylodd proceſs, by which the jaw is onnectæũ to the temporal bone, at the root oſ the z Zygeme; and behind the os malæ, the corenoĩd proceſs. The ſeven cervical vertebræ, with their intermediate cartilages. Oppoſite to g, their tranverſe proceſits. T R U N E. Sternum. a, its middle plece, to which one half oſ the cartilage that connects the ſecond rib, the whole of the cartilages of the third, fourth, fiſth, ſixth, and one half oſ the ſeventh, are fixed. Above a, the firſt or upper triangular piece, to vhich the clavicle and one half of the cartilage that connects the ſecond rib are fixed. EBelow 4, the extremity, or third piece of the ſternum, named the cartilago enſiformis, to which one half of the cartilage that connects the ſeventh rib ĩ3 fixed. The ſeventh, or laſt true rib. The twelſth, or laſt of the five falſe ribs. The five lumber vertebræ, with their intermediate cartilages. Oppoſite to d, their tranſverſe proceſſes. The os ſacrum, with its five diviſions. Os innominatum, divided into Os ilium, Os pubis, Os iſchium, Oppoſite to , the foramen thyroideum. SUPERIOR EXTREMITY. The clavicle, fixed before to the firſt piece of the ſternum, and outwards to the acromion of thę ſcapula. The ſcapula. Above b, the cervix of the ſcapula. Oppoſite to it, the inferior coſta; and below the outward extremity of the clavicle, the ſuperior coſta, and coracoid proceſs, are ſeen. the os humeri. The upper end oſ it, which is connected to the cavity of the ſcapula, named the glencid, below the acromion, is named its head or boll; on each ſide of which is ſeen the tubercles, named the external and internal; and between theſe, a groove for lodging the long head of the biceps flexor cubiti. The internal condyl. The external condyl. Between à and æ, the trochlea, upon which thæ ulna moves. The radius. The upper end, which moves on the external condyle of the os humeri, is named its head; below that, the tubercle for the inſertion of the biceꝑs flexor cubiti, and between theſe the cervix. The inferior end of it is connected to the carpus. The ulna. The upper end of it forms the coronoid proceſs, for the inſertion of the brachialis muſcle. The inferior end has a proceſs named the ſtyloid, vhich is connected to the carpus by a ligament. The carpus, formed of eight bones. Metacarpal bone of the thumb. The metacarpal bones of the four fingers. The two joints of the thumb. The three joints or phalanges of the fore- finger; and the ſame are ſeen in each oſ the other three, INFERIOR EXTREMITY. The os femoris. The upper end of it is named its head or ball, which is lodged in a deep ſocket of the os innominatum, named the acetabulum. Between the head and trochanter major, the cervix. Trochanter major. Trochanter minor. Internal condyl. External condyl. Patella. The place where it moves upon the os femoris, is named the frochlea. Tibia, Between the tibia and the condyls of the os femoris, the ſemilunar cartilages are ſeen; and below the joint, the tubercle oſ the tibia. Fibula. Malleolus internus. Os calcis. Between I and m, the other ſix bones of the tarſus, , Metatarſal bones of the four toes. The three joints, or phalanges, of the four toes. Metatarſal bone of the great toe. The two joints of the great toe. The figure in plate III. repreſents a back view of e human ſeleton, with ſome of the ligaments and rtilages which connect the bones. H E AD and N ECE. Os parietale, joined to its fellow by the ſagittal ſuture. The os occipitis, joined to the parietal bones by the lambdoid ſuture, which is between æ and à. Os malæ. Maxilla irferior, with a view oſ the teeth oſ both jaws from behind. The ſeven cervical vertebræ. T RrR U N E. The ſeventh or laſt true rib. The twelſth or laſt rib. The five lumber vertebræ. Os ſacrum. Os coccygis. Os innominatum, divided into Os ilium. Os pubis. Os iſchium. SUPERIOR EXTREMITY. The clavicle, joined outwards to the acromion of the ſcapula. The ſcapula. Os humeri. Internal condyl. External condyl. Radius. Ulna, its upper end, named olecranon wriſt, ĩts ſtyloid proceſs. The eight bones of the carpus. The metatarſal bone of the thumb, The metatarſal bones of the four fing The two joints of the thumb. The three joints or phalanges of the INFERIOER EXTREMI Os femoris. Trochanter major, and at the in cervix. ll Trochanter minor. Internal condyl. External condyl. Tibia. Fibula. Maolleolus internus. Malleolus externus. The ſeven bones of the tarſus. The metatarſus. C u A P. X. STRUCTURE OF THE MUSCLES. General Deſeripticu of MuſclesObſervations of the Abbè Fontana OF Leavenhoeck—DMuſcles compoſed of ſmall FibresStrudturs 7L diferent Muſcles AutagoniſtsMuſcles of the Fætus.  E bones, conſidered with relation to the motions of the body, are merely levers; let us now conſider the ſtructure of the muſcles, which are the immediate ſources of all the motions oſ the animal machine. The animal ſubſtance, which the anatomiſt calls muſcle, is that which in common language paſſes under the name of the lean or fleſh of meat. The colour of the muſcles, when they are firſt removed from the body, is red; this colour, however, is not eſſential to them, but is merely owing to the preſence of blood, ſor when muſcle is cleanſed from blood, it appears white. In every recent muſcle we may at firſt view diſtinguiſh two Linds of fibres; the one kind appears red, and is the true muſcular ſubſtance; the other is tendinous, has a white ſilvery appearance, and has no power of contraction like the former. The tendinous ſubſtance is ſometimes collected Into a cord, but is very frequently expanded, ſo as by covering the ſurface of a muſcle, or by pervading its ſubſtance, to aford a very extenſive connexion to muſcular fibres. The Abbẽ Fontana has taken great pains to examine the ſtructure oſ muſcles. He divided muſcular ſubſtance vith the point of a ſmall needle till he came to minute threads, which, whatever pains he took, would admit of no further diviſion. Theſe, he examined vith a lens, the diameter of which was cne-ninth of an inch; when they appeared to be ſolid homogencous cylinders, interrupted at regular diſtances by very minute lines or vrinkles. Theſe wrinkles, when they vere examined in different points of view, might have paſſed for globules; but upon this circumſtance, as the obſervation vent no further, the Abbẽ does not inſit. This undulated appearance has alſo been obſerved in nervous and tendinous fibres, examined by microſcopes of high magnifying powers. Dr. Monro, in his obſervations on the nervous ſyſtem, gives it as his opinion, that they are to be conſidered as folds or joints, ſerving to accommodate the parts to the different ſtates of flexion and extenſion. In proof of this he finds, that thoſe parts which have this appearance in their relaxed ſtate, loſe it when ſtretched. Iewenhoeck long ago fancied that he had diſcoveredt the ultimate muſcular fibre, which he conſidered as being one hundred times as ſmall as a hair. He aſterwards, however, candidly acknowledged, that what he ſuppoſed to be a ſimple fibre, was, in fact, a bundle of them. Notwithſtanding, therefore, the microſcopical obſervations of the Abbẽ Fontana, and other philoſophers, we muſt ſtill acknowledge ourſelves ignorant of the ſtructure of the ultimate component parts of muſcular ſubſtance; and all we are allowed to ſay is, that their ſtructure is fibrous. Theſe minute fibres, obſerved by. the Abbè Fontana, were tied by cellular ſubſtance in ſmall ſaſciculi or bundles, theſe bundies are again ſormed into larger by the ſame means, and of theſe faſciculi are compoſed thoſe contractile maſſes of fleſh called muſcles. Muſcles are generally connected at their two extremities to bones, by meæns of tendons; the largeſt part of a muſcle is called its belly, and is chieſly compoſed of contractile muſcular fibres. That connexion of a muſcle which is leaſt moveable ĩs called its origin, that which is moſt moveable its inſertion: but theſe terms are in many caſes merely relative, for a part of the body which is more fixed in one poſture becomes leſs ſo in another. The fibres which compoſe a muſcle run either longitudinally, tranſverſely, obliquely, or circularly. Iſ all the fibres which compoſe a muſcle run in the ſame direction, it is called rectilinear; radiated, if the fibres are diſpoſed like radii; penniform, if, reſembling the plume of a feather, the fibres are ſituated obliquely with reſpect to the center from which they proceed; compound, if the fibres run in different directions. The męjority of the lurge muſcles of the body are compound. Moſt muſcles have others oppoſcd to them, which act in a contrary direction, and are called antagoniſts. Thus, one muſcle, or one ſet of muſcles, bends æ limb, another extends it; one elevates a part, another depreſſes it; one draws it to the right, another to the left. By theſe oppoſite powers the part is Eept in a middle direction, ready to be drawn either one way or another, as particular muſcles are thrown into ſtronger action. The ſlexor muſcles exceed the extenſors in ſtrength, and for this reaſon the eaſieſt poſtures are thoſe in which the body or limbs are moderately bent. lllES When we ſpeak of the muſcies of a part, we do not mean thoſe which are ſituated on it, but thoſe which ſerve to move it. Thus, what are called the muſcles of the leg, and which are ſubſervient to its motions, are placed round the thigh bone; thoſe which move the foot, round the bones of the leg, &c. In the fœtus the muſcles are evidently inſerted into the pericſteum only, but in the adult ſtate, when the perioſteum adheres much more cloſely to the bone, the tendons, being confuſed with the perioſteum, paſs with that even into the foveoli of the C u1 a r. XI. MUSCLES OF THE HE AD. Muſdles of the FereheadOf the Eye-lida Of the EyoOF ilæ NeſeMuscles of the MouthIVhy ihe Face is the Inuĩex to tht Mind. —Temporal Muſtles Maſcls of ithe Neck—QOF the Jau  be TongueMuſles of ibe Palute, &e. EH E ſin which covers the head is moved by a ſingle broad muſcle, and one ſmall pair. The ſormer of theſe is ſituated immediately below the common integuments, at the back and fore part of the head, with the intervention of a broad tendon, and is called occipito ſrontãlis. Tts effect is to draw the ſiin oſ the head backwards, to raiſe the eye-brows, and vrinkle the ſkin of the ſorehead. The corrugator ſupercilii ariſes ſrom the internal angular proceſs of the os frontis, near its joining with the bones of the face; it is inſerted inmo the inferior and inner part oſ the occipito frontalis, draws the eye-brows towards cach other, pulls downwards the ſkin of the forehead, and cauſes it to wrinkle, particularly between the eye- brows. The muſcles of the ear will be ſpoken of when it becomes neceſſary to treat of the organs of hearing. The muſclesof the eye- lids are, the orbiculaeris palpebrarum, which ſurrounds the eye, and has the effect of ſhutting the eye-lidss. The upper eye- lid has alſo a muſcle proper to itſelf, called the levator palpebræ ſuperioris, the effect of which is to raiſe the upper eyelid, and conſequently to counteract the ſormer. The ball of the eye has ſix muſcles, four ſtrait and tom of the orbit around the foramen, through hich the optic nerve paſſes, and are extended to the fore part of the globe of the eye. Theſe muſcles are named from their uſe. The levator oculi ræiſes the ball of the eye, the depreſſor pulls it down, the adductor turns the eye towards the noſe, and the abductor moves the globe outwards. The two oblique muſcles are, the obliquus ſuperior or trochlearis, which, riſing ſrom the bottom of the orbit, runs along the pars plana of the ethmoid bone to the upper part of the orbit, where its tendon paſſes through a cartilaginous ring connected to the os frontis, by which mechaniſm the direction of its force is altered, and its tendon afterwards proceeding a little downwards, and directed outwards at the ſame time, Is inſerted half way between the inſertion of the attollens oculi and optic nerve. The eſfect of this curious muſcle is to roll the eye, to turn the pupil downwards and outwards, and to draw the whole bali nearer to the noſe. The obliquus inferior ariſes from the orbitar proceſs oſ the ſuperior maxillary bone, and running obliquely outwards is inſerted in the ſpace between the abductor and optic nerve. Its uſe is to draw the globe of the eye forwards, inwards, and downwards, and, contrary to the ſuperior oblique, to turn the pupil upwards towards the inner extremity of the eye-brow. By acting ſucceſſively with all the muſcles of the eyes we aere able to roll them. The noſe is aſected by ſeveral muſcles of the face, but only one pair is commonly conſidered as properly belonging to it. This, which is called the compreſſor naris, ariſes externally from the root of the alæ naſi, and running obliquely upwards along the cartilage of noſe, joins its fellow, and is inſerted into the neighbouring bone. The effect of this muſcle is to compreſs the alæ towards the ſeptum naris, particularly when ve want to ſmell acutely; it alſo wrinkles the ſin of the noſc. The mouth has nine pair of muſcles inſerted into the lips, where their terminations ſorm a ſingle muſcle, vhich ſurrounds the mouth. One of theſe riſes ſ ſrom the upper jaw-bone, and is inſerted into the angſe of the mouth. Its eſfect is to raĩſe the corners oſ the mouth, and it is thereſore called the levator anguli oris. 2. The levaætor lubii ſuperioris alæque naſi. This riſes by two diſlinct origins; one of theſe proceeds from the ſuperior maxillary bone immediately below the orbit, the other from the ſame bone at the inner angle of the eye. It is inſerted partly into the upper lip and rartly into the outer part of the alæ naſi, rãiſes the upper lip tovards the eyes and a little outwards, and alſo dilates he roſtrils, by drawing the alæ naſi upwards and outwards. 3. The depreſſor labii ſuperioris alaquæ naſi, ariſes from the upper jaw-bone, where the dentes inciſivi and canini are fixed, and is inſerted into the upper lip and root of the alæ naſi. When it acts, it draws the upper lip and alæ naſi downwards and backwards. The three muſcles oſ the mouth, alrcady mentioned, are ſituated above, the three other pairs are placed beIow. 4. The depreſſor anguli oris ariſes from the lower edge of the maxilla inſerior, and is alſo connected to the neighbouring ſoft parts. It is inſerted into the corners of the mouth, and pulls them downwards. 5. The depreſſor labii inferioris ariſes from the inferior part of the lower jaw- bone, near the chin, ĩs inſerted into the edge oſ the Iower lip, and pulls it downwarcis and a little outwardss. 6. The levator labii inferioris ariſes ſrom the lower jaw, where the dentes inciſivi and, canini are fixed, and, being inſerted into the under lip and ſkin of the chin, draws them upwards. Three pair of muſcles are alſo ſeated outwards with reſpect to the mouth. 7. The buccinator (or trumpeter) ariſes from both jaws, adheres cloſely to the membrane of the mouth, and is inſerted at its angles. Its effect ĩs to draw the angles of the mouth backwards and outwards, and to contract its cavity, as in blowing a wind inſtrument, and in puſhing our meat beteen the teeth. 8. The 2ygomaticus mejor ariſes from the os malæ, near the zygomatic ſuture, and is inſerted into the angle of the mouth. When it contracts, ĩt draws the angles of the mouth upwards and outwards, and makes the cheels prominent as in laughing. 9. The Zygom⸗ticus minor de ſcends obliquely from the prominent part of the os malæ, and is inſerted into the upper lip near the corner of the mouth. Its uſe is to draw the corner of the mouth obliquely upwards and outwards towards the external corner of the eye. Fhe ſingle muſcle, which was mentioned as being formed by the terminations of all the others decoſſating each other, is called the orbicularis oris, and entirely ſurrounds the mouth.. Its uſe is to ſhut the mouth, by contracting and drawing both lips together, and to counteract all the muſcles which contribute to its formation. The muſeles oſ the face are the organs, which, being affected by the paſſions, render the human countenance an index of what is paſſing in the mind; and, as all muſcles acquire a greater degree of ſtrength as well as proneneſs to action in proportion to the degree in which they are employed, ſo the countenance becomes impreſſed with a general character, which is the foundation of phyſiognomy. For this reaſon the countenances of old people are more expreſſive, and their likeneſſes mgrę eaſly taken, than thoſe of the young, rhough this is partly to be attributed to the waſting of the fat, which in youth fills the interſtices between the muſcles, and prevents ſtrong lines. To the above principle is to be attributed the greater expreſſionobſervable in the countenance of a perſon of a cultivated mind, than in that oſ a perſon whoſe ſtock of ideas is Iimited. From all theſe circumſtances it appears, that the cultivation of the mind is the moſt likely method of ncreaſing the expreſſion and beauty of the countenance. The muſcles of the lower jaw are four pairs, and are thoſe employed in the maſtication of the food. The temporalis muſcle has a very extenſive origin, from the lower and lateral part of the parietal bone, all the pars ſquamoſa of the temporal bone, from the external angular proceſs of the os frontis, and from the temporal proceſs of the ſphenoid bone. From theſe different origins the fibres deſcend like radii towards the jugum, under which they paſs, and are inſerted into the coronoid proceſs of the lower jaw. Its uſe is to preſs the lower jaw againſt the upper, and at the ſame ime to draw it a little backwards. This muſcle is covered with a broad tendon, called its aponeuroſis, which defends it, and gives origin to a great number of muſculor fibres. The maſeter ariſes from the ſuperior maxillary bone, vhere it joins the os malæ, and from the inferior and anterior part of the jugum, and is inſerted into the angle of the lower jaw, which, when it acts, it preſſes againſt the upper. The pterygoideus internus proceeds from the inner and upper part of the internal plate of the pterygoid proceſs of the ſphenoid bone, and from the pterygoid proceſs of the os palati. It is inſerted into the angle of the lower jaw internally, and, when it acts, draws it upwards and obliquely towards the oppoſite ſide. The pterygoideus externus takes ĩts origin from the outer ſide of the prervẽq/-a proceſs of ſhe ſphenoid bone, from part of the tuberoſity of the os maxillare adjoining to it, and ſrom the root of the temporal proceſs of the ſphenoĩd bone. It is inſerted into the neck of the cond; loid proceſs of the lower jaw, and pulls it forwards and to the oppeſite ſide, or when both the external prerygold muſcles act, the fore teeth of the under jaw are puſhed forwards beyond thoſe of the upper jaw. DOn the ſide of the neck, towards its fore part, are two muſcles. The external of theſe is a muſcle of the ſin, and is called platiſina myoĩides. It ariſes by a number of ſender fibres from the cellular ſubſtance, which covers the upper parts of the deltold and pectoral muſcles; in their aſcent they all unite to form a thin muſcle, adhering to the ſkin, and which is inſerted into the lIower jaw. It draws the ſkin of the cheek downwards. The ſterno-cleido-maſtoldeus has two origins, one from the ſternum, the other from the clavicle, which, uniting, form one muſcle, which runs oliquely upwards and ourwards, and is inſerted into the maſtoid proceſs of the temporæl bone. WEen it contracts, it turns the Eeæd to one ſide, and bænds it forwards; or when its fellow acts with it, they draw the head directly forwards. Six pair of muſcles are ſituated between the os hyoĩdes and the lower jaw. The muſcle, which forms the external layer, is called the digaſtricus. It riſes near the maſtoid proceſs, runs downwaerds and forwards to the os hyoides, and thence proceeds to the bone of the chin, into which it is inſertedl. When it cts, it pulls the lower jaw, downwards and baclwares, and therefore opens the mouth, When the lower jaw, however, is fixed by the ſtronger muſcles, hich have been already deſcribed, the effect of the digaſtricus ĩs diſſerent, for the os hyoides, then becoming the more moveable part, ĩs drawn upwards, and ith it the larynx and pharyng, as in the act of ſwallowing. The mylo-hyuideus paſſes ſfrom the inſide of the lower jaw to the os hyoides, and has neariy the ſame effect as the digaſtricus. The genio- hyoideus alſo paſies from the os hyoides to the chin, and either raiſes the former or pulls down the latter, according as the Ilower jaw or the os hyoĩdes is rendered more Axed by other muſcles. The genio-hyo-g gloſſus ariſes from the lower jaw, and is inſerred partly into the os hyoides, and partly into the tongue. This muſcle, according to the direction of its fibres, acts very differently on different occaſions; from the ſeparate action of its fibres ĩt either draws the tongue backwards, extends it out of the mouth, or renders its upper part concave. Two muſcles paſs from the os hyoides to the trunk. The ſterno-hyoideus proceeds from the ſternum, and pulls the os hyoldes downwards. The omo hyoideus ariſes from the ſuperior coſta of the ſcapula, and draws the os hyoides obliquely downwards. It ĩs to be noticed, that when there are two muſcles of equal ſtrength and equal obliquity attached to a moveable part, and they both act together, they draw it in a ſtrait line, the obliquity of the one counterbalancing that of the other. The ſubſtance of the tongue is muſcular, and is diſtinguiſicd by anatomiſts into ſix pair of muſcles, which it cannot be neceſſary to enumerate. They alſo deſcribe ſix pair of muſcles belonging to the pharynx: theſe I ſall paſ over in ſlence, and merely er ſt as a muſcular bag, fo alimentary canal. There longing to the palate and of this work do not permi t preſent alſo paſs over th as a better opportunity v 1g them under the deſcrij they belong. The ſame C  A P. XII. MUSCLES OF THE TRUNE. 3uſcles of the Neck and Bach.OF the BreaſtOf the Ribshe DiaphragmDMuſcles of the Abdomen. Of ihe Pelvis, &e. N the anterior part of the neck, cloſe to the vertebræ, are ſeated the following muſcles: The longus colli ariſes from the bodies of three of the vertebræ oſ the back, and from the tranſverſe proceſſes of moſt of the vertebræ of the neck. It is inſerted into the fore part of all the vertebræ of the neck, and has the eſfect of drawing it forwards or to one ſide, according as the muſcle on both ſides, or that on one only, is called into action. The rectus capitis internus major proceeds from the extremity of the tranſverſe proceſſes of the third, fourth, fiſth, and ſixth vertebræ of the neck, is inſerted into the cuneiform proceſs of the os occipitis, and bends the head forwards. The rectus capitis internus minor ariſes from the fore part oſ the body of the firſt vertebra oſ the neck, is inſerted into the condyloid proceſs of the os occipitis, and alſo bends the head forwards. The rectus capitis lateralis ariſes from the anterior part of the point of the tranſverſe proceſs of the firſt vertebra of the neck, and is inſerted into the os occipitis, and bends the head a little to one ſide. The large and ſtrong muſcles, ſeated at the poſterior part of the trunk, may be divided into four layers and a ſingle pair. The external layer conſiſts of two qr of ibe [Book IX. The trapezius ariſes by a ſtrong round tendon, from the middle of the os occipitis, and from a rough curved line, which extends thence towards the maſtoid proceſs oſ the temporal bone. It proceeds downwards along the nape of the neck, is attached to the ſpinous proceſſes of all the vortebræ of the back, and the two loweſt of the neck, and is alſo firmly connected by the intervention oſf a tendon to its fellow of the oppoſite ſide. It is inſerted into the poſterior part of the clavicle, the acromion, and almoſt all the ſpine of the ſcapula. It moves the ſcapula either obliquely upwards, directly backwards, or obliquely downwards, according ⸗ as ĩts different parts are called into actionThe latiſlimus dorſi aiũs by a broad thin tendon, from the poſterior part of the ſpine of the os ileum, from the ſpinòus proceſſes of the os ſacrum, Ioins, and ſeven inferior of the back, and from: three or four of the lower ribs; ĩts fibres converging paſs over the inferior angle of the ſcapula, are collected into a flat cord in the axilla, and inſerted into the os humeri. Its action ĩs to pull the arm downwards and backpard, and to roll the os humeri. The ſecond layer of muſcles conſiſts of three pair, two on the back and one on the neck. On the back are ſeated the ſerratus poſticus inſerio. This muſcle originates from the ſpinous proceſſes of the two inferior of the back and three ſuperior vertebræ of the Ioins, i is inſerted into the four loveſt ribs, which it dras downvards, and is therefore a muſcle of expirationn. The rhomboideus proceeds from the ſinous proceſſcs of the five ſuperior vertebræ of the back and three inſerior of the neck, and i is inſertd into the baſe oſ the ſcapula, which it draws obliquely upwards, and directly inwards towards the ſpine. On the neck is ſituated, The ſplenius, which ariſes from the ſpinous proceſſes of the four upper vertebræ of the back and five lower of the neck; it ĩs inſerted into the tranſverſe proceſſes of the five ſuperior vertebræ of the neck, the poſterior part of the maſtoid proceſs, and the os occipitis, where it joins the root of that proceſ. When one of theſe nmuſcles acts, it brings the head and neckly obliquely ber waerds, or, vhen they both act, they draw the heæad directly backwards. The ſingle pair, whi was mentioned, is the Serratus poſticus ſuperior. This originates from the ſpinous proceſſes of the three loweſt vertebræ of the neck, and two uppermoſt of the back, and is inſerted into the ſecond, third, fourth, and fifth ribs. Its eſfect is to elevate the ribs, dilate the thorax, and conſequently iĩt ĩs ſubſervient to inſpiration. Having removed theſe muſcles, ve come to the third layer, which conſiſts of three c on the back, and three on the neck. On the back are, The ſpinalis dorſi, which ariſes from the ſpinous proceſſcs of the two uppermoſt vertebræ of the Ioins and three inferior of the back, and paſes to the nine uppermoſt ſpinous proceſſes of the vertebræ of the back. The evident cfſect of this muſcle is to ſtraiten the ſpine, and prevent it from bending forwards. The longiſſimus dorſi originates from the ſide of the os ſacrum, and its ſpinous proceſſes; from the poſterior ſpine of the ileum; from all the ſpinous proceſſes, and from the rcots oſ the tranſverſe proceſſes of the vertebræ of the loins. It is inſerted into all the tranſverſe proceſſes of the vertebræ of the back, and alſo into the lower edge of the ten uppermoſt ribs, near their tubercles. This muſcle ſtrengthens the ſpine, and keeps the body ſrom bending forwards. The ſacro- lumbalis, which ariſes in common with the longiſſimus dorſi, is inſerted into all the ribs near their angle. It pulls down the ribs, and aſſiſts in erecting the trunk of the body. On the neck we find, the Complexus, which ariſes from the tranſverſe proceſſes of the ſeven ſuperior vertebræ of the back and four inferior of the neck; it is inſerted, with the trapezius, into the inferior edge of the protuberance in the middle of the os occipitis, and into a part of the curved line which runs towards the maſtoid proceſ. When they both act, they draw the head directly backwards, or obliquely ſo when only one is called into action. The trachelo-maſtoideus, which ariſes from the tranſverſe proceſſes of the three uppermoſt vertebræ of the back, and from the five lowermoſt of the neck, where it is connected to the tranſverſus cervicis, ĩs inſerted into the poſterior part of the maſtoid proceſ. It aſſts the complexus, but pulls the head more to one ſide. The levator ſcapulæ ariſes from the tranſverſe proceſſes of the five ſuperior vertebræ of the neck, and is inſerted into the ſuperior angle of the ſcapula. It elevates the ſcapula, and draws it a little forvards. The fourth layer conſiſts of tvo pair on the back, two on the poſterior part of the neck, four ſmall pair, fituated immediately below the poſterior part of the occiput, and three on the ſide of the neck. On the back are the Semiſpinalis dorſi, which ariſes from the tranſverſe proceſſes of the ſeventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth vertebræ of the back, is inſerted into the ſpinous proceſſes of all the vertebræ oſ the back above the eighth, and into the two lowermoſt of the neck. Its effect is to extend the ſpine backwards. The multifidus ſpinæ originates from the ſide and ſpinous proceſſes of the os ſacrum, and from the poſterior part of the os ileum, where it joins the ſacrum; from all the oblique and tranſverſe proceſſes of the vertebræ of the loins; from all the tranſverſe proceſſes of the vertebræ of the back, and from thoſe of the neck, except the three upper; its tendinous and muſcular fibres run in an oblique direction, and are inſerted into the ſpinous proceſies of all the vertebræ of the loins, of the back, and of the neck, except the ſirſt. When one ſide of this muſcle acts by itſelf it extends the ſpine obliquely, when both act they draw ĩt directly backwards. On the poſterior part of the neck are the ſemiſpinalis colli, which ariſes from the tranſverſe proceſſes of the ſix uppermoſt vertebræ of the back, and is inſerted into the ſpinous proceſſes of all the vertebræ of the neck. It extends the neck backwards. The tranſverſalis coll, which proceeds from the tranſverſe proceſſes of the five uppermoſt verrebræ of the back, and is inſerted into the tranſverſe proceſſes of all the cervical vertebræ, except the firſt and the laſt. It turns the neck obliquely backwards and a little to one ſide. Below the poſterior part of the occiput are, TaDhe rectus capitis poſticus major. This muſcle ariſes from the external part oſ the ſpinous proceſs of the ſecond vertebra of the neck, aſcends obliquely outwards, and is inſerted into the os occipitis. i paL the head bacuæards, and aſiſts a little in its jitii c rectus capitis poſticus minor ariſes ſrom a little protuberance in the middle of the back part of the firſt vertebra oſ the neck, and is inſerted near the foramen magnum of the os occipitis. It aſliſts in moving the head bàckwards. The obliquus cap itis ſuperior ariſes from the tranſverſe proceſs oſ the ſirſt vertebra of the neck, and is inſerted into the os occipitis. It draws the head backwards. The obliquus capitis inſerior ariſes from the ſpinous proceſs of the ſecond vertebra of the neck, and is inſerted into the tranſverſe proceſs of the firſt vertebra f the neck. This muſcle acts very powerfully in giving a otton motion to the head. On the ſide of the neck are the ſcalenus anticus, which ariſes from the fourth, fiſth, and ſixth tranſverſe proceſſes oſ the vertebræ of the neck, and is inſerted into the upper part of the firſt rib. The ſcalenus medius, which proceeds from all the tranſverſe proceſſes of the vertebræ of the nec, and Is inſerted into the upper and outer part of the firſt rib. The ſcalenus boties which ariſes from the fiſth and ſixth tranſverſe proceſſes of the vertebræ oſ the neck, and is inſerted into the upper part of the ſecond rib. The eſfect of all the ſcaleni is to bend the neck to one ſide, or, when the neck is fixed, to raiſe the ribs and dilate the thorax. There are a number of ſmall muſcles ſituated betveen the ſpinous and tranſverſe proceſſes of contiguous verbræ, ſome oſ vhich approach ſo nearly to the nature f of tendons as to ſerve merely as ligaments. The uſe of all theſe is to ſtrengthen and erect the ſpine. In the deſcription which has been given of the muſcles which ſerve for the motion of the whole head, the reader cannot have failed to obſerve, how much more numerous thoſe are which are inſerted into the back part of the head, and pull it backwards, than thoſe which have the oppoſite inſertion and eſfect. The reaſon of this is, that the center of gravity of the heæd does not fall on the condyls, on which it is ſupported, but conſiderably farther forward; from which mechaniſm it is evident that the muſcles which pull the head back muſt be continually acted againſt. Hence, when a perſon falls aſleep, or is affected with the palſy, and the muſcles ceaſe to act, the head always falls forwards. By the ſpine being thus connected towards the poſterior part of the cranium, more ſpace is allowed for the cavities oſ the mouth and fauces. Muſcles ſituated on the anterior part of the thorax. After having removed the common integuments of the thorax, we obſerve a large muſcle, the pectoralis major, which riſes ſfrom the cortilaginous extremities oſ the fifth and ſixth ribs, from almoſt the whole Iength of the ſternum, and from near half the anterior part of the clavicle. Its fibres run towards the axilla, and it ĩs inſerted into the upper and inner part of the os humeri. Its effect is to move the arm forwards and obliqucly upwards towards the ſternum. Having removed this we come to aænother layer, which conſiſts of three muſcles. The ſubclavius is a ſmall muſcle which riſes from the firſt rib, and ĩs inſerted into the inferior part of the clavicle. Its effect is to pull the clavicle downwards and forwards. The pectoralis minor ariſes ſrom the upper edge of the third, fourth, and fiſth ribs, and is inſerted into the coracoid proceſs of the ſcapula. Its uſe is to bring the ſcapula downwards and forwards, or that being ixed, to pull the ribs upwards. The ſerratus magnus originates from the nine ſuperior ribs, by an equal number of fleſhy points, reſembling the teeth of a ſaw, whence the term ſerratus is derived. Paſſing over tvo angles of the ſcapula it is inſerted into its baſe. Its effect is to move the ſcapula forwards, or when the ſcapula is forcibly raiſed, to draw the ribs upwards. The muſcles which cover the ribs being removed, ve obſerve the ſpace between the ribs filled up with double rows of muſcles, called the intercoſtales externi and interni. The external ariſe from the inferior acute edge of each rib, and running obliquely forwards are inſerted into the obtuſe upper ſurface of the rib next below. The internal ariſe in the ſame manner as the external, except that, contrary to them, they begin at the ſternum, and run obliquely backwards. The two rows of intercoſtals, therefore, decuſſate each other like the ſtrokes of the letter X. The effect of the contraction of both ſeries is the ſame, viz. that of bringing the ribs nearer to each other, and as each lower rib is more moveable than that above; to raiſe the ribs, dilate the thorax, and aſiſt in inſpiration. Certain portions, both of the external and internal intercoſtals, are longer, and paſſing over one rib are inſerted into the next below it. The ribs are likewiſe raiſed, and their poſterior articulations ſtrengthened, by twelve ſhort muſcles, which ariſe from eleven of the tranſverſe proceſſes of the dorſal vertebræ, and the loweſt of thoſe of the neck, and which are inſerted into the rib immediately below the tranſverſe proceſs from which each of them riſes. mis, and is inſerted into the lower edge of the cartilages of the third, fourth, and fiſth ribs. Its efect is to depreſs theſe cartilages and the extremities of the ribs, to contract the cavity of the thorax, and therefore to aſiſt in expiration. The moſt important muſcle of the thorax, iowever, ſtill remains to be conſidered. The diaphragm is a broad and ſtrong muſcle, which divides the cavity of the abdomen from that of the thorax. It is placed very obliquely between theſe two cavities, its anterior connection being much higher than iĩts poſterior. Its middle part ĩs forced up by the viſcera of the abdomen, ſo as to form an arch. The diaphragm, at its anterior part, ariſes from the upper and internal part of the enſiſorm cartilage, and ſrom the cartilages of the ſixth, ſeventh, and all the inferior ribs. The muſcular portions ariſing from all theſe points converge towards a common center, where they terminate in a broad triangular tendon. This being directed downwards and backwards is attached to a muſcular ſubſtance, which ariſes by eight heads from the ſecond, third, and fourth lumbar vertebræ. There are ſeveral paſſages through the diaphragm, which muſt not be paſſed over in ſilence. Among the muſcular portions which proceed frum the lumbar vertebræ, are openings through which paſs the aorta, the thoracic duct, the vena azygos, and the two great intercoſtal nerves. The muſcular fibres, which proceed from the lumbar vertebræ, run obliquely upwards and forwards, and form in the middle two fleſhy columns, which decuſſate, and leave an oval ſpace between them for the paſſage of the œſophagus and eighth pair of nerves. Towards the right ſide of the broad tendon, which forms the middle of the diaphragm, there is a large quadrangular opening, through which the vena cava paſſes to arrive at the heartt. When the diaphragm contracts, ſts concavity is leſſened, particularly on each ſide, over which the Iungs are placed, ĩts center being firmly fixed from its connection with the mediaſtinum. By the deſcent, however, of its ſides, it puſhes downwards and forwards the abdominal viſcera, it lengthens, and of courſe enlarges, the cavity of the thorax, and is the principal muſcle of inſpiration. The ribs are at the ſame time raiſed by the intercoſtal muſcles, by which the thorax is made wider. The chief muſcles of expiration, on the other hand, are thoſe which ſurround the abdomen. Theſe counteract the intercoſtals, by pulling down the ribs, in which they are aſiſted by the ſerràti, and oppoſe the diaphragm by the poſtici inferiores preſſing backwards and upwards the abdominal viſcera. By theſe muſcles reſpiration is in general carried on. In caſes, however, of Iaborious reſpiration, whether from diſeaſe or violent exerciſe, other muſcles arẽ called into action; inſpiration is then promoted by the pectoral muſcles, the ſerrati antici majores, the ſerrati poſtici poſteriores, and the ſcaleni. That theſe muſcles may act with more advantage, perſons Iabouring under diſſicult reſpiration extend and fix the neck, and raiſe the ſhoulders. In laborious expiration the quadrati lumborum, acro- lumbales, and longiſimi dorſi, concur in puli ling down the ribs. The claſticity of the cartilages of  the rits is alſo cn all occaſions an agent in expirotion. l The muſcles ſituated on the ænterior part of the abdomen are five pair. On the middle oſ the anterior part of the abdomen, three of its muſcles, the two oblique and the tranſverſe, terminate in tendinous ſubſtance, vhich forms an expanſion the whole way from the cartilago enſiſormis to the oſſa pubis. This ſrom ĩts white appearance is called linea alba. The external layer is formed by a muſcle, which from its ſituation and the direction of its fibres is called the obliquus deſcendens externus. This muſcle riſes by as many heads from eight or nine of the loweſt ribs; its notches always mix with thoſe of the ſerratus major anticus, and generally adhere to the pectoralis major, intercoſtals, and latiſſimus dorſi. It proceeds obliquely downwards ænd forwards, and is att2ched partly to the linea alba and partly to the ſpine of the ileum. Its tendinous ſubſtance, which forms part of the linea alba, divides below into two columns, which leave between them æ ſlit named the ring of the abdomen; of theſe columns the inferior is inſerted into the os pubis of the ſame ſide, the ſuperior decuſſates its fellow, and paſſes over to be inſerted into the os pubis of the other ſidec That part oſ the external oblique muſcle, which is connected with the ſpine of the ileum, is ſtretched from the anterior ſpinous proceſs of that bone towards the os pubis, forming what is called Pouparts or Fallopiuss ligament. This tendon ĩs united with the ſtrong tendinous expanſion of the thigh, caelled faſcia lata, which involves and ſheaths the muſcles of the thigh, and, proceeding to the leg, performs there the ſame oſfice. The opening, called the ring of the abdomen, formed by the tendons of this muſcle, gives paſſage to the ſpermatic veſſels in men, and the round ligaments of the uterus in women. The contents of the abdomen, getting through this opening, form the inguinal hernia. Under Pouparts ligament paſs the great veſſels of the thigh, and this is the ſeat of the crural or femoral hernia. This muſcle aſſiſts in the excluſion of the fæces and urine, and in expiration, and bends the body forwards. The ſecond layer is formed by the obliquus aſcendens internus. This muſcle ariſes from the ſpinous and tranſverſe proceſſes oſ the three uppermoſt lumbar vertebræ, from the upper part of the ſacrum, and from the ſpine of the ileum, the whole length between the poſterior and ſuperiur anterior ſpinous proceſs. Paſſing obliquely upwards, it ĩs inſerted into the cartilaginous part of all the falſe ribs and the two loweſt of the true, to the enſiform cartilage and to the ſternum. At its anterior part it becomes tendinous, and dividing, receives the rectus muſcle between its ſeparate portions. Its poſterior portion is connected with the tendon of the tranſverſalis muſcle, its anterior with the linea alba. At its loweſt part it is inſerted into the anterior part of the os pubis. Its uſe is to aſiſt. the former, but it bends the trunk in the reverſe direction. The tranſverſalis has nearly the ſame origins as the internal oblique. It ĩs inſerted into the cartilago enſiformis above, and into the whole Iength of the linea alba, except at ĩts lowermoſt part. It ſupports and compreſſes the abdominal viſcera. The rectus abdominis ariſes from the cartilago enſiformis and the cartilages of the three loweſt true ribs. In its courſe downwards it paſſes through the ſheath formed by the diviſion of the tendon of the internal oblique, having the tendon of the external oblique vithout, and that of the tranſverſalis withinn. The rectus is generally divided by three tendinous interſections. Below it is connected to the oſſa pubis, where they are joined to each other. The uſe of this muſcle is to compreſs the fore part, and more particularly the lower paert of the abdomen. It alſo bends the trunk forwards, or raiſes the pelvis towards the ſternum. By being ſurrounded by the tendons of other muſcles, it is prevented from ſtarting from its ſituation. The pyramidales are a ſhort pair of muſcles, frequently wanting; they ariſe from the oſſa pubis, and are inſerted into the linea alba about half way between them and the navel. They aſſiſt the rectus. ap The ænterior part of the abdomen is tininguied into ſeveral diviſions, called regions. I. The epigaſtric region, which reaches ſrom the bi of the ſtoach to within three fingers breadth of the navel, and is bounded laterally by the hypocondria. 2. The umbilical region, which extends three fingers breadth above and below the navel, and is terminated laterally by the lumbar regions; and 3. Below the umbilical region is the hypogaſtric, on each ſide of which are the ilinc regions. Still lower down is the region of the pubis. Within the cavity of the abdomen are ſituated four pair of muſcles. The pſoas magnus ariſes from the ſide of the body and tranſverſe proceſ; of the loweſt vertebra of the back, and from thoſe of all the vertebræ of the loins. Paſſing downwards through the pelvis it is inſerted prtly into the leſſer trochanter, and partly into that part of the os femoris a little below it. It raiſes the thigh forwards, or when the thigh is fixed, as in the poſturs of ſtanding, it bends the trunk forwards on the oſſa femoris. The pſoas parvus proceeds from the two upper vertebræ of the Ioins, and ſending off a ſmall long tendon, is inſerted into the brim of the pelvis at the junction of the os ileum and pubis. It aſiſts the pſoas magnus in bending the loins forwards. The iliacus internus ariſes from the tranſverſe proceſs of the laſt vertebra of the loins, from the inner edge of the ſpine of the ileum, from the edge of that bone between its anterior ſpinous proceſs and the acetabulum, and from moſt of the hollow. part of the ileum. It joins with the pſoas magnus, where it becomes tendinous, is inſerted along with it into the ſmaller trochanter; and has the ſame effect. The quadratus lumborum is ſeated further backrard; ; it ariſes from the poſterior part of the ſpine of the ileum, and is inſerted into the tranſverſe proceſſes of all the lumbar vertebræ, into the laſt rib near the ſpine, and by a ſmall tendon into the ſide of the laſt vertebra of the back. Its uſe is to draw the loins to one ſide, or, when both act, to bend the loins forwards towards the ileum. j Within the pelvis are placed the obturator internus, which ariſes from the internal circumference oſ the foramen thyroldeum. Its tendon paſſes out of the pelvis, between the poſterior ſacro-iſchiatic ligament and the tuberoſity of the os iſchium, and is inſerted into the large pit at the root oſ the trochanter major. Its effect is to roll the os femnoris obliquely outwards. The coccygeus paſſes from the ſpinous proceſs oſ the iſchium to the bottom of the os ſacrum, and the vhole length of the os coccygis.- By its contraction the os coccygis is drawn forwards. Belonging to the anus are, The ſphincter ani, which ariſes from the ſin a and fat which ſurrounds the verge of the anus. The ſibres are gradually collected into an oval form, and ſurround the extremity of the rectum, which they ſerve to contract. The levator ani ariſes from the os pubis, within the pelvis, and from the ſpinous proceſ of the iſchium. It ib inſerted into the ſphincter ani, acceleratores urinæ, and the point of the os coceygis. It ſurrounds the extremity of the rectur and the neck of the bladder, ſo that joining with its ſellow, they together very much reſemble the ſape of a funnel. It ſupports and draws ra Ct 2 1 Cu A ?P. XIII. MUSCLES OF THE INFERIOR EXTREMITIES. Muſcles of the ThighOF the Leg.Of the Foot and Toes. S the two ſides of the trunk of the body correſpond, a deſcription of one ſide is to be underſtood as applying equally to both. In the ſame manner the parts oſ the extremities have their fellows on the oppoſite ſide. The muſcles which belong to the thigh, and are ſituated at the anterior part of the pelvis, are, Ths P ſoas magnus, ſalreaoy deſcribed. The iliacus internus, The pectinalis ariſes from the upper and anterior part of the os pubis, immediately above the foramen thyroideum. It is inſerted into the anterior and upper part of the linea aſpera of the os femoris, a little below the trochanter minor. Its uſe is to draw the thigh upwards and inwards, and to roll ĩt in ſome degree outwards. The triceps adductor femoris ariſes by three diſtinct heads from the oſſa pubis, and is inſerted into almoſt the whole length of the linea aſpera, into a ridge above the internal condyl of the os femoris and into the upper part of that condyl. The uſe of this extenſivę muſcle is, as the name expreſſes, to draw the thighs together; it alſo at the ſame time tends to move them i—— and to roll the thigh outwards. The obturator externus Turrounds the foramen thyroideum, and alſo riſes from the membrane which fills up that foramen, and from the adjacent parts of the os pubis and iſchium. Its fibres converge to a poini, and paſſing outwards around the back part of the neck of the os femoris, are inſerted by a ſtrong terdon into the inner and back part of the trochanter major, àdhering in their courſe to the capſular ligament oſ the thigh bone. Its uſe is to roll the thigh bone obliquely outwards, and to prevent the capſular ligament from being pinched. The muſcles placed at the poſterior part of the pelvis, and deſigned for the motions of the Iower extremity are, the gluteus maximus, which forms the external layer, and ariſes from the poſterior part of the ſpine of the ileum, from the whole poſterior ſurface of the os ſacrum, and from the poſterior ſacroiſchiatic ligament; deſcending obliquely, it paſſes over the trochanter mãjor, is firmly connected to the tendinous expanſions of the tenſor vaginæ ſemoris, and is inſerted by a broad tendon into the upper and outer part of the linca aſpera. The effect of this muſcle is to draw the thigh backwards and a little outwards. The gluteus medius forms another layer. It ariſes ſrom the anterior ſuperior ſpinous proceſs and the dorſfum of the os ileum, and is inſerted into the outer and poſterior part of the trochanter major. Its uſe is to draw the thigh cutwards, and a little backwards, and to roll it, eſpecially when it is bended. The third layer conſiſts of ſour muſcles. The glutcus minimus ariſes ſrom the outer ſurface of the os ileum and the border of the great niche. It is inſerted into the upper and anterior part of the great trochanter, and aſiſts the former muſcle. The pyriformis ariſes within the pelvis, from the anter jor part of the os ſacrum, thence becoming narrover, it paſſes out of the pelvis along with the poſterior crural nerve, below the riche in the poſterior part of the os ileum. It is inſerted into a cavity at the root of the trochanter major. By its contraction it moves the thigh a little upwards, and rolls it outwards. The gemini conſiſts oſ two portions, one of which riſes from the outer ſurface of the ſpine of the os iſchium, the other from the tuberoſity of the os iſchium and poſterior ſacro-iſchiatic ligament. It is inſerted into the ſame part of the trochanter major with the pyriformis and obturator internus. This muſcle rolls the thigh outwards, and confines the tendon of the obturator internus. TEe quadratus ſemoris ariſes ſfrom the outſide of the tuberoſity of the os iſchium, is inſerted into a ridge which paſſes from one trochanter to the other, and rolls the thigh outwards. The muſcles ſeated on the thigh, and which move the leg, conſiſt of two on the inſide, one on the outſide, four before, and four behind. On the inſide are, The ſartorius, which ariſes from the ſuperior anterior ſpinous proceſs of the ileum: This long muſcle, running downwards and a little inwards, is inſerted into the inner ſide of the tibia. It draws the legs obliquely inwards, ſo as to bring the legs acroſs each other, for which reaſon it is called the ſartorius, or the taylors muſcle. The gracilis ariſes near the ſymphyſis of the oſſa pubis, and is inſerted with the ſartorius into the inner part of the tibia. It aſſiſts the ſortorius in bringing the legs acroſs, and, when they are a litle bent, to eoncur in bending them further. On the outſice of the thigh ĩs placed The tenſor vaginæ ſemoris, which ariſes from the external part of the anterior ſuperior ſpinous proceſs of the os ileum It is inſerted into the tendinous faſcia which covers and confines the muſcles of thiec thigh. Its uſe is to ſtretch and ſupport the faſciæ, and alſo to roll the thigh ſomewhat inwards. On the fore-part of the thigh are, The rectus, which ariſes partly from the inferior and anterior ſpinous proceſs of the ileum, and partly from the dorſum of the ileum, a little above the acetabulum. Paſſing down the middle of the os ſemoris it is inſerted into the patella, by the intervention of which its effect, that oſ extending the leg, is much increaſed. The vaſtus externus ariſes from the root of the trochanter mæjor, and the outer edge of the linea aſpera through its whole length. It is inſerted partly into the upper and outer paert of the patella, and partly into the tendinous expanſion, which is continued from the outſice of the thigh to that of the le;. This muſcle aſiſts the former in extending the leg. The væſtus internus aeriſes from the fore part of the os femoris, the root of the trochaænter minor, and inner edge of the linea aſpera. It terminates partly in the tendinòus aponeuroſis of the leg, and is partly inſerted into the inner and upper part of the patella. It alſo exterds the Ieg. The cruræus ariſes from the anterior part of the os femoris, between the two trochanters, but nearer the trochanter minor. It adheres ſirmly to the whole of the antcrior part of the os ſemoris, is inſerted into the middle oſ the patella, and aſiiſls in extending the leg. On the poſterior part of the thigh ære placed The ſemitendinoſus, which ariſes ſfrom the tuberoſity oſ the os iſchium, and is inſerted into the inſide of the ridge of the tibia a little below ĩts tubercle. Its eſſect is to bend the leg and draw it inwards. The ſemimembranoſus, which criginates ſiom the tuberoſity oſ the iſchium, and is inſerted into the inner and back part of the head of the tibia. It bends the leg, and brings it directly backwards. The biceps ſſlexor cruris ariſes by two diſtinct heads, Of theſe the longer proceeds from the tuberoſity of the iſchium, and the ſhorter ſfrom the linea aſpera, a little below the termination of the gluteus maximus. The two heads join a little above the external condyl of the os ſemoris, and are inſerted by a ſtrong tendon into the head of the ſibula, forming the external ham-ſtring. The internal is formed by the two preceding muſcles. T he popliteus ariſes from the lower and back part oſ the external condyl of the os femoris, it runs over the ligament which involves the joint, and is inſerted into a ridge at the upper and internal edge of the tibia, a little below its headl. It aſiſts in bending the leg, and prevenis the capſular ligament from being pinched. The muſcles ſituated on the leg, and which perform the motions of the foot, are either extenſors or flexors of the foot, or extenſors and flexors oſ the toes in general. The extenſors of the foot are: the gaſtrocnemius, which ariſes by two heads, one ſfrom each oſ the condyls of the os femoris. A little below the joint their ſleſny bellies unite in a middle tendon, and below the middle of the tibia it terminates in a broad tendon of the following muſcle. The ſoleus, or gaſtrocnemius internus, alſo ariſes by two heads; one from the upper and back part ofthe head of the fibula, the other from the upper and poſterior part of the tibia. The ſleſh of this muſcle, covered by the tendon of the gemellus, runs down nearly as far as the extremity of the tibia, a little above which the tendons of this and of the preceding muſcle unite, forming a Muſiles ef thæ Foo. [Book IX. ſtrong cord called tendo achillis, hich is inſerted into the poſterior and projecting part of the os calcis. The diſtance of the extremity of the os calcis from the aſtragalus, which is the center, on which the motions of the foot are perſormed, gives theſe muſcles great power. Their effect is to extend the foot by bringing it more nearly into the direction of the tibia. When the foot, however, becomes the more fixed point, as in the erect poſture of the body, theſe two muſcles, by preſſing the foot againſt the ground, raiſe the body; they are therefore very much employed in walking, running, and jumping, but particulerly in afcending ſteps, whence the fatigue felt in theſe muſcles which form the calves of the legs by a continuance of that exerciſe. The plantaris ariſes from the upper and back part of the external condyl of the os femoris, adhering in ĩts deſcent to the capſular ligament of the knee. Paſſing under the gemellus, it ſoon terminates in a thin tendon, which is the longeſt in the body, and which is inſerted into the inſide of the back part of the os calcis. It co-operates with the former muſcle in extending the foot, and alſo puils the capſular ligament of the Enee from between the bones, and prevents ĩt from being pinched. : The ſlexors of the foot are four, two of which beIong to the tibia and two to the fibula. The tibialis anticus proceeds from the upper and fore part of the tibia, and from the interoſſeus ligament. Near the extremity of the tibia it ſends off a round tendon, which paſſes under the ligamentum tærſi annulare near the inner ankle. It is inſerted into the inſide of the os cuneiforme internum and the poſterior end of the metacarpal bone, which ſuſtains the great toc. The effect of this muſcle is to bend the foot, by draving it upwards, and at the ſame time to turn it inwards. The tibialis poſticus proceeds from the upper part of the tibia near its union with the fibula, then paſing through a perforation in the interoſſeous ligament, it continues its origin from the interoſſcous ligament, and from the upper half of the tibia, receiving alſo a few ſibres from the fibula. It ſends off a round tendon, which paſſes in a groove behind the malleolus internus. It ĩs inſerted into the inner part of th]e os naviculare, and into the adjacent bones, at the internal and upper part of the foot. This muſcle alſo bends the foot, and turns it inwards. The two flexors which proceed from the ſibula, are, The peroneus longus, which ariſes from the forepart of the head of the fibula or ꝓærone, and alſo continues to receive fibres from the external part of this bone almoſt as low as the ankle. Its tendon runs in a channel at the back part of the outer ankle, thence being reſlected to the ſinnoſity of the os calcis, it runs in a groove in the os cuboides, and paſſing cloſe to the bones in the ſole oſ the foot, it is inſerted chieſiy into the metatarſal bone of the great toe. This muſcle moves the foot outwards and a little upwards. The peroneus brevis ariſes from the outer and fore part of the fibula. Its tendon paſſes behind the outer ankle, in which ſituation it is retained by the ſame ligament as that of the la muſcle. It is inſerted into the root and external part of the metatarſal bone of the little toe. This muſcle alſo moves the foot outwards and a little upwards. The common extenſors oſ the toes are, The extenſor longus digitorum pedis, which ariſes ſrom the upper, outer, and fore part of the tibia, interoſſeous ligament, and inner edge of the fibula. It divides into four tendons under the ligamentum tarſi annulare. It is inſerted by four flat tendons into the roots oſ the ſirſt joints of the four ſmall toes. Its uſe is to extend all the joints of theſe toes. A portion of this muſcle is inſerted into the metatarſal bone of the little toe, aſſiſts in bending the foot, and is called the peroneus tertius. The extenſor brevis digitorum pedis ariſes from the fore and upper part of the os calcis, is inſerted into the tendinous expanſion at the upper part of the foot, and extends the toes. The common flexors of the toes are, The ſflexor brevis digitorum pedis, which ariſes from the lover part of the os calcis. Its thick fleſhy belly ſoon divides into four tendons, which, after being pierced by thoſe of the following muſcle, are inſerted into the ſecond phalanx of the four ſmall toes. This muſfcle berds the ſecond joint of theſe toes. The fiexor longus digitorum pedis ariſes ſfrom the upper and back part of the tibla, ſome diſtance below jts head. In its courſe downwards it is increaſed by fleſhy fſibres from the inner edge of the tibia, and by means of tendinous fibres is connected to the outer edge of that bore. Paſſing under two annular ligaments, which retain its tendon in ĩts proper ſituation, it is received into a ſinuoſity at the inſide of the os calcis, and about the middle of the ſcle of the foot divides into four tendons, which perforate thoſe of the flexor brevis, ænd are inſerted into the extremity of the laſt joint of the four ſmall toes. Its uſe ĩs to bend the ]aſt joint of the toes. This muſcle receives, in the ſole of the foot, another, which ariſes from the inſide of the os calcis, and which increaſes ĩts ſtrength. The lumbricales pedis are four ſmall muſcles in the ſole of the ſoot, ſo called ſfrom their reſemblance in ſize and appearance to earth-worms: they ariſe ſrom the four tendons of the flexor digitorum longus, and are inſerted into the inſide of the firſt] joint of the four ſmall toes. Theſe muſcles render the flexion of the toes more extenſive, and draw them inwards. The muſcles ſituated chieſly on the foot are thoſe deſigned for the motions of each of the toes in particular. To the great toe belong five muſcles. Of theſe, one extends it, two bend it, one draws it outwards, and another inwards. The Iittle toe, beſides the common ſflexors and extenſors, has two muſcles proper to ſtſelf. One of theſe draws it outwards, and the other contributes to its flexion. Between the metatarſal bones are alſo ſeated ſeven muſcles, called the interoſſei interni et externi. The internal interoſſel are three in number; their uſe is to draw the three ſmaller toes towards the great toe. The external interoſſei are four; of theſe, the firſt ſerves to move the fore-toe towards the great-toe; the other three draw the three toes next the great toe outwards. All the interoſſeĩ aſſiſt in extending the toes. The tranſverſalis pedis ⸗ ariſes from the under part of the anterior extremity of the metatarſal bone of the great toe, and terminates at that of the metatarſal bone of the little tor. By the contraction of this muſcle the reat anrd lisele toes are brought nearer. The muſcles ſituated in the foot are covered and protected y a ſtrong tendinous expanſion, which aſſes ſrom the os calcs to the firſt joints of all the toos. Ci a r. XIV. MUSCLES OF THE SUPERIOR EXTREMITIES. Scapular MuſilesMaſiles of the Fere-armOF ile HandOf the Fingers. H E pectoralis major and letiiimus dorſi havẽ already been deſcribed. The muſcles which are ſeàted on the ſcapula, and vhich are inſerted into the os humeri, are, The ſupraſpinatus, which ariſes, as its name expreſſes, from that part of the ſcapula which is above its ſpine; it paſſes under the acromion, adhering to the capſular ligament of the os humeri, and is inſerted into the large tuberoſity on the head of that bone. Its uſc is to raiſe the arm upwards, and to draw the capſular ligament from between the bones, ſo that it may not be hurt by compreſſion. The infraſpinatus, which originates from all. that part of the baſe of the ſcapula that is between its ſpine and inferior angle; ænd alſo from the ſpine as far as the cervix ſcapulæ. Its tendon, running forwards, ĩs connẽcted with the capſular ligament, and terminates in the middle and upper part of the protuberance on the head of the os humeri. This muſcle rolls the humerus outwards, ſupports the arm when raiſed, and alſo aſſiſts in raiſing it, and pulls the ligament from between the bones. The teres minor ariſes from the inferior coſta of the ſcapula, and is inſerted into the back part of the tuberoſity on the head oſ the os humeri. Its uſe is to roll the humerus outwards and draw it backards, and by its connection with the capſular ligament of the os humeri, to draw it from berween the bones. The teres major ariſes from the inferior angle and inferior coſta oſ the ſcapula; its fleſhy fibres are continued over part of the infraſpinatus muſcle, to which they firmly adhere. It ĩs inſerted, by a broad and thin tendon, along with the latiſſimus dorſi, into the ridge at the inner ſide of the groove for lodging the tendon of the long head of the biceps. Its eſfect is to roll the humerus inwards, and draw it backwards and downwards. The deltoides ariſes from the clavicle, proceſſus acromion, and the ſpine of the ſcapula; from theſe origins its faſciculi converge, forming a covering to the anterior part of the joint of the os humeri. It ĩs inſerted into a rough protuberance in the outer ſide of the os humeri. The chieſ effect of this muſcle is to raiſe the arm; but from the different direction of its fibres, it may alſo move it backwards or forwards. The coraco-brachialis ariſes from the fore part of the coracoid proceſs of the ſcapula, is inſerted into the middle and inner ſide of the os humeri, and moves the arm upwards and forwards. The ſubſcapularis ariſes from the whole internal ſurface of the ſcapula; aſter being attached to the capſular ligament, it is inſerted into the upper part of the ſmall internal protuberance at the head of the os humeri. It rolls the os humeri inwards, draws ĩt to the ſide of the body, and draws the capſular ligament from betveen the bones. The muſcles ſituated on the os humeri, and which move the fore-arm, are only four; two being placed before for the flexion of the joint, and two behind for its extenſion. Thoſe placed before are, The biceps flexor cubiti, which conſiſts of two heads, which unite about the middle of the os humeri. Of theſe the ſhorter riſes from the coracold proceſs of the ſcapula; the longer and outermoſt begins from the upper edge of the glenoid cavity of the ſcapula, paſſes over the head of the os humeri within the joint, and in its deſcent without the joint is incloſed, by a membranous ligament, in a groove near the head of the os humeri. This muſcle is inſerted, by a ſtrong roundiſh endon, into the tubercle on the upper end of the radius internally. Its effects are to bend the fore- arm, and to turn the radius outwards, and ſo bring the palm of the hand uppermoſt. Part of the tendon proceeding ſrom this muſcle is alſo ſpent in a tendinous expanſion, which covers æll the muſcles at the inſide of the fore arm, and joins with another tendinous membrane, which is ſent off behind from the triceps extenſor cubit. The uſe of theſe expanſions, as in other parts of the body, is to confine the motions of the muſcles, to protect them, and to gve origin to a number of fibres. The brachialis internus ariſes from the os humeri at each ſide of the inſertion of the tendon of the deltoides. Being cloſely applied to the inferior and inner port of the os humeri, it runs over the jeint, is firmly attached to the ligament, and is inſerted into the coronoid proceſs of the ulna. It aſtę the ſormer muſcle in bending the fore-arm. Behind are The triceps extenſor cubiti, which corſiſts of three heads; of theſe cne proceeds from the inferior coſta of the ſcapula, another from the upper and outer part of the os humeri, and the third ſrom the back part of that bone. Theſe three heads, when united, ſorm æ large muſcle, which is cloſely applied to the poſterior part of the humerus, from vhich they receive ſome muſcular fibres. This muſcle is fixed rto the upper 2nd outer part of the olecranon of the ulna. The anconeus ariſes from the external condyle of the os humeri, and is inſerted into a ridge on the outer and poſterior edge of the ulna. It aſiſts in extending the fore-arm. The muſcles ſituated on the fore-arm may be divided into four orders: I. Flexors and extenſors of the whole hand. 2. Flexors and extenſors of the fingers. 3. Supinators and pronators, or thoſe which roll the radius on the ulna. 4. Flexors and extenſors of the thumb and fore-finger. The firſt order conſiſts of three flexors and three extenſors. The ſlexors are, The palmaris longus, which ariſes from the inner condyle of the os humeri, and is inſerted partly into the annular ligament, which confines the tendons ſcated in the wriſt, and partly into the tendinous expanſion, which covers the palm of the hand. This muſcle bends the wriſt and ſtretches this membrane. The palmaris brevis, which originates from the annular ligament and tendinous expanſion on the palm of the hand, and is inſerted into the os piſiforme, and the ſkin covering the abductor minimi digiti. It aſiſts in contzacting the palm of the hand. This ſmall muſcle is commonly conſidered as belonging to the former. The ſlexor carpi radialis proceeds from the inner condyle of the os humeri, and is inſerted into the metacarpal bone of the fore- finger. It bends the hand and aſſiſts in its pronation, that is, in turning the palm downwards. The ſlexor carpi ulnaris ariſes alſo ſfrom the internal condyle of the os humeri, and alſo from the outer ſide of the olecranon. Iv is inſerted into the os piſiforme, and aſſiſts in bending the vriſt. The extenſors of the whole hand are, The extenſor carpi radialis longior, which ariſes from the lower part of the external ridge oſ the os humeri, 2bove its external condyle. It is inſerted into the upper part oſ the metacarpal bone, which ſepports the fore-finger. Its effect ĩis 1o extend the wriſt and draw the hand backwards. The extenſor carp radialis brevior æriſes from the outer part of the external condyle of the humerus, and from the ligament which connects the radius to it. It is inſerted into the upper part of the metacar;al bone of the middle finger, and extends the wriſt. The extenſor carpi ulnaris ariſes ſrom the external condyle of the os humeri, and alſo receives an acceſſion of fibres in its progreſs from the ulna. Its round tendon is confined by a membranous ſheath in a groove, which is ſituated at the extremity of the ulnu. It is inſerted into the upper part of the metacarpal bone of the little finger, and aſſiſts in extending the vriſt. The ſflexors and extenſors of the ſœr ſingers are, The flexor ſublimis perſoratus, which ariſes from the internal condyle of the os humeri, the nner edge of the coronoĩd proceſ's of the ulna, and the upper and anterior part of the racius. It ſerds oſſ four tendons before it paſes under the ligament of the wriſt, which being divided for the paſſage of the tendons of the following muſcle, are - into the anterior and upper pert of the ſecond bone of cach finger. It bends the ſecond jonts of the fingers. : The flexor profundus perſorans, which originates from the upper part of the ulna, ænd from a conſiderable part of the inte roſſeous ligament. It divides into four tendong, which paſe through the ſits in the tendons of the preceding muſcle, and are inſerted into the up9 per part of the laſt bone of the ſour fingers. Its uſe is to bend the laſt joint of the fingerss The lumbricales ariſe from the four tendons of the preceding muſcle, and are inſerted into the outer ſides of the broad tendons of the interoſſei muſcles. They increaſc the flexion of the fingers. The extenſor digitorum communis ariſes ſfrom the outer condyle of the os humeri, and is inſcrted into the poſterior part of all the fingers by a tendinous expan⸗ ſion. It extends all the fingers. The muſcles, which roll the radius on the ulna, are, The ſupinator radii longus, which ariſes from the external ridge of the os humeri above the external condyle. It is inſerted into the outer ſille of the inferior extremity of the radius. Its eſfect is to roll the radius outwards, and conſequently to turn the palm of the hand upwards. The ſupinator radii brevis, which ariſes ſfrom the external condyle oſ the os humeri, and poſterior ſurface and outer edge of the ulna. It is inſerted into the head, neck, and tubercle of the radius. It rolls the radius outwarcs, and turns the pelm of the hand upwards. The pronator radii teres, which orig;nates lom the internal condyle of the os humeri and coronęid proceſs of the ulna. It ĩs inſerted into tãe peſterior part oſthe radius, about the middle of that b ne. Its eſfect is to roll the radius, with the hand, invards, and conſequently to turn the back of the hand upwards, or to lay the hand prone. The pronator radii quadratus ariſes from the inner und lower part of the ulna. Its fibres, running tranſverſely, are inſerted into the anterior part of the rædius oppoſite to their origin. For the motion of the thumb ae placed in the ſore-arm, The flexor longus pollicis manus, which originates from the upper and fore part of the radius; its tendon paſſes under the ligament of the wriſt, and ĩs inſerted into the laſt joint of the thumb, which it ſerves to bend. The extenſor oſſis metacarpi pollicis manus, which ariſes from the middle and poſterior part of the ulna, from the middle and poſterior part of the radius, and from the interoſſeous ligament. It is inſerted into the os trapezium and upper back part of the metacarpal bone of the thumb. Its eſſect is to extend the metacarpal hone of the thumb outwardly. The extenſor primi internodii ariſes from the poſterior part of the ulna, and from the interoſſeous ligament. It is inſerted into the poſterior part oſ the firſt bone of the thumb, which it extems obliquely outwards. The extenſor ſecundi internodii, ariſes from the middle and back part of the ulna, and ſrom the interoſeous ligament, and is inſerted into the laſt bone of the thumb, which it extends obliquely backwards. To the fore-finger belongs The indicator, which begins from the poſterior part of the ulna, about the middle of that bone. Its tendon, accompanying that oſ the extenſor digitorum communis, which belongs to the ſame finger, they are inſerted together into ĩts upper part. Its effect is to extend the fore-finger, whence its name of iudicator, as that is the finger with which we uſually point at any object of attention. The muſcles ſeated in the hand may be divided into thoſe of the thumb and thoſe of the fore and little fingers. The ſflexor brevis pollicis manus ariſes from the os trapezoides, annular ligament, os magnum, and os unciforme, and is inſerted into the ſecond joint of the thumb, which it ſerves to bend. The ſlexor oſiis metacarpi pollicis, or opponens pollicis, ariſes from the os trapezium and ligamentum carpi annulare. It is inſerted into the under and anterior part of the firſt bone of the thumb. Its eſfect is to bring the thumb inwards, ſo as to place ĩt in oppoſition to the fingers. The abductor pollicis manus commences ſrom the ligamentum carpi apnulare and from the os trapezium, and is inſerted into the outer ſide of the root of the firſt bone of the thumb,. Its uſe is to draw the thumb from the fingers. The adductor pollicis manus ariſes from the metacarpal bone which ſuſtains the middle finger, and is inſerted into the inner part of the root of the firſt bone of the thumb. This muſcle pulls the thumb towards the fingers. The thumb has, therefore, in all, eight muſcles, ſour ſeated in the fore-arm and ſour in the hand. Of the whole eight, three are flexors, three extenſors, one is an abductor, the other an adductor. One muſcle, the indicator, proper to the fore-finger, and ſeated in the fore-arm, has been already deſcribed; another muſcle proper to this finger is ſeated in the hand; it is called The abductor indicis manus, and ariſes from the inner ſide of the firſt bone of the thumb and from the os trapezium, and is inſerted into the rirſt bone of the fore- finger. It ſerves to bring the fore-finger towards the thumb. To the little finger belong The abductor minimi digiti, which ariſes from the os piſiforme and the adjacent part of the annular ligament. It is inſerted into the ſide of the firſt bone of the little finger, which it draws from the reſt. 182 Hand, Fiugers, &. Book IX. The adductor metacarpi minimi digiti manus, hich ariſes from the os unciforme and the ædjacent part of the arnular ligament; it is inſerted into the anterior part of the metacarpal bone of the little finger, which it draws towards the reſt. The flexor parvus minimi digiti ariſes from the os unciforme, and ſrom the ligament of the wriſt near it, and is inſerted into the firſt bone of the little finger. It bends the little finger, and aſſiſts the adductor. Between the metacarpal bones there are four internal and three external muſcles, named interoſſei. They are inſerted into the roots of the fingers. The interoſſei interni extend the fingers, and move them towards the thumb, except the third, which draws the middle finger from the thumb. The interoſſeĩ externi alſo extend the fingers; but the firſt draws the middle finger inwards, the ſecond draws it outwards, and the third draws the ring- finger inwards. The figure in Plate IV. repreſents the ſirſt Iayer of muſcles ſituated on the anterior part of the whole body, immediately under the common integuments, and tendinous faſciæ. MuSsCLES ſituated on the H E AD ard N E CE. a, The anterior ſleſhy belly of the occipito-ſfrontalis ſituated on the os frontis. Above a, the tendinous aponeuroſis ef the occipitofrontalis, covering the upper part of the purietal bones. 5, Attollens aurem. Under it the tendinous aponeuroſis covering the temporal muſcle. Anterĩor auris between  and the ear. Its tendon is ſeen at the inner canthus, fixed to the npaſal proceſs of the ſuperior maxillary bone. Levator labii ſuperioris alæque naſi. Seen divided ĩnto two portions running down along the ſide of the noſe; and on the outſide oſ it, the levator anguli oris. Next this, the Zygomaticus minor. Farther outwards, Zygomaticus major. On the ala and tip oſ the noſe, the Compreſſor naris. Depreſſor anguli oris. And beneath it, a portion of the depreſſor labii inferioris. Orbicularis oris. Platyſma-myoides. Behind ſ, the ſterno-cleido-maſtoideus is ſeen through the platyſma- myoides. TR U NE. Pectoralis major. The upper part of ĩt is covered by the origin of the platy ſma- myoides. Serratus magnus. The other portions reſemble this. Latiſſimus dorſi. Obliquus externus deſcendens. Linea ſemilunaris. Linea alba. Below f, the umbilicus. : Between e and f, the rectus abdominis; and, at the inferior part of the linea alba, oppoſite to g, the pyramidales appear through the tendons of the oblique muſcless. : Ring of the external oblique muſcle; with the ſpermatic chord, paſſing through it, and covered by the cremaſter muſcle. SUPERIOR EXTREMITY. Deltoides. Above the clavicle, a portion oſthe trapezius is ſeen. Biceps flexor cubiti. At the bending of the arm is ſeen its tendon going towards the radius, and the part, from which the tendinous aponeuroſis that covers the fore-arm, is cut off. On the inſide of the biceps, part of the triceps extenſor cubiti; and on the outſide, part of the brachtalis internus. Supinator radii longus. Pronator teres. Palmaris longus. Palmaris brevis. On the palm of the hand, the aponeuroſis palmaris is ſeen extended from the annular ligament at the wriſt, to the roots of the metacarpal bones oſ the four fingers. Flexor carpi radialis. Part of the flexor ſublimis perſoratus. Inſertion of the flexor carpi ulnaris. Abductor pollicis. INFERIOR EXTREMITY. Tenſor vaginæ femoris, the vagina or tendinot: faſcia being cut off. On the cutſide of it a portion of the glutæus maximus. Part of the iliacus internus. On the inſide of it, between  and ę, part of the pſoas magnus. Pectinalis. Triceps longus. Gracilis. Sartorius. Rectus cruris. Its tendon is ſeen inſerted into the patella, from which a ſtrong tendon is ſent to be fixed to the tubercle of the tibia. Vaſtus externus. Vaſtus internus. Tibialis anticus. Peroneus longus. On the outſide of it, a portion of the ſolæus. Extenſor longus digitorum pedis, with the peronæus tertius, and extenſor proprius pollicis pedis. Gaſtrocnemius externus, or gemellus. Soleus. Ligamentum tarſi annulare. Abductor pollicis pedis. The figure in Plate V. repreſents the ſecond layer muſcles on the anterior part of the whole body. MuscLES ſituated on the HE AD and NECK. Corrugator ſupercilii. Temporalis. Maſſeter. Levator anguli oris. Buccinator. Orbicularis oris. Oppoſite to the right ala naſi, the portion of this muſcle, which Albinus names Naſalis labii ſuperioris. Depreſſor labii inferioris. Sterno-cleido-maſtoideus, which is Seen below, ariſing from the ſternum and clavicle, by two heads. Sterno- hyoideus. On the outſide of it, the Omo- hyoideus. Further out, a portion of the Hyo-thyroideus. Levator ſcapulæ. TRr U N E. Subcelavius. Pectoralis minor. Serratus magnus. Rectus abdominis, divided into ſevera tions by its tendinous interſections. Pyramidalis. Obliquus aſcendens internus. Spermatic cliord, with the origin of tl muſcle. SUPERIOR EXTREMIT Biceps ſlexor cubiti. Short head of the biceps. Beneath the upper part of ĩt, a portion cobrachialis. Beneath the under part, a portion of I internus. Long head of the biceps. At the bending of the arm, the tendon and the place where the tendinous was cut from it, are ſeen. Extenſor carpi radialis longſor. Beneath it a portion of the Extenſor carpi radialis brevior. Flexor ſublimis perforatus. Inſertion of the extenſor carpi ulnaris. Opponens rollicis. On the inſide of it, a portion of the Flexor pollicis brevis. Tendon of the ſſlexor longus pollicis manus, aſter paũTng through the flexor brevis pollicis manus, Atductor minimi digiti manus. Flexor parvus minimi digiti manus. Ligamentum carpi annulare. INFERIOR EXTREMITY. lliacus internus. Between a and b, part of the pſoas magnus. Pectinalis. Triceps longus. Gracilis. Rectus cruris cut off near its origin. Tendon of the rectus cruris cut off above the patella, from which a ſtrong tendon is ſent to be inſerted into a tubercle of the tibia. Portion of the gluteus medius. On the inſide of it, part of the gluteus minimus. Vaſtus internus. Vaſtus externus. Cruræus. Inſertion of the biceps flexor cruris into the fibula. Tendons of the gracilis and ſemitendincſus inſerted into the tibia. Soleus. Peronæus longus. Extenſor longus digitorum, with the peronæus tertius on the outſide, and extenſor pollicis proprius on the inſide. Soleus. Flexor longus digitorum. Tendons oſ the tibialis poſticus and ſlexor longus digitorum pedis. Flexor brevis digitorum pedis. The figure in Plate VI. repreſents the third Iayer muſcles, with ſome of the ligaments, cartilages, d naked bones on the anterior part of the whole dy. Depreſſor labii ſuperioris alæque naſi. Orbicularis oris, aſter moſt of the muſcles, which are fixed to it, and aſſiſt to form it, have been taken away.. Buccinator. Above c, part of the pterygoidæus externus is ſeen paſſing behind the coronoid proceſs of the lower jav. Levator labii inferioris. Sterno-thyroidæus. Immediately above, and ſeemingly the continuation oſ it, the Hyo-thyroidæus. Scalenus anticus. Contiguous to it, on the inſide, the Scalenus medius. Above it, a portion of the Trachelo maſtoidæus. Between the ſcalenus anticus, and ſterno- thyroideus, and hyo- thyroidæus, the Rectus capitis anterius major, and Longus colli. TR U NE. Third row of external intercoſtal muſcles. The reſt appear in the ſame manner between the other ribs. Third row of internal intercoſtal muſcles. The reſt appear between the other ribs. Tranſverſlis abdominis. The place ſfrom which the inferior part of the tendon of the tranſverſalis, that paſſes before the rectus and pyramidalis muſcles, is cut off. Between theſe portions of each ſide, the peritonæum is laid bare, and the ligaments of the bladder, which were formerly the umbilical arteries and urachus. Between this portion and the os pubis, the ſpermatic chord is ſcen cut. The inferior edge of the upper part of the tendon of the tranſverſalis, which paſſes behind the rectus, and immediately adheres to the peritonæum. The anterior lamella of the internal oblique, which joined the tendon of the external to paſs over the rectus. Between f and &, the poſterior Iamella of the internal oblique, joining with the tendon of the tranſverſalis, to paſs behind the rectus. The place at the linea alba, from which the tendon of the external oblique, and anterior Iamella of the internal, were cut ofſ. t 5, Umbilicus. SUPERIOR EXTREMITY. Subſcapularis. Teres minor. Coraco- brachialis. The part from which the ſhort head of the biceps flexor cubiti was cut off ſiom it, is ſeen at ĩts upper end. Brachialis internus. Brachialis externus, or third head of the triceps. Extenſor carpi radialis Iongior, and with it the extenſor carpi radialis brevior. Both theſe are diſtinctly ſeen in the right hand. Between the tendon oſ the brachialis internus and extenſor radialis, the Supinator radii brevis ĩs ſeen. Flexor longus pollicis marus, with the fieſby portion of it which ariſes from the internal condyle oſ the os humeri. Flexor profundus perforans, which ſplits into four tendons, which paſs under the ligamentum carpi annulare. Pronator quadratus. Adductor minimi digiti manus. One of the lumbricales. The other three appear in the ſame manner, along the tendons of the flexor profundus. Behind theſe, the internal interoſſei are ſeen. INFERIOR EXTR EMITY. Glutæus minimus. Iliacus internus. On the inſide of it, between à and c, the pſoas magnus. Obturator externus. Adductor brevis femoris. Adductor magnus femoris. Gracilis; whi h is Scen inſerted into the infide of the head of the tibſa. The ſhort head of th e biceps flexor cruris. Peroneus longus. Peroneus brevis. Between theſe two peronci and tibia, the tibialis poſticus is ſeen. E Tendon of the tibialis poſticus, covering the tendon, of the flexor longus digitorum pedis. I, Extenſor brevis digitorum pedis. The figure in Plate VII. repreſents a back view of the muſcles, which are immediately ſituated below the common integuments. HE AaD and NE CE. a, Part oſ the occipito- frontalis muſcle, with ĩts aponeuroſis. b, Attollens aurem. c, Anterior auris. i d, Retrahentes auris. TRVUNE. a, Trapezius, or cucularis. 2, Its tendinous edge joining with its fellow in the nape of the neck, which is called ligamentum nuchæ or colli. c, The flehy belly of the latiſſimus dorſi. à, The tendon of the latiſſimus dorſi, which ariſes in common with the ſerratus poſticus inferior. e, Part of the obliquus externus abdominis. S UPERIOR EXTREMITY. æ, Deltoides. ll b, Infraſpinatus, with a portion of the teres s minor and major below it. c, Triceps extenſor cubiti. Its tendon is ſeen inſerted into the hæad of the ulna, called olecranon; and, on the inſide of it, the anconeus. à, Extenſor carpi radialis longior, covered by æ porroof the ſupinator radii longus; ænd, under i it, a portion of the extenſor carpi radialis brevior. e, Extenſor digitorum communis manus, which ſplits into four tendons, and paſs with the indicator, under the ligamentum carpi annulate externum, at the extremities of the metacarpal bone, under ligaments proper to themſelves; and are loſt in a broad tendon, which covers the back oſ the four fingers. Extenſor oſſis metacarpi pollicis manus. Extenſor primi internodii pollicis manus. Extenſor ſecundi internodii pollicis manus. Extenſor carpi ularis. Part of the flexor carpi ulnaris. Under it, part of the Flexor proſundus perforatus. And on the inſide, part of the Flexor ſublimis perforatus, which is more diſtinctly ſeen on the right fore-arm. Likewiſe, on the right hand, are ſeen part of the abductor pollicis manus, abductor minimi digiti manus, and the aponeuroſis palmaris. INFERIOR EXTP EMITY. Gluteus maximus. Part of the gluteus medius. Part of the tenſor vaginæ femoris. Vaſtus externus. The long head of the biceps ſlexor cruris: And beneath it, Part of the ſhort head. i Semitendinoſus: And beneath it, on each ſide, A portion of the ſemimembranoſus in ſcens Gracilis. On the outſide oſ it, A portion of the abductor magnus is ſeen. A ſmall ꝑirt of the vaſtus internus. Gaſtrocnemius externus, or gemellus; And within its outer head, A portion of the plantaris. Solæus or gaſtrocnemius i internus. ,Tendo Achillis, with the plantaris. Peroneus longus. Peroneus brevis; between it and the tendo Achillis, a portion of the flexor longus digitorum pedis. Tendons of the extenſor longus digitorum pedis, with the peroneus tertius, paſſing uncer the ligamentum tarſi annulare; and the flexor brevis digitorum pedis is ſeen beneath them. Abducctor minimi digiti pedis; and above ĩt the tendons of the peroneus longus and brevis, paſing under their own proper ligaments. The figure in Plate VIII. repreſents the ſecond layer of the muſcles on the back-part of the body. HE AD and NECE. T emporalis; its tendon Is ſeen paſſing below the Zygoma. ) Miaſſcter. Splenius capitis et colli. Portion of the complexus. Levator ſcapulæ, or the muſculus patientiæ, Tr U N E. Rhomboides major. Rhomboides minor: And immediately above it, the upper edge of the ſerratus poſticus ſuperior is ſeen. The ſerratus poſticus ſuperior on the right ſide. Serratus poſticus inferior. Part of the ſpinalis dorſi, Part of the longiſſimus dorſi. Part of the ſacro lumbalis. Serratus magnus. The broad tendon, by which the latiſſimus dorſi begins, and from which the tendon of the ſerratus poſticus inferior is inſeparable. Part of the obliquus internus aſcendens abdominis. The ſphincter ani, fixed to the point of the os coccygis; at the ſide oſ which the coccygæus, and a portion of the levator ani, are ſeen, &e. SUPERIOR EXTREMIT. Supra- ſpinatus. Infra-ſpinatus. Teres minor. Teres major. Triceps extenſor cubiti. Its head called longus. The brevis: And, A ſmall portion of the third head, named Irachialis externus. The tendon oſ the triceps, inſerted into the olecranon. Part of the brachialis internus. Anconæus, which ſeems to be continued from that part of the brachſalis externus immediately above it. Extenſor carpi radialis longior; and beneath it, the brevior: both are ſeen at the wriſt, inſerted into the metacarpal bones of the fore and middle fingers. Flexor carpi ulnaris. Part of the ſupinator radii brevis. Extenſor oſſis metacarpi pollicis manus. Extenſor primi internodil pollicis manus. Extenſor ſecundi internodii pollicis mapus. Indicator, inſerted into the root of the firſt joint of the fore finger. One of the three external interoſſei manus. The other two are diſtinctly ſeen without letters. One of the tendons of the extenſors of the ſingers cut; and the ſame is ſeen in each of the other threę fingers, joining with the tendons and aponeuroſes of the interoſſeĩ and lumbricales, and ſpread upon the back of the fingers. N. B. On the right hand, part of the flexors oſ the fingers, the abductor pollicis and minimi digiti, are ſeen. INFERIOR EXTREMITVY. Glutæus medius. Pyriformis. The two muſcles called gemini, between  which the tendon and fleſhy belly of the obturator internus paſſes over the tuberoſity of the os iſchium, are ſeen vithin the pelvis, partly covered by the coccygæus and levator ani. Quadratus femors. Vaſtus externus. f, Parts of the triceps magnus. Long head of the triceps flexor cruris, and beneath it part of the ſhort head is ſeen. Semitendinoſus, and beneath it parts of the ſemimembranoſus are ſeen on each ſide of it. Gracilis. A ſmall portion of the vaſtus internus. Poplitæus. The fleſhy belly of the plantaris; and its long ſlen der tendon is ſeen paſſing over the inſide of the ſolæus. n, Solæus. 0, The place where the tendon of the gemellus was cut off; but the fleſh of the ſolæ]us runs farther down. 7, Tendo Achillis, with the plantaris. ꝗ, Peroneus longus, paſſing at the outer ancle to the ſole of the foot; beneath it, the peroneus brevis to the root of the metatarſal bone of the little toe; and, between it and the tendo Achillis, a portion of the ſlexor longus digitorum pedis. r, Tendons of the extenſor longus digitorum pedis, with the peroneus tertius; and bencath theſe, the extenſor brevis digitorum pedis. ſ, Flexor brevis minimi digiti pedis. The figure in Plate IX. repreſents the third layer of muſcles on the poſterior part of the body, with ſome of the ligaments and naked bones. MVUSsCLES on the H æ a D ond NE C K. a, Part oſ the buccinator. b, Complexus. c, Trachelo-maeſtoldeus; on the outſide of it, the tranſverſalis colli. d, Scalenus medius. e, Scalenus poſticus. ~ r TR U N E. a, Spinalis dorſi and beneath it, the multifidus ſpinæ. Hill b, Longiſſimus dorſi, which ſends of a ſleſby ſip to the trachelo-maſtoidæus. , c, Sacro lumbalis, with the cervicalis deſcendens ſent cff from it along the ſide of the neck, and outſide oſ the tranſverſalis colli. Semiſpinalis dorſi. Tranſverſalis abdominis. N. B. The ſpaces between the ſpinous proceſſes oſ the vertebræ have muſcular faſciculi between them, particularly thoſe of the neck; and are named interſpinoles colli, derfi, and lumborum; but thoſe of the back ſeem to be tendinous and ligamentous. SUPERIOR EXTREMITY. Teres major. Part of the coraco-brachialis. Part of the brachialis internus. The third head of the triceps extenſor cubiti, called brachiolis externus, aſter the Ilongus and brevis have been cut oſf. Extenſor radialis longior. Extenſor radialis brevior. Part oſ the flexor profundus perforans. Supinator radii brevis. Part of the adductor pollicis manus. One of the threæ external interoſei; the other two may be eaſily diſtinguiſhed without letters. Tendons of the extenſors of the fingers, joining with thoſe oſ the lumbricales and interoſſei, which form a tendinous expanſion on the back of the four fingers. N. B. On the right hand, part of the flexors of the fingers and thumb, part of the adductor pollicis, and the whole of the adductor minimi digiti, are ſeen. INFERIOR EXTREMIT Glutæus minimus. Obturator internus; its fleſhy belly is the pelvis. Beneath b, the tendon of the obturator Semimembranoſus. The ſhort head of the biceps flexor cr Triceps magnus. Gracilis. In the ham, the origins oſ the two gaſtrocnemius externus and plantaris Poplitæus. Tibialis poſticus. Flexor longus digitorum pedis. Flexor pollicis longus. Peroneus longus, running down to be the metatarſal bone of ;he little toe. Beneath it, the peroneus brevis, paſſi of the foo. Extenſor brevis digitorum pedis. C ”a r. XV. THE CELLULAR SUBSTANCE, FAT, AND INTEGU. MENTS OF THE BRODY. General Deſerittion of the Cellular Substance ; its UsesThe Fat; its UſesTbhe SkinThe Organ of TouchThe Epidermis Cauſe of the blach, Colour of the Africans. CornsVFontana's microſcopic Objervations on the EpidermisQuantity of Perſpiration from the Humau Body. N the preceding chapters the muſcles of the human body have been treated of as ſo many diſtinct and feparate mãſſes of ſ=leh. It is neceſſary, however, to remark, that when the anatomiſt comes to trace them in the ſubject, he finds the caſe far otherwiſe, as moſt neighbouring muſcles are mixed and confuſed together by an intertexture of fibres, as well as by being involved in cellular ſubſtance. The cellular ſubſtance is à looſe fibrous web, and when filled with air plainly exhibits its real ſtructure, viz. that of cells communicating with each other. This ſubſtance forms a great part of the body, as it is interpoſed between all the muſcles, all the faſciculi of muſcular fibres, and it ſhould ſeem alſo, that it involves the ultimate fibres, of which theſe faſciculi are compoſed. All the blood-veſſels alſo, and nerves, are in their courſe attached to the neighbouring parts by means of this ſubſtance. Many of the glands too, which are compoſed of ſmaller maſſes, are united into one body by its intervention. It ſeems probable, indeed, that the membranes which inveſt the contents of the abdomen and thorax, and other membranes in other purts of the body, are compoſed of the cellular ſubſtance in a more conſolidated ſtate; and it is therefore very properly conſidercd as an univerſal connecting Liedium ſn every purt of the body. The uſes of this ſubſtance are ſo important, that, in all probability, animals could not exiſt without it. By uniting the fibres oſf the muſcles into compact maſs, it ſecures them ſrom becoming entangled with cach other, and with the minute blood-veſiels, lymphatics and nerves, which are every v here diſtributed arong them. At the ſame time, however, that it connects together the muſcles, and preſerves them in their relative ſituations, it is ſufficiently looſe to give full play to all their motions. It ſerves alſo the purpoſe of a ſoſt and compreſſible cuſhion, interpoſced among the muſcles, and, being alvays moiſt and ſlippery, renders their motions eaſy, and prevents friction. The cellular ſubſtance alſo affords a lodgment to the fat, and, together with it, fills up the interſtices beveen muſcles, and adds to the beauty, evenneſ, imoothneſi, and ſoſtneſs of the ſurſace of the body. The Abbè Fontana, on examining the fat of different animals, found ĩit fluid and of an oily nature. It was contained in very minute veſicles hieaped together, nũ theſe veſicles were covered with a thin tiſſue of iſting fibres. On preſiing them, he plainly perceived the fat oczZe out on all ſides, but on the moſt careful examination was unable to diſcover any ducts going to or from them. The uſes of the fat, as has been already intimated, are in ſome reſpects ſimilar to thoſe of the cellular ſubſtance, in which it is ſeated. It involves many of the viſcera, particulorly thoſe of the abdomen, and here ĩt increaſes, in people diſpoſed to obeſity, to a great degree. Within the cranium, where by its preſſure it might injure the brain, none of this ſubſtance is ſound. The ceſlular ſubſtance, beſides ſerving the purpoſes already mentioned, by being placed between the ſkin and the muſcles, is always conſidered as one of the integuments of the body. The other integuments are the ſin, properly ſo calleq, and the epidermis or ſcart in. The ſkin is probably nothing more than a condenſed cellular ſubſtance, copiouſly furnihed with blood-veſſels, Iymphatics, and nerves, as it within gradually becomes Ieſs denſe, and is at length inſenſibly loſt in the looſe cellular ſubſtance. It covers the whole ſurſace of the body, is tough, elaſtic, and ſorms, by means of the nerves, which terminate in it, particularly at the extremities of the fingers, where it is moſt ſenſible, the organ of touch. The cutis, when freed from the epidermis, which ĩs its external covering, is found to be furniſhed with innumerable papillæ, which appear like minute granuations; their uſe is probably to increaſe the ſenſibility oſ the ſkin, as where it is moſt ſenſible they are oſt remarkable. The ſXin or cutis, however, not only covers the outcr parts of the body, but becoming thinner and more delicate enters and inveſts internally the various cavities which open on the ſurface. It is every where pierced with blood-veſſele, and in ſome parts with the ducts of ſmall glands, which are ſeated between the ſin and the cellular ſubſtance, and which pour out an olly ſebacious matter for the lubrication of the ſurface of the body. The epidermis or ſcarf ſkin every where covers the truc ſkin, which would otherwiſe, from its extreme ſenſibility, occaſion much uneaſineſs from the friction to which the ſurface of the body is neceſſurily expoſed. The epidermis conſiſts of a mucous ſubſtance, which is ſituated next the true ſkin, and a dry, tranſparent, and in ſome meaſure horny ſubſtance, which is external, The mucous ſubſtance, called corpus mucoſum, or rete Malpighianum, is of a conſiſtence between that of a ſolid and a fluid, and is often treated of by anatomiſts as a diſtinct covering cſ the body. The colour of it varies according to the complexion. In fair people it is white, in brown people of a duſky hue, and in the Africans black. In the latter it is alſo more ſolid, and can be ſeparated from the external part of the epidermis, which cannot be effected in Europeans. By friction, the epidermis gains very much in thickneſs, as may be obſerved in the hands of labouring people, and in the ſoles of the feet of thoſe much accuſtomed to walking. Corns, which are nothing but hardened epidermis, are the conſequence of the preſſure and friction of tight ſhoes *. The epidermis is not furniſhed either with nerves or blood-veſſels, and is therefore inſenſiblee The Abbẽ Fontana ſubmitted ſome very minute portions of the epidermis, taken from his hand, to examination by a microſcope which magnified ſeven hundred diameters. The epidermis appeared to be compoſed of winding cylinders, which approached each other, and retreated with much regularity and order; ſmall globules alſo were in parts perceptiblee When the  The cure of theſe diſagreeable excreſcences is very obvious from this account; nothing is indeed required for this purpoſe, but to cover them with any ſoſt adheſive ſubſtance, which will protect them from friction, when they wil næturally decay, and in time come off ſpontaneouſly. portion of epidermis was covered with water, it appeared more tranſparent, and the cylinders and globules were ſeen more diſtinctly. He could obſerve nothing, however, like perforations or holes in the epidermis, and therefore doubts of their exiſtence. It ſeems probable, the Abbẽ Fontana adds, that the lymphatics, wnich le Pere della Torre pretends to have ſcen in the epidermis, were. nothing but theſe winding cylinders. We muſt believe, however, from the quantity of ſenſible and inſenſible perſpiration, eſpecially in warm climates, where, according to Sanctorius, who made his experiments in Italy, it amounts to five-eighths of the food taken in, that there are perforations in the epidermis for the paſſage of exhalent arteries. It may be alſo added, that the appearances exhibited by objects ſubmitted to microſcopes of high powers are never much to be depended on, and have given riſe to numerous deceptions, Immediately below the ſkin of quadrupeds, except thoſe of the porcine (ſwine) ſpecies, lies a thin fleſThy expanſion, called panniculus carnoſus, covering the greater part of the body, and ſurrounding the other muſcles. In man there is nothing ſimilar to this, rxcepting the platiſma myoides, or the occipitofrontalis muſclee The uſe of this thin muſcular expanſion is to wrinkle and move the ſin in order to C u Aar. XVI. . THE HAIR AND THE NAILS. Opinions of Aunatomiſis avith rctel to the Nature I the Hair, Nails, & e.Hair originates from tbe Ceilulur Sulbyiance Fontana's Obdirvations on Hair.T7lhe NailsThe Horn, Hoof⸗, and Clas of Animals. Vꝶx anatomiſts chuſe ro call the hair, the I i nails, and the horns of animals, productions of the epidermis; by Malpighi and Ruſh the hairs were ſuppoſed to be continuations from the nerves; neſther of which opinions, hovever, ſeems to be ſuſficiently proved, though the former appears by far the more probablee. The hairs are diſtributed more or leſs remarkably over the whole body, except on the palms of the hands and ſoles of the ſeetl. They riſe each of them from a ſeparate oval bulb placed beneath the true ſkin, and lodged in the cellular ſubſtance, and they aere ſurrounded by a ſheath, which riſes with them s ſar as the ſurface of the body. The Abbẽ Fontana took a hair, which he cleanſed by repeatedly drawing iĩt through a piece of fire Iinen dipt in water; he examined it with lenſes of diſferent powers, from ſome which magnified 400, to others which magnified 700 diameters, and the appearances, he informs us, were uniformly the ſame. The hair in general appeared of the colour of tranſparent amber; towards the center, however, of ir, there vas an obſcure line, which was broken at one part. It appeared woven, and formed hy, or covered with, twiſting cylinders, interrupted at places, and vinding like the inteſtines of animals. Among the winding cylinders there appeared minute globules of the ſame diameter with the cylinders. Having cruſhed the hair at one of its extremities, it appeared as if formed of many irregular poliſhed trunks, which were compoſed of bundies of very ſmall winding cylinders, with ſome globules ſcattered on the cylinders themſelves. The nails are horny inſenſible bodies, formed oſ thin lamellæ or plates. They riſe by a ſquare origin from the laſt joints oſ the fingers and toes, and are hard where they are expoſed to the air, but ſoſt near their roots. The ſtructure of the horns, hoos, and claws of animals is very ſimilar to that of our nailss. A minute portion of a finger nail being ſubmitted to the microſcope, exhibited the ſame appearance as the epidermis. Both the nails and hair grow entirely from below, C H A P. XVII. THE CAVITY OF THE ABDOMEN. Centents of the AbdomenpParts involved by ihe PeritoneumpParts not involVed by ithe Peritoneum. he Meſentery.he Omentun.Diſjirent in Man and Quadrupeds. HIS cavity is bounded above by the diaphragm, below by the bores of the pelvis, at the ſides by various muſcles and the falſe ribs, beſore by the muſcles of the abdomen, and behind by the vertebræ of the loins and the os ſacrum: Strictly ſpeaking, however, no part is ſaid to be within the cavity of the abdomen, which is not involved in a thin tranſparent membrane, called the peritoneum, of which a more particular deſcription will preſently be ſubmitted to the reader. The parts which are involved In the peritoneum are, the meſentery, the omentum or caul, the ſtomach, the ſmall and great inteſtines, the lacteal veſſels, he pancreas, the ſpleen, and the liver. The organs which are not involved in the peritoneum, but are placed behind it, are the kidneys, the ureters, the receptacle of the chyle, the aorta, and the vena cava. The upper part of the bladder is involved in the peritoneum, the lower is placed without it. The peritoneum is to be conſidered as a membrane forming an internal covering to the parts which are the boundaries of the abdomen, and at the ſame time doubled back on itſclf in ſuch a manner as to ſorm the external covering of the abdominal viſcera. The internal ſurface of the peritoneum is ſmooth, its Chap. 17.] he Peritoneum and Meſentery, 207 its external is rough, and united to the neighbouring muſcles and veſſels by the intervention of cellular ſubſtance. The cellular texture attached to the peritoneum, and in ſome parts included within its duplicatures, is generally replete with fat. The peritoneum is a denſe but thin and tranſparent membrane, the uſes of which are to retain the viſcera of the abdomen in their places, and by the ſmooth and moiſt covering which it affords them, to prevent adheſions of one viſcus to another; for which it is excellently adapted by being continually moiſtened by a ſerous ſluid, which proceeds from very minute pores. The exiſtence of theſe is proved by ſpreading a portion of the peritoneum on the end of the finger, and then pulling it very tight on all ſides; by theſe means the pores are dilated, and ſmall drops may be obſerved to proceed from them. The meſentery is a production of the peritoneum, and is formed by two laminæ oſ this membrane including cellular ſubſtance. It riſes by a narrow origin from the firſt, ſocond, and third vertebræ of the loins; it advances forwards, and gradually becomes broader in its progreſs. The meſentery at length embraces the inteſtines with ĩts laminæ, and thus afords them the coat which they derive from the peritoneum. That part of the meſentery which involves the ſmall inteſtines is more properly called the meſentery; that which involves the large is diſtinguiſhed by the term meſocolon. The meſentery includes between its laminæ all the blood-veſſels and nerves which belong to the inteſtines, and alſlo the numerous lacteal veſſels which take up the chyle from the inteſtines, and the glands with which theſe veſſels are connected. The omentum or caul is alſo formed by a dublicature of the peritoneum, including thin cellular ſubſtance, vith a large quantity of fat. It is variouſiy attached to ſeveral of the viſcerã oſ the abdomen. The ſuperior portion of ĩt is divided into two borders, one of which is fixed to the arch of the colon, the other along the great curvature of the ſtomach. Below this ĩt is looſe, nd; is placed between the inteſtines and the anterior part of the peritonenm: Beſides this large membranous covering, called the great omentum, there js a much ſmaller membrane of the ſame kind, which is called the little omentum. It ĩs fixed by its whole circumference partly to the ſmall curvature of the ſtomach, and partly to the coneave ſide of the liver. Tpe little omentum is thinner and more tranſparent than the other, but its ſtructure is much the ſame, and it is im fact a continuation of the larger. The omentum in man deſcends as far as the navel, in in quætupæ much lower. The reaſon for this difference ſeems to be, that from the erect poſture of man, the oily matter exuded from the omentum muſt fall downvards to lubricate the inteſtines, which are placed ſtill Iower; this, however, cãannot happen in quadrupeds, which have the trunk of the body in a horizontal ſiruation, and therefore ſtand in need of a longer omæntum; but as the uſe of the omentum is not fully aſcertained, this explanation is perhaps imaginary. C n a ?. XViſI. THE STOMACH AND INTESTINES. General Deſeription of ihe Stomach.Lengih of the Inteſtines in Man and QuadrupedsSmall and large Inuteſtines. j H E ſtomach is a membranous ſack, in form; when diſtended, not unlike a bag-pipe. The ſtomach is much larger towards the leſt ſide than towards the right. It has two orifices, one towards its lefc ſide, where the œſophagus or gullet enters, called the cardia, and another towards the right, called the pylorus, which opens into the inteſtines. The great extremity of the ſtomach is in the left hypochondrium, and for the moſt part immediately under the diaphragm, yet the leſt orifice is not in the leſt hypochondrium, but almoſt oppoſite to, and very near the middle of the bodies of the loweſt vertebræ oſ the back. The ſmall extremity oſ the ſtomach does not reach to the right hypochondrium; it bends obliquely backward towards the other orifice; ſo that the pylorus lies about two fingers breadth ſfrom the body of the vertebræ, immediately under the ſmall portion of the liver, and conſequently lower down and more forward than the cardia. The ſtomach is connected to the omentum, and by means of the omentum, on the leſi ſide, to the ſpleen. The orifices of the ſtomach are placed in the receſſes on each ſide of the ſpine, and the body of the ſtomach is cloſely applied toit, and in a manner bent round it. The orifices of the ſtomach are therefore placed further back than its body, and are alſo a lste higher, though when the ſtomach is diſtenced its body riſes nearly to a level with its orifices. The body of the ſtomach is d: ſtinguiſned into two curvatures; the concave ſurface, which is applied round the ſpine, is called the leſſer curvature, and that which is convex, and is turned forwards and downwards, the greater. The ſtomach is formed of four coats. The external of theſe is the peritoneal; the ſecond is muſcular, and is formed of fibres, which are continued from the muſcular coat of the œſophagus. Theſe fibres are variouſly diſtributed in the ſtomach. Some run directly in the leſſer curvature to the right orifice of the ſtomach, and are loſt in the duodenum; ſome run down each ſide of the ſtomach, and are loſt in its wideſt part towards the leſi ſidee Beſides theſe longitudinal fibres, the ſtomach is ſurrounded by ſomæ which are circular, and which are alſo continued from the œſophagus. There is a large aſſemblage of muſcular fibres round the right oriſice of the ſtomach, which conſtringes it ſo as to prevent the food from. paſſing into the inteſtines before it has undergone the proper changes in the ſtlomach. If we examine the inner ſurface of the ſmall extremity of the ſtomach, where ĩt ends in the inteſtinal canal, we obſerve a circular border with a roundiſh hole in the middle, which ĩs the pylorus, as before mentioned. The border is formed, partly by a fold of the internal eonts of the ſtomach, and partly by a collection of fleſhy fibres fixed in the duplicature of the tunica celJuloſa, and diſlinguiſhed from the other muſcular fibres bv a thin whitiſh circle, which appears even through the external coat, round the union of the ſtomach and inteſtines. I The third cont of the ſtomach, which conſtitutes the greatęſt part of its ſubſtance, ĩs the cellular, or, as it has been improperly called, nervous eoat. This is thick, firm, of a white colour, and is connected to the muſcular by the intervention of cellular ſubſtanc., as it is alſo to the coat within: li The fourth and inner coat of the ſtomach is the villous. This and the cellular coat, being more extenſive than the reſt, are formed into numerous wrinkles or folds. It obtains the name of villous ſfrom the unevenneſs of its ſurface, as being ſimilar to wool or heir vhen immerſed in water. It is ſingle, of a red colour, ands copĩouſly ſupplied with mucus. llll The ſtomach is furniſhed with lacteals, which riſe moſt numerouſly from it near its right orifice; it is alſo very copiouſly furniſhied ith nerves and bloodveſſels, which will be more fully deſcribed hereaſter. With reſpect to the uſes of the ſtomach, they will be ſpoken of æt large in the chapter on digeſtion. BY the inteſtines is meant the whole of the alimentary tube beyond the ſtomach. They are divided into e ſmall and the Iarge. The ſmall inteſtines are ſubdivided into the duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum. The large into the c|œcum, the colon, and the rectum. All the inteſtines, except ſome part of the duodenum, are ſurrounded and ſupported by the meſentery. In man, the length of the inteſtines is about ſix times that of the body, but in graminivorous quadrupeds their length, in proportion to that of the body, is much greater. The ſmall inteſtines fill the middle and fore- parts of the abdomen, while the large fill the upper and under parts, as well as the ſides of that cavity. The ſmall inteſtines, in general, are of a cylindrical ſorm. They are compoſed of four coats, the ſtructure oſ which is ſimilar, and which bear the ſame names as thoſe of the ſtomach. The muſcular coat, however, differs from that of the ſtomach in one reſpect, that the longitudinal fibres are here leſs numerous, and the circular fibres much more ſo. The ſame fibre, however, does not wholly ſurround the inteſtine, as the circlè is made of ſeveral imperfect arches. The cellular coat is exactly the ſame as that of the ſtomach. It aſfords ſtrength to the inteſtines, and conducts nerves and blood-veſſels to and from the villous coat. The villous coat of the ſmall inteſtines is exceedingly extenſive, and forms, together with the cellular ſubſtance, which connects ĩt to the cellular coat, a vaſt number of red ſemilunar folds or wrinkles, which ſerve to increaſe remarkably the internal ſurface of the inteſtines, and of courſe to expoſe the chyle more fully to the mouths of the lacteals. The ſmall inteſtines aſſiſt in the preparation of the chyle, and propel theĩr contents towards the great inteſtines. With reſpect to the ſmall inteſtines in particular, ſcveral circumſtances are to be noticed. The duodenum, ſo named from its being about twelve inches in length, differs from the others in not being entirely ſurrounded by the peritoneal coat; its muſcular coat, however, is ſtronger than that of the other ſmall inteſtines, and its colour is more ſlorid. The duodenum, beginning from the ſtomach, ſirſt runs towards the right ſide downwards, and rather backwards; then it bends towards the right kidney, to which it is ſlightly connected, and thence paſſes beſore the renal artery and vein, aſcending gradually from right to left, till it gets befcre the aorta ænd laſt vertebra of the back. It continues its courſe obliquely forwards by a gentle turn, and then terminates in the jejunum. Through this whole courſe the duodenum is firmly bound down and num is more lax, and of larger diameter than the other ſmall inteſtines, and by its various riſings and fallings is ealculated to retain the food for ſome time beſore it paſſes into the jejunum. About ſix inches from the pylorus, the common bile duct and the duct from the pancreas pour their contents together into the duodenum. Of the remaining part of the ſmall inteſtines, two fifths are called the jejunum, and the remaining three fifths the ileum, as no other characteriſtic mark of diſtinction can be pointed out. The upper part of the ſmall inteſtines is indeed uniformly more red, rather wider, and its ſtructure more robuſt than the lover part, but the gradation is regular. Nothing particular is to be obſerved at any part, which can furniſh a juſt foundation for a change of name, and Haller accordingly comprehended the jejunum and ileum under the term of inteſtinum tenue, or ſmall inteſtine. The jejunum is placed more about the umbilical region, the ileum more in the hypogaſtricc. The ſmall inteſtines at length terminate in the large, in the hollow of the right iliac bone, below the kidney. At this place there is a valve, which exhibits the appearance of a ſit or chink. This valve permits a free paſſage from the ſmall inteſtines to the large, but prevents any thing ſrom paſſing readily from the large to the ſmall. The cœcum, which forms the beginning of the great inteſtines, may be conſidered as a production of the colon expanded into a bag. It is about four fingers in length and as many in breadth. It iĩs ſituated in the right iliac region, and reſts on the broad part of the os ileum. At its lower part ĩt has a long ſmall proceſ, called the vermiform, from its reſemblance to an earth worm. This proceſs is plentifully furniſhed with mucus, which it pours into the cœcum. In apes this proceſs is wanting, but ĩts place is ſupplied by a gland, which aſfords a ſippery fluid. In ſome birds ve meet vith to vermiform proceſes, and in ſome inds of fith they are very numerous. Under the name of; colon is comprehended almoſt the whole of the great inteſtines. The colon begins in the right iliac region, and is attached to the kidney, t thence it riſes as high as the ſtomach and the liver. It now runs tranſve ſely before the ſtomach to the leſt ſide, ĩs connected to the ſpleen and kidney, deſcends into the left iliac region, and being there bent in the form of the letter S, it terminates in the rectum. The ftructure of the colon is ſimilar to that of the ſmall inteſtines. It is more robuſt, hovever, and the longitudinal muſcular fibres, which are mixed with ligamentous ſubſtance, are united into three faſciculi, giving it in ſome meaſure a triangular form. Theſe faſcicul are continued from the vermiform Broceſ of the c|œ]cum to the end of the colon, where they gradually diſappear. Along the whole couiſe oſ the colon are a number of cells formed by circular contractions oſ the inteſtine, which ſerve to retard the progreſs of its contents. Along rhe whole courſe of the large inteſtines we alſo obũerve ſmall projections oſ a fat ſubſtance, contained in elongations of their common coat. They ſeem in their nature very analogous to the omentum, and are conſidered by Winſlow as a kind of ſmall omenta; they are accordingly named appendices epiploicæ. The rectum, which is a continuation of the colon, begins at the loweſt vertebra of the loins. It is bent like the internal ſurface of the os ſacrum and os coccygis, to which it is cleſel y applied, and terminates at the anus. The blood-veſſels of the inteſtines wil be mentioned in treating of the general diſtribution of the arteries C H A P. XIX. THE LIVER, SP LEEN, AND PANCREAS. Nature and Situation of the Liver. The Gall Bladder.Bile Ducts Cauſe of JaundiceThe SpleenThe PancreasIts Usis. HE liver is an organ of a deep red colour, and is by far the largeſt gland in the body. It is ſituated immediately beneath the diaphragm. .In man, the liver is divided into two portions or lobes, the larger of which is placed in the right hypochondrium, and the ſmuller extends acroſs the epigaſtric region, towards the left. The liver ĩs divided on the upper and anterior ſide into its lobes by a broad ligament, on the lower and poſterior, by a deep fiſſure. The upper ſurface of the liver is convex and ſmooth, correſponding to the concavity of the diaphragm. The lower ſurface is concave and uneven. The anterior and inferior margin of the liver is acute, the poſterior and ſupcrior obtuſe At the back part of the liver, near the great fiſſure, there is a triangular eminence, called the ſmall lobe of the liver, or lobulus Spigelii. The ligaments of the liver, by which it is ſupported, are four. Oftheſe, one ſupports either lobe, and the broad ligament ſupports the middle. Theſe ligaments are productions of the peritoneum, and are very different from what are called by the ſame name in other parts of the body. They paſs from the diaphragm to the liver. Beſides theſe, there is the round ligament, which ĩs formed by the concretion of a conſiderable bloodveſſel of the fœtus, and paſſes from the liver to the navel. Beſides being ſupported by theſe ligaments, the great lobe of the liver is likewiſe connected by immediute adheſion, without the intervention of the peritoneum, to the tendinous part of the diaphragm. Round this adheſion we may obſerve the peritoneum folded back, to ſorm the external covering of the liver. The blood-veſſels of the liver, which will be hereafter particularly conſidered, all enter on the concave ſide of this organ, where it is divided into iĩts two lobes. The uſes of the liver are to ſecrete and prepare the bile. The gall-bladder is a membranous receptacle, ſuſficiently large to contain two or three ounces of bile. It is connected to the inferior part of the right lobe of the liver in ſuch a manner, that its fundus or bottom is placed forvards, and is in contact with the colon, and its neck is placed backwards. In ſhape the gall-bladder much eſembles a pear. It conſiſts of four coats, which are very ſimilar to thoſe of the inteſtines, and are called by the ſame names. The gall-bludder, as vell as the ver and the other viſcera of the abdomen are covercd by the peritoneum. The ducts, which ſerve to convey the bile formed in the Iiver to the duodenum, deſerve particular attention. The duct which comes ſfrom the liver, and is called the hæpatic duct, is conſtituted of a number of ſmaller ducts, which riſe through the whole ſubſtance of the liver. This duct is joined to another coming from the gall bladder, and theſe ducts together conſtitute the common bile duct. The common duct deſcends towards the pancreas, and paſſing behind the duodenum, pierces its external coat. After having run between the coaets of this inteſtine for ſome diſtance, it is at length, between its ſecond and third coat, united with the duct from the pancreas, and the fluids from the liver and pancreas being thus mixed, are poured together into the cavity of the duodenum, The gall- bladdær in man receives all its contents by means of the communication between the cyſtic and hepatic ducts, In ſome animals, however, the gallbladder receives its bile by peculiar ducts immediately from the liver, and in theſe animals the cyſtic and hepatic ducts do not unite. From the ſtructure and connection of theſe ducts in man it is evident, that all the bile which paſſes into the duodenum muſt paſs through the hepatic and common bile ducts, and that which goes to the gall-bladder paſſes through the cyſtic duct. The ducts are furniſhed with a muſcular coat. The uſe of the gall-bladder ſeems to be to retain the bile till its more watery parts being removed, the remainder may become thicker, more pungent, and more acrid. It is ſo placed that it may be preſſed upon by the diſtended ſtomach, and its contents therefore diſcharged vhen they are moſt required to aſiſt in the proceſs of digeſtionn. The gall-bladder is alſo emptied Ly the compreſſion and agitation of the viſcera, which happen in vomiting. The bile in the gall- bladder ſometimes concretes into hard maſſes called gall-ſtones. As long as theſe remain in the gall-bladder they occaſion little or no inconvenience, but when they are propelled into the ducts they diſtend and irritate them ſo as, when of a large ſize, to be productive of very violent pain. When theſe concretions are ſtopped in the common gall duct, they prevent the paſſage of bile into the inteſtines. The bile, not eſcaping in the uſual manner, is accumulated in the liver, and bring taken up by the abſorbents is carried into the circulating ſyſtem, and produces jaundice. The ſpleen is a ſpongy viſcus, of a colour between deep red and blue. Its figure is ſo irregular as to 218 s;leen, and Pan eqas r S⸗ _ B ok IX. 2dmit of no deſcription; it ĩs ſomevhat oblong, how⸗ ever, but ĩs convex on the ſide which is applied to the ſibs ⸗ and concave on that which is turned inwards tovards the other viſcera of the abdomen, and where it receives its bloodveſſels. It is placed on the Ieſt ſide, in the leſt hypochondrium, and ] is oppoſite to the two laſt of the falſe ribs. The ſpleen is connected to the ſtomach by bloodveſſels and a ligament, to the omentum, to the leſt idney, to the poſterior part of the diaphragm by the peritoneum, to the pancreas by veſſels, and, to the colon by a ligament. The ſpleen has only one coat, which can be diſtinetly perceived, and which is derived from the peritoneum. The ſpleen is extremely vaſculer, and when macerated ſeems wholly conſtituted of numerous blood-veſſels. It has no excretory duct, and jt is remarkable, that though an organ of ſuch conſiderable ſize, its uſe is entirely unknown.  The pancreas is a glandular organ, of a pale red colour, and is called in certain animals the ſeetbread. The pancrens is ſituated in the epigaſtric region, behind the ſtomach, in the triangular ſpace ſurrounded by the Windings of the duodenum. In ſorm it reſembles the tongue of a do⸗ g, the narrow terminẽtion of which is placed towards the ſpleen, and is conrected to that organ by blood-veſels. The pancreas in the human ſubject is eight or nine inches in length but very narrow, and iis ſituation in the body is very nearly tranſverſe. The liquor prepared by this glanũ is remarkably ſimilar to that prepared by the glands which fſurniſi ſaliva to the mouth; ſo that the pancreas ma v be conſidered as the largeſt ſalivary gland in the body. Lik? the ſalivary glands, the pancreas is a conglomerate gland, or conſiſts of a number of ſmall glandular maſſes united by cellular ſubſtance. Near the pancreas is obſerved a ſmaller gland of the ſame Kind. This is called the little puncreas, and pour⸗ its contents into the pancreatic duct. We have already ſcen, that where the pancreatic duct pours its contents into the duodenum, it is united with the common C u A P. XX. THE ORGANS PLACED NEAR, EUT WITHOUT THE CAVITY OF THE ABDOMEN. The Glandulæ Suprarenales. The Kidueyshe BladderPVHE glandulæ ſuprarenales are two triangular bodies, the fabric of which is analous to that of glands. In the fœtus they are larger than the kidneys themſelves, over which they are placed; but in adults they are much ſmaller. They are hollow, and are filled with a reddiſh matter. The right ſuprarenal gland is fixed to the liver, the leſt to the ſpleen and pancreas, both to the diaphragm, and each of them to the kidney, above which it is placedl. They are furniſhed with no excretory duct, and their uſe is unknown. The kidreys are two organs of a pale red colour, and a firm conſiſtence, in form reſembling the beans which bear the ſame name. They are placed without the cavity of the abdomen, on each ſide oſ the ſpine, and extend acroſs the two loweſt falſe ribs as far as the bottom of the ſecond lumbar vertebra; they ret on the great pſoas muſcle, the ſquare muſcle of the loins, and the tranſverſe of the abdomen, in ſuch a manner that the right kidney is placed below the liver and the colon, ſomewhat lower and further back, the leſt under the ſpleen, the ſtomach, the pancreas, and the colon, ſomewhat higher and more forwards. The length of the kidneys is about ſix inches, their breadth about four. Of the two margins of the kidneys, that which is placed outwards is convex, that placed inwards concave. The kidneys are variouſly connected to the viſcera, which are next them. The right kidney is connected to the colon, which, as ſhould have been before remarked, is here partly without the cavity of the abdomen. The kidney is made up of three different ſubſtances; ſirſt, an external part of a pale colour, which chieſly conſiſts of numerous convolutions of bloodveſſels, and is called the cortical part. The other two ſubſtances, that is the medullary or ſtriated, and the papillary, are really but one and the ſame maſs, of a redder colour. The radiated ſtriæ are continued into the papillary portion, where they terminate in about eleven or twelve papillæ, correſponding with the number of glandular portions, of which the kidney was originally compoſed. At the point of each papilla we ſee with the naked eye, in a ſlight depteſſion, ſeveral ſmall holes, through which the urine may be perceived to flow when the kidney is compreſſed. Each papilla Iies in a kind of membranous calix or ſneath, which opens into a common cavity, called the pelvis. The pelvis is alſo membranous, being a continuation of the calix. In man the cavity of the pelvis is not uniform, but diſtinguiſhed into three portions, each oſ which contains a certain number of calices, together with the papillæ which they ſurround. The kidneys are ſurrounded with a ſtrong firm membrane, which ĩis very cloſely applied about them. This, however, does not proceed from the peritoneum, but is connected to the poſterior part of that membrane by means of a large quantity of cellular ſubſtance, which is always plentifully f filled with fat. The urine, which is ſecreted in the kidney, drops from the papillæ into the pelvis. All the ſub-divil ſions of this bag ultimately terminate in a membranous canal, called the ureter, which, deſcending between the peritoneum and the great pſoas muſcle, reaches the urinary bladder, to which it conveys the urine. The ureters of both kidneys enter the bladder at the poſterior part, near the neck, which is tho moſt fixed point. They run ſome diſtance between the coats of the bladder, before they open into its cavity, and this ſtructure has the effect of a valve, in preventing the fluid when the bladder is very full, from returning towards the kidney. The ureters are about a ſpan long, and their canal is much wider in ſome parts than in others. They are in general about the ſize of a writing pen, and are ſomewhat curved in their courſe from the kidney to the bladder, ſo as to reſemble the letter. They are furniſhed with ſeveral coats, one of which is muſcular. They are very ſenſible, as is proved by the acute pain which perſons who are ſubject to the gravel experience while the ſtones are paſſing through them. The urinary bladder is a membranous ſack of conſiderable ſize. It is placed at the anterior part of the pelvis; when it is empty, ĩt ſinks below the upper part of the oſſa pubis, but when filled, riſes conſiderably above them. It is larger in women than in men. The upper part of the bladder is called its fundus, which is much wider than where it terminates in its neck. The anterior part of the bladder, which is placed next the oſſa pubis, is more ſlat, that turned backwards more convex. Its general form is a round cblong. The bladder in men is connected behind to the rectum, and beſore it is always attached by cellular ſubſtance to the oſa pubis. It is alſo connected to the navel by ligaments, which are the remains of two arteries of the ſœtus, and as its funlus prje ects into the cavity of the abdomen, the bladder is alſo connected to the peritoneum, which covers part of ĩts fundus. The coats of the bledder are, ſirſt, a coat of cellular ſubſtance, by which it is connected to the neighbouring parts; 2dly, a muſcular coat, the fibres of which, beginning ſrom the neck, aſcend on both ſides, towards the fundus. At the neck the fibres croſs each other, and in this manner form a ſphincter, by which animals are enabled to retain the urine; and yvet a continuation of the ſame fibres towards the fundus aſiſts in expelling it. In this part, as well as in the tongue and mouth, we have an inſtance of the different parts oſ the ſame muſcular fibres counteracting each other. The third coat of the blad lder is like the nervous coat of the inteſtines, and bears the ſame name. The inner coat has many foldings, and is plentiſully ſupplied with mucus. The fundus of the bladder allo derives a coat ſrom the peritoneum. The uſes of the bladder are to receive the urine, to retain it for a time, and to expel it through the urethra ſrom the body. Had the peritoneum been ſpread over the bladder in its whole extent, the weight of the viſcera in our erect poſture would have ſo borne upon it, that a conſiderable quantity of water could not have been collected there. The peritoneum, however, by paſſing from the ſides of the abdomen over the ſuperior part of the bladder, forms a ſupport for the incumbent viſcera, and preſerves a certain ſpace below, where they cannot preſs. In the quadruped, where, ſrom the horizontal poſition of the body, the 2bdominal viſcera do reſs on the bladder, that organ is entirely inveſted the peritoneum. The figure in plate X. repreſents, The trachea. The internal jugular vein. The ſubclavian vein. The vena cava deſcendens. The riZht auricle of the heart. The right ventricle, the pericardium being removeẽ. ] Part of the leſt ventricle. The aorta aſcendens. The aeria pulmonalis. The right lobe oſ the lungs, part of which is cut oſf to ſhew the great blood veſſels. The left lobe of the lungs. The diaphragm. The liver. The ligamentum rotundum. The bottom of the gall-bladder projecting beyond the anterior edge of the great lobe ol the liver. The ſtomach, preſſcd by the liver towards the left ſide. The ſmall inteſtines. The ſpleen. The figure in Plate XI. repreſents. The under ſide of the liver. The ligamentum rotundum:? The gall-bladder. The pancreas. The ſpleen. G. 7. S. 9. 10. 1I. 12. 13.  The urinary bladder. 2 The kidneys: The aorta deſcendens. The vena cava aſcendens. The emulgent vein. A probe under the ſpermatic veſſels and the arteria meſenterica inferior, and over the ureters. The ureters. The iliac veſſels. The inteſtinum rectum. C u AP. XXI. THE CAVITIES OF THE MOUTH AND FAUCES, &c. Dhe Pulate, The Pharynx. —The OcophagusThe Lary.xThe Glottis,  The EpiglotiisThe lindtipe. uT is unneceſſary to enumerate the parts which ex: ternally limit the cavity of the mouth, as the lips, chees, &c. ſince they are obvious to common obſervation. Within the mouth are the bony proceſſes which include the teeth, and which are covered by the gums. The upper and arched part of the mouth is called the palate. The palate is divided into the hard and the ſoſt. The hard palate is bounded hy the teeth, and is formed by the two oſſa maxillaria and oſſa palati covered with the perioſteum and the common coat of the inſide of the mouth, which produces, particulerly in ſome animals, æ number of hard ridges. The ſoft palate or velum pendulum palatinum is a ſeptum, which ariſes from the external margin oſ the palate bones, and laterally from a proceſs of the ſphenoid bones. It is a moveable ſoſt ſubſtance, hanging between the cavity of the mouth and the poſterior termination of the noſtrils. The ſoſt palate is compoſed of the common membrane of the mouth and noſe, and includes a number of mucous glands, and ſome muſcular ſubſtance. It forms two arches on each ſide, deſcending from the hard palate. The two anterior of theſe arches are ſmaller and thinner, and are inſerted laterally into the tongue; the two poſterior are large, and are connected behind to the pharynx. In the middle and upper part, where all the half arches unite, they are lengthened- into a ſmall pointed body, which is eaſily ſeen at the back parc of the mouth, and is called the columella or uvula. On each ſide, in the bottom of the ſpace which is leſt between the anterior and poſterior arches, is placed an oblong glandular hody, which opens into the thront by eleven or twelve excretory ducts, and is called the amygdala or tonſil. We have the power of ſtopping the paſſage of air from the noſe, by drawing up the ſoſt palate, ſo as to cover its poſterior openings. The whole cavity of the mouth is meiſtened by mucus, and the liquor from the ſulivary glands. The glands which furniſh the mouth with ſpittle or ſaliva are the two parotids, which are ſeated immediately below the ears; the maxillary, which are ſeated at the inſide of the angles of the lower jaw; the ſublingual, which are placed between the bone oſ the ower jaw and the tongue; and laſtly, a number of ſmall glends, placed in bunches about the opening of the ducts, which come fſrom the parotid glands. The ſtructure of the ſalivary glands is like that of the pancreas. I ſholl defer the deſcription of the tongue till I come to treat of the ſenſe of taſting. The noſe, the ear, and the eye, will be deſcribed when I treat of the ſenſes to which they are ſubſervient. The cavity behind the palatum molle or ſoſt palate is called the pharynx. At the back part ĩt is bounded by the vertebræ oſ the neck, above by the baſe of the cranium, before and laterally by the ſoſt palate and much cellular ſubſtance, and every way by the muſcles which ſurround the neck. The noſtrils terminate at theĩr poſterior opening in the cavity of the pharynx, as do laterally the two euſtachian tubes from the internal part of the ear. The pharynx i is a muſcular bag ſhaped like a funnel, beginning ſrom the baſe of the cranium and terminating below in the æſophagus or gullet. Its ſubſtance is merely muſcular, covered with the ſame tender and glandular membrane which lines the mouth, fauces, and œſophagus. The uſe of the pharynx is to receive the aliment and impel ĩt into the œſophagus. The œſophagus or gullet is a membranous tube, beginning from the narrow termination of the pharynx. It is placed between the vertebræ of the neck and the vindpipe, and deſcending Iower is embraced by the pleuræ, and lies in a triangnlar ſpace behind the mediaſtinum. IIving arrived at the bottom of the thorax it paſſes through the leſt perforation of the diaphragm, and terminates in the cardia, or left oriſice of the ſtomach. The æſophagus has four coats. Firſt, a covering from the pleura; ſecondly, a muſcular coat of conſiderable power; thirdly, a cellular coat; and laſtly, a tender internal coat, like that of the fauces, and which is copiouſly ſupplied with mucuss. àhe æſopliagns conveys the food to the ſtomach. The larynx is a hollow tube compoſed of cartilages, muſcles, and ligaments, ſituated behind and below the tongue, at the anterior puart of the neck. The larynx is connected above to the os hyoides, behind to the root of the tongue and the pharynx⸗. The cartilages of the larynx are the cricold or annuar, which is narrow before and broad behind, and is there divided mto two excavations, which receive the rytenoĩd or prramidal cartilages. The cricoĩld cartilage ſorms the baſis of the whole larynx. It is connectæd below to the windpipe, and above to the pyramidal and thyroĩd cartilages. The thyroĩd cartilage reſts perpendicularly on the crienid, and conſtitutes the upper, anterior, and largeſt part of the larynx. It conſiſts of twvo almoſt quadrangular plates of cartilage, which unite before at an obtuſe angle, but behind are ſeparate. This cartilage is harder and more prominent in men than in women, and has therefore been called the pomum Adami. At its poſterior part the thyroid cartilage has proceſſes above and belowv. The upper are united by means of ligaments with the proceſſes of the os hyoides. The lower, which are ſorter, are connected to the cricoid cartilage. The two arytenoĩd cartilages are the ſmalleſt, which contribute to form the larynæ. They are equal in ſize, and when joined together reſemble the ſpout of an ewer. They are placed perpendicularly in two excavations of the cricoĩd cartilage at its poſterior purt. The glottis is formed of two ligaments, in the following manner: l Anteriorly the baſe of each arytenoid cartilage is fixed to one end of a ligamentary cord, which, by its other end, is inſerted about the middle of the concave ſide of the anterior portion of the thyroidl. At the latter inſerſion the two ligaments touch each other; but a ſmall ſpace is lefc between them, where they are connected with the arytenoid cartilages. This chink is what is called the rima glottidis, which is capable of contraction and dilatation. Under theſc ligaments are two ſmaller, which alſo ariſe from the arytenoi cartilages, and, running forwards, are attached to the middle part of the thyroĩd cartilage. Between theſe ſuperior and inferior ligaments there is on each ſide a ſmall bag or cavity, called the ventriculus Galeni. Over the opening of the larynx, the rima glottidis, is placed a cartilaginous ſubſtance, called the epiglottis; ; it ĩs ſituated above the anterior or convex portion of the cartilago thyroĩds, and its Iower extremity is conQ nected biy a ſnort, broad, and very ſtrong ligament, to the middle notch in the upper edge of that cartilage. The epiglottis is ſome what concave behind and convex before. Its ſape reſembles that of the tongue, and its termination or apex is always ſree, ſo'as by its own elaſticity to be naturally elevated. In deglutition, however, when the tongue is drawn backwards, the epiglottis is exactly applied over the rima glottidis, ſo as to prevent the food from paſſing into the larynx, or, as is commonly ſaid, going the wrong vay... The pharynx is every vhere connected by muſcular fibres' to the larynx, and the larynx is in a manner ſuſpended i in its cavity.. At the anterior part of the larynx ĩs placed a gland of conſideræble ſize, called the thyroid gland. It is not diſcovered to have any excretory duct, and its uſe is unknown. The muſcles which regulate the motions of the glottis, which is the principal organ oſ the voice, are the following four pairs, and one ſingle muſcle: The crico- arytenoĩdeus poſicus ariſes from the cricoĩd cartilage, and is inſerted into the poſterior part of the baſe of the arytenoid cartilage. By ĩts contraction it opens the rima glottidis a little, and by pulling back the arytenoid cartilage, renders the ſigament tenſe. The crico-arytenoideus lateralis proceeds from the cricoid cartilage laterally, where it is covered by part of the thy roid, and is inſerted into the baſe of the arytenoid cartilage. Its eſfect ĩs. to open the rima glottidis, by ſeparating the arytenoid cortilages, and conſequently the ligaments which are fixed to them. The thyreo- arytenoĩdeus ariſes from the thyroĩd cartilage, runs backwards along the ſide of the glottis, and is inſerted into the aery tenoĩ cartilages. Its effect ĩs to bring the thyroid and arytenoĩd cartilages nearer each other, and conſequently to relax the igments which are placed between them. ſ The arytencideus obliquus ariſes from the baſe of one arytenoid cartilage, and croſſing its ſellow; i is inſerted into the tip-of the other. When both act, they pull the aryteroid cartilages towards each other, and therefore contract the rima glottidis. The ſingle muſcle which was mentioned is the arytenoĩideus tranſverſs. It ariſes from the ſide of one arytenoid cartilage and paſſes to the other. It ſnuts the rima glottidis by 7 bringing the arytenoid cartilages with the ligaments nearer cach other. Beſĩdes theſe, there are a few ſeparate muſcular Abres. vhich from their connections are calleld The thyreo-epiglottideus, which ariſes from the thyroĩd cartilage, and is inſerted into the epigiottis laterally. It draws the epiglottis obliquely downwards. The aryteno- epiglottideus, which ariſes from the ſide and upper part of the arytenoid cartilage, and is inſerted with the former into the epiglottis; it pulls down the epiglottis, andl counteracts the effect of its elaſticity. The aſpera arteria, or vindpipe, i is a tube ſormed of annular cartilages, membranes, and muſcular fibres. It begins from the annular cartilage of, the larynx, deſcends rather towards the right ſide of the ſpine into the cavity of the thorax, and is divided into two great branches, which being aſterwards ſubdivided, obtain the name of bronchia, and are diſtributed through the ſubſtance of the lungs. The aſpera arteria is furniſhed with two membranes, the outer of which is formed ofcellular ſubſtance, and the inner is very ſoſt and tender; between theſe membranes are placed the cartilaginous rings. Theſe rings are connected to each other 5 ligamentous fibres above and below, They do not ſorm Qæ complete complete circles, but are imperſect behind, where the cirele is completed by a ſoft but ſtrong glandular and muſcular membrane. The cartilaginous rings are thin and elaſtic, but thicker and broader before than at their ſides. They are largeſt at the upper part of the windpipe, and are found to be ſmaller as we advance lower. Of the muſcular fibres ſituated between the cartilaginous rings, ſome are circular, which render the windpipe narrower, and others longitudinal, which render it ſhorter. The windpipe in the upper part of the cavity of the thorax is divided as was before ſtated into two great branches, the Iarger and ſhorter of which goes to the right lobe of the lungs, the ſmaller and longer to the left. The ſtructure of the branches of the windpipe, till they enter the ſubſtance of the lungs, is the ſame as that oſ the vindpipe; after they enter the lungs, however, the cartilaginous rings ſoon diſappear, and nothing but a thin elaſtic coat remains. The ultimate diviſions of C n a Pr. XXII. THE PLEURA, THE LUNGS, AND THE THYMUES. l Deſcription of the Thorax. he PleuraThe BreaſtsBreaſi: of Infants contain Milb.The MediaſtinumThe LungsThe T hymus. H E thorax is that part of the body which lies between the neck and the diaphragm. It is ſurrounded by the ſpine, the ribs, the ſternum, and the diaphragm, and alſo, internally, by a thin membrane like the peritoneum, which forms two ſeparate cavities, and is called the pleura. On the external part of the thorax are placed the mammæ or breaſts; within is the heart, with its large veſſels, and the lungs. The mammæ, or breaſts, in men, and children of both ſexes, are no more than cutaneous tubercles, with a browniſh circle in the midle, called the areola. In women they are two convex firm bodies, of a glandular nature. In the middle of each breaſt is a prominent ſpongy ſubſtance, called the papilla, perforated by a number of ducts ſor the diſcharge of he milk, around which is placed the arecl. The internal part of the breaſt chieſlty conſilts oſ a large quantity of fat; but there ĩs alſo a large glandular Tubftance, compoſed of many ſmaller glands, connected together by cellular membrane; this is the organ which ſecretes the mill, and to which the term mamma is more ſtrictly applicable. It is remarkable, that a ſmall quantity of milk my in general be preſſed ſrom the breaſts of new-born nfants, oth male and female. : The pleur, as has been intimated, is a  tranſparent ſoration oſ the diaphragm from the peritoneum. It covers the internal ſurface of the bones of the thorax and the upper part of the diaphragm, and involves the viſcera of the thorax in the ſame manner as below it involved thoſe of the abdoinen. The internal ſurface of the pleura is conſtantly moiſtened, and rendered ſlippery by a ſerous exudation. The mediaſtinum is formed by two laminæ of the pleura including cellular ſubſtance. Theſe are cloſely connected near the ſternum and vertebræ; but in the middle and towards the lower part they are ſeparated by the pericardium and heart. Before thè heart, from zhe pericardium to the ſternum, the two lIaminæ adhere very cloſely; higher up they are divided to receive the thymus. The mediaſtinum dividesthe thorax perpendicularly into two ſeparate cavities or. ſecks, which contain the lungs. The mediaſtinum is atrached in ſuch a manner to the anterior part of the bones of the thorax, as to render the right ſack of the ple ura larger than the left.. Behind,, the mediaſtinum is a stached to the dorſal vertebræ, before to the ſternum,, below to the diaphragm and pericardium, and above to the large blood-veſſels. Behũnd, wæds the vertebræ of the back, is Ieſt a triangular ſpace, in which is placed the windpipe, the œſophagus, the thoracic duct, and ſeveral large bloudveſſels; before, the gland called the thymus occupies a ſimilar ſpace. The uſes, of the pleura are to furniſh an internal covering to the bones oſ the thorax and he diaplragm, and an external c covering to the thoracie viſcera. The unicn of the two ſacks of the plebra, ſorming - mediaſti num, is of uſe, by ſupporting the long⸗, and by preventing their preſſure on each other when the body is turned to either ſide.:  By the two ſides of ll the the thorax being thus ſeparated, one may be wounded vio. impeding the functions of the other. The lungs ſill the two ſaols of the pleura, one of vhich is phced on each ſidle of the mediaſtinum. With reſpect to the form of the lungs, their buſes are broad, and their ſummits form an obtuſe cone. Their anterior ſurfaces, and thoſe applied to the mediaſtinum, are flat, that next the ribs is ſomewhat convex, and that behind round. The lower part of the leſt lung is excavated to make room fſor the heart. The colour oſ the lungs is in infants reddiſh, in adults greyiſh, and in old age they verge towards dark blue or black; their ſurface is uſually mottled. : The lungs are connected above to the neck by means of the windpipe, and below by blood. veſſels to the heartt. They have no other covering but the pleura, connected to them by the intervention of thin cellular ſubſtance, which in this part is always ſree from fat. Vith reſpect to the ſtructure of the lungs, the right, which is larger, conſiſts of three lobes, the leſt only of two; all of theſe are ſubdivided into a number of ſmaller Iobes called lobules. Theſe diviſions are connected to each other by the intervention of cellular ſubſtance. The ſubſtance of the lungs is ultimately made up of minute veſicles, culled the air-veſſels of the lungs, which are the terminations of the windpipe. Theſe veſicles have extremely thin coats, and on theſe coats are ſitribureã the minute ramifications of the blood-veſſels which go to the lungs. It has been cormputed, from the extreme minuteneſs of the airveſſcls, that the internal ſurface of the lungs is not leſę extenſive than the floor of a moderate ſized ſitting roomm, Theſe air-veſſels communicate with each orher through the whole ſubſtance of each lung, ſo that by inflating one lobule the air paſſes into the reſt. The uſes of the lungs are of the moſt important nature, and will be conſidered in a ſeparate chapter on the ſubject of reſpiration. The thymus, the ſituation of which has been juſt mentioned, is ſoft, and of a ſpongy texture. It is very large in the ſœ]tus, and is filled with a white thin liquor; in adults ĩt is hard, ſmall, and gradually decays. It is not diſcovered to have any excretory duct, and C n Aa Pr. XXIII. THE HE ARTT. 1 i l . The Pericardium—&be Heart. he Veutricles and Auriclesheir Useseneral Vie of the Blood-veſſels. r7EHE heart is a hollow muſcle, included in a membranous bag, called the pericardium. This membrane incloſes not only the heart, but the great veſſels which ariſe from it. This covering oſ the heart conſiſts of three laminæ; the external of theſe is formed by a duplicature of the mediaſtinum. The middle lamina, which is the thickeſt and ſtrongeſt, is compoſed of very fine tendinous fibres, which at the lower part are connected and mixed with thoſe of the diaphragm. The Internal lamina ſeems to be a continuation of the outer coat of the heart and great veſſels. Within the pericardium is found a quantity of tranſparent liquor, which facilitates the motions of the heart, by preventing friction. The heart is placed in man almoſt tranſverſely, and reſts on the diaphragm at the anterior part of the thorax. The baſe or broad part of rhe heart is directed towards the right ſide, its point or apex towards the left, and this latter ĩs ſo placed, as when the heart beats to ſtrike the ſixth rib. The upper ſurſace of the heart is convex; the lower, which reſts on the diaphragm, is flat. The greater part of the heart lies in the leſt cavity of the thorax. The ſubſtance of thæe heart is muſcular, and is compoſed of fibres, which, ariſing ſfrom the baſe, where it is tendinous, take a winding courſe towards its apex in various directions. The principal part oſ the muſcular ſubſtance of the heart forms two cavities called the ventricles. The poſterior or left ventricle of theſe is much thicker, ſtronger, longer, and rounder than the other; the anterior or right ventricle is wider, ſhorter, and thinner*. The ſeptum, or that portion of muſcular ſubſtance which is placed between the ventricles, ſeems chiefly to belong to the former, and gives the latter an appearance of being merely an appendage. At the baſe of the heart are two cavities, which are each of them divided by anatomiſts into two parts, the ſinus and the auricle; but as theſe together form one cavity, it will anſwer beſt the purpoſe of perſpicuity to ſpeak of them ſimply by the name of auricles. The auricles are compoſed of two membranes, with ſome muſcular fibres. Like the ventricles, they are ſeparated from each other by a ſeptum, and one of them obtains the appellation of the anterior or right auricle, the other that of the poſterior or left. Each of them communicates with the ventricle which is placed next it, and which beaers the ſame name. Between the auricles and ventricles of the heart are placed valves, as alſo at the mouths of the great arteries, which prevent the blood from paſſing in any other than the proper direction. The valves, which are placed between each of the auricles and ventricles, are turned inwards towards the latter cavities. The valves, ſituated at the entrance of the anterior ventricle, have three remarkable points,  The terms anterior ard poſtærior auric'es and ventricles of the heart are uſed as deſcriptive of the ſituation of them in man. In quadrupeds, the anterior auriclæe aud ventricle, or thoſe which perform the ſome purpoſe, are placed towards the right ſide, and the poſterior towards the Ieſt. lil and are thereſore called valvulæ tricuſpides; thoſe of the poſterior ventricle terminate in two points, æ2nd ſrom being compared to a mitre, are called valvulæ mitrales. In each of the great arteries, which proceed from the ventricles, the aorta and pulmonary artery, are ſeated three valves turned from the ventricles, and are called ſemilunares. All theſe valves are elongations of the internal membrane of the part to which they belong. They are cloſely connected on that ſide from which the current of blood proceeds, and their other extremity is looſe. When the blood, therefore, proceeds in its proper courſe, they are preſſed cloſe to the ſide of the veſſel, and occaſion no impediment; but when it is about to return in the contrary direction, they are raiſed from the ſide of the veſſel, and meeting in the middle of its cavity, ſiut up the channel. The internal ſurface of the ventricles is extremely uneven, from a number of fleſhy columns which riſe from its inſide, and ſome of which terminate by tendinous extremities in the valves of the heart, which they ſupport, and enable to perſorm their office more effectuaelly. Beſides the connection, however, between the auricles and ventricles of the heart, each auricle communicates with a large vein, and each ventricle with a large aertery. The uſe of the auricle is to receive the blood from the vein, and to di ſcharge it into the cavity of the ventriclee. The ventricle receives the blood from the auricle, and drives it ſorcibly into the artery. By a repetition of thoſe actions is performed the circulation of the blood, which is the ſubject of another chapter, in which I ſhall take occaſion to mention ſome remarkable varieties in the hearts of diſſerent races oſ animals. The veſſels of the human body are either bloodveſſels or Iymphutics. The blood-veſſels are membranous tubes, which convey the blood to and from the various parts of the body. They are divided into arteries and veins. The arteries pulſate, and convey the blood from the heart; the veins return it towards the heart, and do not pulſate *. The large trunks, both of the arteries and veins, are near the heart; at a diſtance from it they are divided into numerous ſmall branches in a manner very ſimilar to that in which the trunk of a tree is Ioſt in its branches and twigs. The arteries are formed by the following tunics. The firſt is derived from the cavity, through which the artery paſſes; in the thorax, from the pleura; in the abdomen, from the peritoneum, &c. The ſecond is a looſe covering of cellular ſubſtance, which contains ſmaller veſſels, for the nouriſhment of that on which they run, and which in the large arteries oſten contains a conſiderable quantity of fat. The third is muſcular, and is compoſed of ſeveral ſmall arches oſ ruſcular fibres, many of which go to the formation of a cirelee Within this is a thin cellular cont, w hich adheres cloſely to the former; and laſtly, there is a firm, ſmooth, and whitiſh coat, with which the circulating maſs of flulds is in contact. T he ſtructure of the veins is the ſamæ as that of the arteries, but more delicate. The muſcular coat is in them ſo thin, or of ſo pale a colour, as not to admit of demonſtration in man, but is plainly ſeen in a veſſel called the vena portarum of the ox. That * As a pulſe is only to be perceived in the arteries, this circumſtance will enable the meſ unſilſul to diſtinguiſh the nature of any blood-veſſel. veins, however, have muſcular coats in all animals, is inferred from their contractile power. . The venous ſyſtem is far more capacious than the arterious. Arteries are commonly ſaid to diminiſh in ſize, as they recede from the heart; but this is not the real ſtate of the caſle. As long as an artery continues undivided, its diameter remains the ſame; and when iĩt does divide, the area of the veſſels formed by this diviſion is ælways greater than the area of the artery from which they are produced; ſo that the artery may in truth be ſaid to be increaſed. This rule holds equally with reſpect to the diviſion of the great trunks of arteries, and the ſub-diviſions of their branches. The trunks alſo of veins are always ſmaller than the ſum oſ the ſmaller veins from which they are formed. The larger trunks of blood-veſſels are ſeparate tubes, but their branches form various communications with each other, and theſe communications increaſe as the veſſels become more minute, ſo as at length to form a web of veſſels in the parts on which they are ciſtributed. The advantages of this ſtructure are very obvious, as by a communication of veſſels each part may receive blood from many ſources, and no part therefore ſuffers by the diviſion of the blood-veſſel which more particularly belongs to it; its advantages are like thoſe of commerce among mankind, by which the eſfects of partial loſſes are guarded againſt by a mutual exchange of conveniencies. he branches of arteries are in general ſent off at much more acute angles than thoſe of the veins, by which the paſſage of the blood through the arteries is the leſs impeded. The arteries have in general a correſponding vein placed near them; but to this rule there are ſeveral exceptions, which will be more particularly noticed in ſpeaking of the venous ſyſtem. The trunks of the veins, and almoſt all the arteries, are deeply ſeated; but the ſmaller veins are every where thickly diſtributed on the ſurface of the body, immediately below the ſkin. By this ſtructure a paſage is provided for the blood on the ſurface of the body, where the internal veins are ſo compreſſed by the action of muſcles as not eaſily to tranſmit their contents. The external C H A P. XXIV. GENERAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE ARTERILS. The Aortahe coronary Artery7he carctid and ſubelavian Arterieshe intereoſtal ArteriesDBronchial ArteriesThe Cæliac Artery.Meſcuteric ArteriesRenal ArteriesLumbar Arurieslliac ArteriesCrural ArteryPulmonary Arterj, &e. R OM the poſterior, inferior, or left ventricle of the heart proceeds the principal artery of the body, called the aorta. Immediately on leaving the heart it ſends off tvo ſmall arteries, called the coronary, which are diſtributed on the heart itſelfl. The aorta now riſes three or four inches above the heart, when it is turned backwards and towards the leſt ſide, forming an arch over the left diviſion of the windpipe. From the convex ſide of is arch, the aorta ſends o three large arteries, which go to the head and arms. The firſt of theſe is equal to the two other in ſize, and ſoon divides into two branches; of theſe one is the right carotid artery, which is diſtributed on the right ſide of the head; the other is the right ſubclavian, which proceeds to the right arm. The arteries which belong to the leſt ſide of the head and Ieft arm ariſe ſeparately ſfrom the aorta, and are the two other branches which were mentioned as being ſent off from its arch. Upon meaſuring the ſides of the veſſels, the ſurſace of the united trunk of the right ſubclavian and carotid is leſs than that of the leſt ſubclavian and carotid, which ariſe ſeparately; if ſo, the reſiſtance to the blood mutſt be leſs in that common trunk than in the leſt ſubR2 clavian and carotid. The reſi*tance being ſmaller, the impetus and velocity of the'blood muſt be leſ: nſfected; and as the ſtrength of the muſcles is as the quantity of blood ſent into them in a given time, thoſe of the right arm vill be ſtronger than thoſe of the left. This therefore accounts in ſome meaſure for the preference which is generally given to the right arm, though it muſt be acknowledged that iĩt is difficult, from this reaſoning, to account for the preference which ſome children give to the left. The right ſubclavian and carotid ſometimes ariſe ſeparately like tlhie left, but it has not been aſcertained that this exception to the uſual ſtructure happens more frequently in leſt than in right handed perſons. In quadrupeds we obſerve ſomething of the ſame preſerena: of the right limbs, and attended vith the ſame diſtribution of the arteries. In birds, which muſt be nicely balanced, the arteries of both ſides come off alike. The two carotid arteries proceed upwards on each ſide of the windpipe, behind the ſterno- cleidomaſtoideus muſcle, and the platiſma myoides, as high as the larynx, without a diviſion. About this part the carotid artery ĩs divided into two others, called external and internal carotid arteries. The external carotid ſupplies the parts about the Iarynx, the face, the external parts of the head and the dura mater. The other diviſion of the carotid is diſtributed almoſt entirely on the brain, and is therefore called the internal caroſid artery. It firſt proceeds to the lower orifice of the great canal of the pars petroſum of the temporal bone. After being eontorted according to the courſe of this paſſage, it at length enters the cavity oſ the cranium, at the ſide cſ the ſella turcica. As it leaves the bony canal, it ſends oſf an artery, which ſupplies the contents of the orbit, and which communicates with twigs of the external carotid about the face. The internal carotid aſterwards runs under the baſe of the brain at each ſide of the infundibulum, where it is at a ſmall diſtance from the carotid artery of the ther ſide. At this part it commonly divides into two branches, one of which paſſes towards the anterior, the other towards the poſterior part of the brain, where it communicates with the vertebral artery of the ſame ſidee The arteries of the brain are incloſed in the folds of the pia mater, and are not diſtributed on the ſubſtance of the brain itſelf;, till aſter having undergone a minute diviſion. The ſubclavian arteries are ſo called, becauſe they paſs under or behind the clavicles. Each ſubclavian artery ſends oſf a conſiderable one to the internal parts of the headl. They proceed from the upper and poſterſor part of the ſubclavian, and obtain the denomination of the vertebral arteries, becauſe they paſs through openings in the tranſverſe proceſſes of the vertebræ of the neck. Having reached the great foramen of the os occipitis, thicy enter the cranium, and pierce the dura mater. The two vertebral arteries, aſter they have entered thæ cranium, gradually advance towards cach other, and at length unite, forming the arteria baſilaris. The ſubelavian artery alſo ſends oſf twigs to the mediaſtinum, thymus, trachea, and pericardium. It alſo ſends oſf two branches oſ a larger ſize, called the mammaria interna, and cervicalis, beſides the vertebralis, which has been already deſcribed. The ſubclavian artery, where it leaves the thorax, immediately above the firſt rib, changes its name to that of the. arteria axillaris, becauſe its paſſes under the axilla. In this courſe it gives off four principal branches, the thoracica ſuperior, mammaria externa, thoracica humeralis, and axillaris ſcapularis. which are diſtributed on the parts from which they derive their names. The arteria axillaris, where ĩt paſſes behind the tendon of the pectoralis major, again changes its name to that of the arteria brachialis. Between the axilla and the middle oſ the arm, the artery is only covered by the common integuments; below this paſſes under the biceps muſcle, and runs obliquely forwards as it deſcends. In its courſe, it continues to ſend off branches to the adjoining parts. A little more than a finger's breadth below the bend of the arm, the arteria brachialis divides into two branches, called the cubitalis and radialis, the former of which lies next the ulna, the latter next the radius. Tho aorta, having completed ĩts arch, is directed downwards, being ſituated towards the leſt ſide of the ſpine. Below the fourth vertebra of the back, it obtains the name of the deſcending aorta, which, between this part and the diaphragm, ſends off the following branches: The inferior intercoſtal arteries are generally ſeven or eight on each ſide. They ariſe in pairs along the poſterior part of the aorta, and run tranſverſely towards each ſide on the bodies of the vertebræ. They afterwards paſs in the bony ridge at the inferior edge of the ribs, almoſt as ſar as the ſternum, being diſtributed in their courſe on the intercoſtal muſcles. The bronchial arteries are two or three in number, which ſometimes ariſe from the aorta, ſometimes are branches of the ſuperior intercoſtal, or of the arteries of the œſophagus. They enter with the diviſions of the bronchia into the ſubſtance of the lungs, on which they are diſtributed. The arteries of the œſophagus are generally two A : i or or three in number. They ariſe ſrom the anterior part of the aorta, And are diſtributed on the œſophagus. One or more arteries are alſo ſent to the diaphragm, and diſtributed on its lower ſurface. Below the diaphragm, the deſcending aorta ſends off The cœliac artery, which ariſes from the anterior part of the aorta by a ſhort trunk, which divides into three principal branches; one runs upwards, and is called the coronary artery of the ſtomach, and is chieſly diſtributed on that organ; another runs towards the right, and having ſent oſf one or two branches to the ſtomach and duodenum, joins the vena portæ, enters the fiſſure oſ the liver, and is diſtributed through its ſubſtance; the third is directed to the leſt, under the ſtomach and pancreas, to the ſpleen. In ĩts progreſs it diſtributes ſmall branches to the ſtomach, pancreas, and omentum. At a ſhort diſtance below the cœliac, the ſuperior meſenteric artery proceeds from the anterior part of the aorta. Near its origin ĩt ſends oſf a ſmall branch, which carries blood to the large extremity of the pancreas, and the neighbouring part of the duodenum. Being included between the laminæ of the meſentery, it forms a kind of arch, which deſcends obliquely from left to right, and from which about ſixteen or ſeventeen branches are ſent oſf, moſt of which are ſpent on the ſmall inteſtines. As theſe branches approach towards.the inteſtines, and are more minutely divided, they inoſculate and communicate very freely with each other, ſo as at length to ſurrounũ the inteſtines like net work. From the concave ſide of the arch proceed ſeveral branches, one of which is of great length, and makes a remarkable communication with the inferior meſenteric artery. From the numerous communications among the arteries of the inteſtines, we may obſerve how careſully theſe parts are provided with a ſupply of blood. The rext arteries, which are ſent off from the aorta, are the two emulgent or renal. They ariſe one on each ſide, and proceed almoſt horizontally to the kidneys. As the aorta lies towards the left ſide of the ſpine, the right renal artery is longer than the left. The reverſe is the caſe with the veins, as the vena cava is placed on the right ſide of the ſpine. Above the renal arteries ariſe two arteries, which go to the glandulæ ſuprarenales, and which alſo ſend branches into the adipoſe membrane which ſurrounds the kidneys. elow the renal ar.eries ariſe the two ſpermatic arteries, which are very ſmall. They are placed behind the peritoneum, on the pſoas muſcles. The lower meſenteric artery ariſes from the anterior part of the aorta, below the ſpermatic. It ĩs ſoon divided into three or four branches, which gradually ſeparate from each other. The ſuperior of theſe branches forms the communication, which was mentioned as taking place between the two meſenteric arteries. The inferior meſenteric artery is diſtributed chieſly on the colon; it ſends, however, a conſiderable branch to the rectum, called the arteria hæmorroidalis interna. The lumbar aerteries proceed in five or ſix pairs ſrom the poſterior part oſ the æaorta, much in the ſame manner with the intercoſtals. The ſuperior ſometimes ſend blood to the diaphragm and intercoſtals, but they are principally ſpent on the pſoas muſcles, the quadrati Iumborum, and the oblique and tranſverſe muſcles of the abdomen. One or more arteries are ſent off from the lower part of the aorta, or ſome of the neighbouring arteries, to the os ſacrum and large nerves of theſe Darts. llt Near the Iaſt lumbar vertebra, the aorta is divided into two equal trunks, called the common iliac arteries, one of which lies to the right the other to the leſt, and which recede from each other as they deſcend. About three fingers breadth from theĩr origin, each iliac trunk is divided into two ſecondary arteries. One of theſe, which is called, from the parts on which it is diſtributed, the hypogaſtric, or internal iliac artery, is gradually bent forwards, and terminates like a ligamentous cord at the navel. The other artery is called the external iliac, and paſſes under the ligament of Fallopius, in its way to the lower extremity, on which it is diſtributed. From the convex ſide of the curvature of the hypogaſtric artery are ſent off ſeveral conſiderable branches, which may be diſtinguiſhed by the following names; iliaca minor, ſaciæ laterales, glut/ea, ſciatica, pudica communis, hæmorrhoidalis media, obturatrix. The iliaca minor is a ſmall artery, which is diſtributed on the iliac muſcles and bones. The arteriæ ſacræ laterales are commonly two in number. They are ſent to the fore part of the os ſacrum, and penetrating its ſubſtance, are diſtributed to the nerves and membranes within. The arteria glutæa is oſ very conſiderable ſize; it paſſes out of the pelvis with the ſciatic nerve, and is diſtributed on the two larger glutæi muſcles; it alſo gives branches to ſome other neighbouring muſcles, and to the parts about the anus. The arteria ſciatica gives ſome branches to the os ſacrum and adjoining muſcles. It paſſes obliquely over the ſciatic nerve, and goes through the great poſterior ſinus of the os ileum. It aſterwards aſcends on the outſide of the os ileum, and is ſpent on that and the glutæi muſcles,. The arteria pudica communis, or pudica interna, divides into two branches; one of theſe runs on the inſide ofthe tubercle of the iſchium to where the corpora cavernoſa take their origin; at this place it is divided into ſeveral ſmaller branches, which are diſtributed on the corpora cavernoſa, the bulb of the urethra, and the anus. The ſecond principal branch, ſometimes called the pudica externa, runs between the bladder and rectum. The hæ morrhoĩdalis media proceeds from the pudica interna, or ſome of the other large branches; it goes to the lower part of the rectum, and ſends twigs to the bladder, veſiculæ feminales, and proſtate gland. The arteria obturatrix perforates the obturator muſcles, and is diſtributed to the neighbouring muſcles. The hypogaſtric, or internal iliac artery, having ſent oſf all theſe branches to the parts about the pelvis, aſcends on the ſide of the bladder towerds the navel, where it meets its fellow of the oppoſite ſidee Theſe arteries, near the navel, are in the adult contracted into the appearance of a ligament, and are quite cloſed; in the fœ]tus, however, they are a continuation of the trunk of the hypogaſtric arteries by which the circulation is carried on between it and the placenta. It has been already mentioncd, that the external iliac artery paſſes out of the abdomen under Fallopiugs ligament; it here gives oſf two conſiderable branches; one of theſe, the arteria epigaſtrica, runs upwards on the muſcles at the anterior part of the abdomen, and communicates freely with the mammaria interna; the other branch, ſent oſf from the external iliac at this place, runs to the internal edge ofthe os ileum, and is ramiſfied on the oblique and tranſverſe muſcles of the abdomen, communicating with the lumbar arteries. After it has paſſed under the ligament of Fallopius, the external iliac changes its name to that of the crural or femoral artery. It ſends oſf, firſt, three ſmall branches; one, the pudica externa, goes to the inguinal glands, &c. and communicates with the pudica interna; another goes to the pectineus muſcle; and the third, to the upper part of the ſartorius. Afterwards the trunk of the artery deſcends to the head of the os ſfemoris. About three fingers breadth from the ligament oſ Fallopius, it ſends out three conſiderable branches. The external branch, called the circumflexa externa, is diſtributed to the muſcles of the thigh, ſituated before and at the outſidee The middle branch, named the profunda, runs down on the inſide of the thigh between the triceps muſcles. The internal branch, called the circumſlexa interna, runs backwards towards the great trochanter, and ſupplies the muſcles ſeated at the poſterior part of the os femoris, and ſends a branch into the ſubſtance of the bone itſelf. After having ſent off theſe branches, the crural artery, covered by the ſartorius muſcle, proceeds down to the bottom of the thigh, and paſſes through the tendon of the adductor magnus, a little above the internal condyle of the os ſemoris; aſterwards, continuing its courſe through the hollow oſ the ham, it is called the arteria poplitea. Wahile in the ham it ſends off branches, which aſcend to communicate with thoſe of the crural artery. Branches are alſo ſent to the joint. When it has reached the back part of the head of the tibia, it gives oſf two branches, one to each ſidee As the poplitea ends, it divides into two principal loranches; one of which runs between the heads of the ſ.ibla and ſibula, paſſing from behind forwards on the interoſſeous ligament, whereit takes the name of arteri⸗. tibialis anterior; the ſecond branch divides into two others, the larger called arteria tibialis poſterior, the other arteria peronea poſterior. From the anterior, ſiiperior, or right ventricle of the heart proceeds an arter y (the pulmonary) nearly equal to the aæorta, but the coats of which are leſs robuſt. Its trunk, having run upwards almoſt as high as the aorta, is divided into two parts, one of which paſt es under the aorta to the right lung, while the otler proceeds to the Ieft. Theſe arteries enter the lungs with the bronchia, and the diviſions and ſub-diviſions of bòth are diſtributed together through their ſubſtance. The ultimæate ramifications of the pulmonary artery are ſpread out on the air-veſſels, through which the blood undergoes that change from the air which it is the purpoſe of reſpiration to effect. Beſides receiving arteries in common with other parts of the body, we find that the lungs continually rcceive and return the ſame quantity of blood as paſies through all the other parts of the body; from which we may form ſome idea of their extreme vaſcularity. In the plate annexed (XII.) the arteries are repreſented freed from the muſcular and fibrous parts. I. Aorta aſcendens. A. Three ſemilunar valves. 2. Trunk of the coronery artery. 3. Acrta deſcendens. 4. Subclavian artery. 5.5. Carotid ærteries. 6.6. Vertebral arteries. 7.7. Arteries that go to the lower part oſ the ſace, tongue, &c. 8.8. Temporal arteries. 10. 10. Trunks which go to the foramina narium, &c. II.1I. Occipital arteries. 12.12. Arteries which go to the ſauces, &c. B. B. A ſmall portion of the baſis of the ſkull. 13.15. Contorſions of the carotid arteries, before they paſe to the brain. The pituitary gland between the contorted trunks of The carotid arteries. The ophthalmic arterĩes. Contorſions of the vertebrals. The vertebral arteries, where they lie on the medulla oblongata. Ramifications of the arteries within the ſkull. The arteries of the cerebellum. Arteries of the larynx, &c. Arteries which convey blood to the muſcles of the neck and ſcapula. Maommary arteries. Arteries of the muſcles of the os humer, &e. Diviſions of the arteries of the arm. A branch of an artery not found in all ſubjects. External artery of the cubitus. Arteries of the hands and fingers. Diviſion of the aorta. Bronchial artery. Intercoſtal arteriĩes. Cœliac artery. Hepatic arteries. Arteria cyſtica, on the gall. bladder. Lower coronary artery of the ſtomach. Pyloric artery. Epiploic artery. Ramiſications of the coronary artery, which embrace the bottom oſ the ſtomach. The upper coronary artery of the ſtomach. Phrenic arteries. Splenic artery. Upper meſenteric artery. Superior branches of the freed from the ſmall inte Lower meſenteric artery. Emulgent arteries. Arteriæ lumbares. Spermatic arteries. Arteria ſacra. Common iliac arteries. Iliacus externus. Iliacus internus. Umbilical arteries. Epigaeſtric arteries. The crural artery. Arteries which paſò to the m and tibiæ. Part of the crural artery. C u AP. xxvV. GENERAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE VEINS. Pulmonary VeinsVena Cava. Veius of the lHead, agular arẽè SubelavianVeius of the Superior Extremity. Vena dæiges. Veins of the Lomer Extremities Courſe f the Blod through ile abdominal Viſcera, the Liver, Ce. N deſcribing the arteries we followed the courſe oſ I the blood. and beginning with the largeſt trunks, traced the ſeveral branches in the crder in Vhich they were ſent off. In pointing out the courſe oſ the veins, however, and ſtill following the courſc of their contents, the order of the deſcription will neceſſarily be reverſed, as it is neceſſary, in this caſe, to begin with the ramifications, and trace them into the trunks. The veins oſf the body may be divided into two claſees; thoſe which return the blood conveyed by the pulmonary artery, and thoſe which return that of the aorta. It has been already remarkeq, that, beſides the blood which the lungs receive in common with other parts of the body, they alſo receive all that ĩs tranſmitted by the pulmonary artery. This, aſter being diſtributed through the ſubſtance of the lungs, is returned by veins, which at length unite into four trunks, and paſſing through the pericardium, are inſertec into the poſterior auricle of the heart, The blood, which is ſent to the various parts oſ the body by the aorta is m received and returned by two large trunks, the vena cava ſuperior and inferior, which enter the anterior auricle of the heart. I ſhall now proceed to enumeræte, in a curſory manner, the branches by which theſe trunks are ſupplicd. In treating oſ the brain, I izll endevour to deſcribe more fully the triangular canals, called ſinuſes, ſituated in the dura mater, and vhich perform the oſfice of veins. The vena cava ſuperior is formed in the following manner. The blood, which is ſent to the internal parts oſ the head, aſter paſſing through other veins and ſinuſes is received by the two lateral ſinuſes; theſe terminate in the internal jugular veins, which correſpond with the internal carotid artery, and terminate in the ſubclavian vein. The external jugular vein, which correſponds with the external carotid artery, receives the blood from the external parts of the head, and alſo terminates in the ſubclavian vein. This vein alſo receives the contents of the vertebral vein, which correſponds with the artery of the ſame name. The veins of the ſuperior extremities run in two ſets; ſome of them lie immediately under the ſkin, others are deeply ſeated, and accompany the arteries. The vena baſilica is formed by a number of branches; it proceeds immediately under the ſkin, àlong the courſe of the ulna, to the internal condyle of the os humeri. It aſterwards runs up along the inſide oſ the arm, communicating freely both with the deep and ſuperſicial veins. The vena cephælica receives, at the extremity oſ the radius, branches which correſpond with thoſe of the radial artery. The trunk runs along the radius, between the muſcles and integuments, communicating with all the neighbouring veins; having paſſed the fold of the arm, it aſcends near the outer edge of the external portion of the bicens, ſtill communicating with the other veins, and paſſing betvween the large pectoral and deltoid muſcles, terminates, as well as the baſilica, in the trunk of the aillary vein. The vena axillaris, which correſponds with the artery of the ſame name, is formed by all the veins of the ſuperior extremity. Above the axilla it receſves branches from all the muſcles ſituated about the ſcapula, and the upper part of the thorax. Where ĩt paſſes between the clavicle and firſt rib, it changes its name from that oſ the axillary vein to that of the ſubelavian. The ſubclavian veins, receive the contents of the jugular and vertebral veins which come from the head, and alſo other branches from adjoining parts. The leſt ſubelavian veln alſo receives a particular vein, called the intercoſtalis ſuperior, which proceeds from the upper intercoſtal muſcles of that ſidlee The leſt ſubclavian vein alſo receives the contents oſ the thoracic duct, which is deſcribed in another place. The two ſubclavian veins are directed towards each other, ard uniting in the upper part of the thorax, rather towards the right ſide, conſtitute the vena cava ſuperior. Into the upper part of the vena cava opens a vein of conſiderable ſize, called the vena azygos, or the vein without a fellowm. This ariſes from the lower and internal part of the thorax, and ſoon paſſes over to the right part of the ſpine. As it aſcends along the right ſide of the thorax, it receives the inferior intercoſtal veins of that ſide, and higher up a trunk common to two or three veins, which alſo come from the intercoſtals. At the top of the thorax it is bent forwards over the right lung, and opens into the vena cava a little above the pericardium. The vena cava now perforates the pericardium, and deſcends to the anterior or right auricle of the heart. The veins of the lower extremities, which terminate in the vena cava inferior, are The vena ſaphena major, which begins on the inſide of the foot, at the great toe, and runs to the inner ankle; here i it receives other branches, and then runs up theinſide of the tibia, immediately under the ſrin. Aſter communicating freely, and receiving other branches, the ſaphena paſſes along the inſide of the knee, and afterwards along the thigh- as far as the middle of the ſartorius muſcle; it next runs on the fore part of the thigh to the groin, and at length opens into the top of the femoral vein. As this vein is quite ſuperſicial, it may be traced through the whole of its progreſs, when it is diſtended with blood, by the naked eye. The vena ſaphena minor returns the blood from the outer ſide of the foot; from this part it runs up on the outſide of the tendo Achillis, and next between the gaſtrocnemius externus and the ſkin. It terminates in the vena poplitea a little above the ham. The vena tibialis anterior is a trunk which accompanies the artery of the ſame name, and terminates in the vena poplitea. The vena tibialis poſterior begins from the ſole of the foot by ſeveral branches. Theſe, forming a trunk, run on the i inner ſide of the os calcis, and behind the inner ankle. Ir paſſes up between the ſoleus, and tihialis poſticus muſcles, accompanied by the correſponding artery, and opens into the vena poplitea. The vena peronea proceeds upwards along the inſide of the fibula, almoſt in the ſame direction with the arteria peronea, and alſo ends in the vena poplitea. The vena poplitea, which correſponds with the artery of the ſame name, is formed by the three large veins deſcribed, but ſeems to be a continuation of the tibialis poſterior. The vena poꝶlitea runs up immediately on the muſcle of the ſame name. About the ham it receives a number of branches from the joizæ and from the neighbouring muſcles. A little above the ham it receives the name of the crural vein, pit takes its courſe upwards between thè biceps and other ſlexors of the leg, cloſely accompanied by the crural artery. When it has arrived oppoſite the trochanter minor it receives three conſiderable veins, the circumflexa interna, externa, and profunda, which correſpond vith the arteries of the ſame names. About an inch below the ligament of Fallopius, it receives the vena ſaphena major, the courſe of which has already been deſcribed. About this place ĩt alſo receives the v venæ pudicæ externæ. Aſter paſſing under the ligament of Fallopius, and entering the peluis, it changes its name to that of the external iliac vein. It now receives the vena epigaſtrica, hich deſcends towards it at the anterior part of the abdomen, and other venous branches ſfrom the adjacent parts. After having received the venoũs branches which correſpond ith the arterial branches of the external iliac artery, the external iliac vein unites with the trunk of the internal iliac, or hypogaſtric, vein, which returns the blood ſent to the pelvis by the artery of the ſame name.. Theſe two venous trunks uniting, form the vena iliaca communis, and the iliacæ communes of both ſides uniting, form the inferior vena cava. This aſcends on the vertebræ but inclines towards the right ſice, whereas the ãaorta is placed towards the left. It receives the venæ lumbares, which enter it behind in pairs. Higher up ĩt ĩs joined by the emulgent veins from the Lidneys, the venæ capſulares from the glandulæ ſuprarenales, and by the right ſpermatic vein. The left ſpermatic vein commonly goes into the emulgent vein of the ſame ſide. Oppoſite the liver the vena cavæ receives the blood from the diaphragm and pericardium. Hitherto, none of the veins which return the blood ſent to the abdominal viſcera by the cæliac and the two meſenteric arteries have been noticed. The courſe oſ this blood, however, deſerves particular attention. The veins of the rectum form the beginning of a vein called vena meſeraica minor, or vena hæmorrhoidalis interna. This aſterwards unites with a branch from the leſt part of the arch of the colon, and opens at length into the vena ſplenica. ; The vena ſplenica returns the blood from the ſpleen, and in its paſſage alſo receives branches from the ſtomach, pancreas, and omentum, and allo the vena me ſeraica minor laſt deſcribed. The vena meſeraica major returns the blood of moſt oſ the branches of the arteria meſenterica ſuperior, vhich are diſtributed on the ſmall inteſtines and right portion of the colon. Tt alſo receives the vena cæcalis from the beginning of the colon, the gaſtro colica, partly from the ſtomach and partly from the colon, and ſome other branches ſrom the adjoining viſcera, which vary in diſferent ſubjects. The vena ſplenica receives the vena meſeraica minor, and the vena meſeraica major the vena ſplenica, and thus is brought. into one veſſel, called the vena portæ, the blood which comes from the omentum, the pancreas, the ſpleen, the ſtomach, and the ſmall and great inteſtines. The blood, however, thus collected, is not immediately returned to the heart, as in other parts of the body; for the vena portæ, having arrived at the concave part of the liver, is firſt divided into five branches, and theſe into others more minute, which are diſtributed through that organ like arteries, and which perform the ſecretion of the bile. Where the vena portæ enters the liver, its ſtructure becomes more robuſt, to enable ĩt to perform its new office. The blood, thus circulated through the liver, is again collected by another ſet of veins, which, uniting into two or three principal trun hepaticæ, pour their contents into the v vena cava aſcendens, having received t forates the diaphragm and pericardium with the ſuperior cava, they empty then into the anterior auricle. The veins are repreſented in plate X ſo perfectly as I could have wiſhed, aa. Vena cava. b. Deſcending trunk of the cava. c.c. Aſcending trunk of the cava. d.d. Subclavian veins. e. Vena azygos. f- Intercoſtal veins. g. Mammary veins. i.i. Internal jugulars. I.I. External Jugulais. m. Right axillary vein. n. Cephalic vein. o. Baſilic. q. Phrenſe. s5.5. Emulgents. . w. Iliac branches. æ. Internul iliacs. 1. Vera ſacra. 2. Spermatic veins. 3. Epigaſtric. 4. Saphena. CHAP. xxvi. STRUCTURE AND COURSE oF THE LYMPHATICS. Tu Kinds of L ymphatics. Deſtription of theſe Veſils. Lymphotic CGlaudsLatcteals T boracic DuctReceptacle of the Chyle, &. YMPHATICS are ſmall pellucid veſſels, 4 which convey ſluids perfectly, or very nearly, colourleſs. The lymphatics are of two kinds; thoſe which take up fluids ſrom the body in general, and thoſe which receive the digeſted aliment from the inteſtines. The latter kind are called lacteals, and both of them terminate in a common trunk, the thoracic dutct. llll The lymphatics have at. leatt two coats, which are thin and tranſparent, but tolerably ſtrong. They have alſo nerves and muſcular fibres, as may be collected from their ſenſibility when inflamed, and from their power of contraction. They are furniſhed vith valves, which are placed in pairs, and which are ſo numerous, that three or. four of them often occur within the diſtance of one inch. From this circumſtance they are frequently called valvulor Iymphatic veſſels, to diſtinguiſh them from the minute ramifications of the ſanguifercus ſyſtem, which alſo convey a colourleſs nuid. Lymphatics begin by extremely minute tubes from the whole ſurface oſ the body, from the cellular ſubſtance, from rhe cavities of the body, from all the glands, from all the viſcera, and in gener al from every part of the ſyſtem. : It is now well aſcertained, that not only water is 2brbed by the Iymphatics on the ſurface of the body, but many other ſubſtances. I7o lIymphatics have been demorſtrated in the bræin; but from a variety of circumſũances there can be very little doubt of their exiſtence. All the lymphatics of the bedy paſs through certain glands, which are connected with them. When the lymphatics approach theſe glands, they ſend ſome branches to neighbouring lymphatics; other branches pæſ6 over the ſurface of the gſlands, and others enter their ſubſtance, in which they are ſo minutely divided as to eſcape obſervation. A great number of theſe glands are placed at the upper pært of the thigh, beſonging to the lymphatics of the lower extremity; others are placed under the arm, belonging to thoſe of the upper; and there are ſimilur ęlands about the neck, and in various other parts of the body. It is at preſent diſputed among anatomiſts, whether lymphatic glands are formed of cells or convoluted veſiels; but the latter opinion ſeerns to be more pro obable. Lymphatic or conglobate glands are of various ſizes, rom that of a ſmall pea to that of a bean. They are commonly ſomewhat ſlattened. In young ſubjects they are found of a reddiſa or brown colour, but they become Vhiter in the progreſs of life. Their ſurface is ſining, which is owing to a ſmooth denſe coat with which they are covered Theſe glands are ſaid to be vanting in ſome animals, which yet have lymphatic veſſels. The lacteals are ſo called ſrom a degree of whiteneſs in their appearance like that of milk, which they receive from the colour of the fluid they convey. They ariſe from the villous coat both oſ the great and ſmall inteſtines, but prine ipally from the ſmall, parricularly the jejunum; paſſing in their courſe through conglobate glands, they advance between the laminæ of the meſentery towards the ſecond or third Iumbar vertebra, where they meet with the lymphatics of the lower extremities. Of theſe ſome are ſuperſicial, and others deeply ſeated. The former chieſly lie at the inſide oſ the leg and thigh, and follow the courſe of the vena ſaphena major. In the groin they paſs through lymphatic glands. Being joined by the lymphatics of the lower part of the abdomen, they paſs under the ligament of Fallopius. The lymphatics of the Iower extremities and pelvis, and the lacteals from the inteſtines, form the beginning oſ the thoracic duct. This veſſel alſo receives the Ilymph from the other abdominal viſcera. The thoracic duct, ſo called from its courſe through the thorax, uſually begins about the ſecond or third lumbar vertebra. It is of diſferent ſizes in different ſubjects, and is ſometimes extended at its lower part into a pyriform bag, called the receptaculum chyli; but in general there ĩs no enlargement ſo remarkable as to deſerve a particular name. The thoracic duct ſometimes divides and again unites. At its beginning, ĩt is ſituated at the right ſide of the aorta. It is aſterwards obſerved in the thorax, lying between the aorta and vena azygos. It aſcends as high as the ſixth vertebra of the neck, where, forming an arch, it turns downwards and enters the leſt ſubelavian vein near the inſertion of the internal jugular. The thoracic duct is furniſhed with few valves, and theſe are placed without much regularity. At the place, however, where ĩt is inſerted into the ſubcelavian veĩn, there is a circular valve, which prevents the blocd from getting into it. Beſides the thoracic duct, which receives the Iymph ſrom the lower extremities and the leſt ſide, and the chyle from the inteſtines, there is another veſſel ſomevhat ſimilar, but much ſhorter, on the right ſide. This receives the lymphatics from the right arm, the right Iung, and the right ſide of the head, and enters the right ſubclavian vein at the ſame place where the Hll r ' : C 5 a r. XXVII. OF THE BR AIN æe Vhe Dura MaterThe Falx.Sinuſes of the Brainbe Pia MaterThe Cerebrum and Cerebellun Source of the Opti? Nerves. Ths Pincal GlandThe suppoſed Seat of ihe Soul The Medulla Oblongata. Source of the Nerves Tht Sginal AMarrow. HE cavity of the cranium is every way ſurrounded with ſtrong bones, which have been already deſcribedl. Within theſe, before we arrive at the ſubſtance oſ the brain, we meet with tvo membranes, called by the antients the dura and pia mater, from an opinion that they were the ſource of the other membranes of the body. The ſame names are ſtill applied to them by the moderns, though, as in many other caſes, the opinion which gave i to them is exploded. The dura mater is a thick, firm, inſenſible membrane, extremely full of blood veſiels. Its external ſurſace perſorms the part of a perioſteum to the internal part of the ſkull, to which it adheres by numerous blood-veſſels, particularly at the ſutures, where they paſs through the cranium to communicate with thoſe of the cxternal perioſteum. Its internal ſurface is moiſtened by the exhalation of a thin fluid, which prevents its adheſion to the membrane within. The dura mater forms ſeveral projections, which ſerve very important purpoſes. One of theſe, from its reſemblance to the blade of a ſcythe, is called the falx. Its narroweſt end is attached to the criſta galli oſ the ethmoid bone; it runs backwards along the courſe of the ſagittal ſuture, to where it meets with the lambdoidal. a little below the lambdoidal ſuture it divides into two wings, forming a tranſverſe ſeptum, which is firmly attached benind to the os occipitisThe uſe of the ſalx is to divide the brain into its two hemiſpheres, and to ſupport them, and prevent their preſſing on each other when the head is turned to eſther ſidle. The tranſverſe ſeptum divides the great brain or cerebrum from the ſmaller brain or cerebellum, the former being placed above it, the latter below. It alſo ſupports the cerebrum, and prevents it from gravitating on the cerebellum when the body is in the erect poſture. The connection between the tranſverſe ſeptum and the falx is ſuch, that they preſerve each other in a ſtate oſ tenſion, for if eĩther of them is cut after the contents of the cranium are removed, the other immediatcly becomes relaxed and flaccid. Below the tranſverſe ſeptum is ſituated a ſmaller falx, which ſerves the ſame purpoſes in the cerebellum as the great falx does in the cerebrum. In the tranſverſe ſeptum is a great oval noteh, through which the ſubſtance of the cerebrum and cerebellum communicate and are intimately mixed. Both the membranes of the brain patt o out of the cranium with the truns of nerves, and afford them coverings, till they terminate in their fentient extremities. i The blood which is circulated through the brain i is not returned through ſuch veins as are Tound j in other parts of the body. We here obſerve a peculiar kind of canals called ſinuſes, which are contained in the duplicatures of the dura mater. The moſt remarkable of theſe is the longitudinal, which runs in the upper part of the falx; at the tranſverſe ſeptum this divides - into ' into two others, called Iateral ſinuſes, which, paſing through the baſe of the cranium, terminate in the jugular veins. Near rhe concourſe oſ tla ſuperior and lateral ſinuſes, we obſerve an opening, which is the orifice of a ſinus, ſituated along the union of the falx and tranſverſe ſeptum. Theſe ſinuſes are triangular veins, which, being conveyed through ſo firm a membrane as the dura mater, are much leſs liable to be ruptured or diſtended; theſe accidents are ſtill further guarded againſt by certain filaments, which paſs from one ſide of the ſinuſes to the other, and give ſtill further ſecurity againſt the bad eſſects which are found to ariſe from the preſſure of the rain. The veins, which pour their blood into the ſinuſes, enter them in ſuch a manner as to produce the eſfect of a valve, and to prevent the blood from returning into the tender veſſels of the brain, and thus over-diſtending them. Beſides the ſinuſes above-mentioned there are others of a ſmaller fize, which anſwer the ſame important purpoſes. All theſe communicate with each other and with the great lateral ſinuſes, and therefore diſcharge their blood into the internal jugular veins. The cavernous or lateral ſinuſes of the os ſphenoides are reſervoirs of a particular kind, containing conſiderable veſſels and nerves; and likewiſe a cavernous and ſpongy ſtructure, which for ſome unknown purpoſe ĩs conſtantly filled with blood. The pia mater is a much ſofter and thinner membrane than the former; it is connected to the dura mater only by the veins which open into the ſinuſes. The pia mater conſiſts of two laminæ]; the external of theſe, from its extreme thinneſs, has been compared to the ſpider's web, and is nemed tunica arachnoĩdea; at the upper part oſ the brain ĩt is connected both to the dura mater and the internal lamina of the pia mater, by means of blood-veſſels, but in other parts it is quite ſeparate from both. It ĩs ſpread uniſormly over the ſurface oſ the brain, incloſing all the convolutions, but not entering between any of them. On the contrary, the internal and moſt conſiderable lamina of the pia mater is not only inſinuated into the numerous ſclds and circumvolutions of the brain, but is continued into its cavities, performing the important oſfice of conveying the blood-veſſels to that delicate organ in ſuch a minute ſtate of diviſion, that their pulſation cannot be prejudicial to its functions. The brain completely ſills the cavity of the cranium, ond its form therefore correſponds with it; ĩt is conex above, irregular below, and flat at the ſides. UnJi the general name of brain, or encephalon, are included the cerebrum, which occupies the upper and largeſt portion of the cranium, and the cerebellum, which is ſeated in iĩts lower and poſterior part, under the tranſverſe ſeptum. The cerebrum is divided longitudinally at its upper part, by the falx, into its two hemiſpheres. The irregular ſurface of the cranium below divides each hemſphere into three lobes. The anterior lobe is lodged on the orbital proceſſes of the os ſrontis; the middie lobe lies in the middle foſſæ of the baſis of the cranium; the poſterior reſts on the tranſverſe ſeptum over the cerebellum. The cerebellum is itſelf divided into two hemiſpheres by the ſmall falx. The component matter oſ the brain is of two kinds; a greyiſh matter, which is for the moſt part placed without, and is therefore called the cortical, and a white matter called the medullary, which is generally ſituated within. The cortical part chieſly accompanies the convolutions of the brain; the medullary is entire, and ſeems to be compoſed of numerous white, minute, perallel, and very tender fibres. E Faving removed the falx ſrom between the hemiſpheres of the brain, and drawn them gently from each other; ve obſerve below a white convex ſurface, which is part of what is called the corpus calloſum. It is a middle portion of the mædullary ſubſtance, hich, under the inferior edge of the falx, and for ſome diſtance on each ſide, is parted from the maſs of the cerebrum by a fold of the pia mater. Along the middle of the ſurſace of the corpus calloſum, a kind of ſuture is formed by a particular intertexture of fibres croſſing each other. Immediately under theſe is placed the ſeptum lucidum, which is connected below to the fornix, and divides the aænterior ventricles of the brain from each other. Theſe ventricles are diſcovered by making an horizontal inciſion in the brain, on a level with the corpus calloſum. When we have cut into them, we find that they are narrow canals, which take a very winding courſe through the ſubſtance of the brain. They are lined with the pia mater, and contain a curious collection of minute blood. veſſels twiſted about each other, and called plexus choroides. One of the ànterior ventricles is ſituated in each hemiſphere oſ the brain, and they are divided ſrom each other by the ſeptum lucidum. The ſeptum lucidum is united by its Iover part to the anterior portion of that medullary body called the fornix, which forms a kind of arch, ſituated under the corpus calloſum, and is nearly of a triangular ſhape. At the anterior part the fornix ſends off a double medullary cord, called its anterior crura; immediately below which we obſerve a large white medullary rope ſtretched tranverſely between the two hemiſpheres, and commonly called the anterior commiſſure of the cerebrum. To this ſubſtance the ſeptum lucidum is connected. At the poſterior part of the fornix are two other crura, which unite with to medullary protuberances called pedes hippocampi. Under the fornix, and immediately behind its anterior crura, there Is a hole by which the two anterior ventricles communicate. In examining the ſubſtance of the cerebrum, the deeper we go tovards the baſis of the cranium, we find that the medull lary part becomes the broader. The plexus choroides is a very fine vaſcular texture, conſiſting of a great number of arterial and venal ramifications, ſpread over the lateral or anterior ventricles. When we have removed this plexus, we diſcover ſeveral protuberances included in theſe cavities. Theſe are the corpora ſtriata, the thalami nervõrum opticorum, and the nates and teſtes. The corpora ſtriata are two curved oblong eminences, which extend along the anterior part of the lateral ventricles. They are called ſtriata or ſtriped, becauſc in cutting them we meet with a number of white and ah coloured lines alternately diſpoſed. Theſe two eminences are of a greyiſh colour on the ſurſace, and larger before than behind, where they are narrow and bent. They may b] conſidered : as ſorning the convex baſes of the ventricles. The thalami nervorum opticorum are externally white, but alſo contain both cortical and medullary ſubſtance, and derive their name from being the chief ſource of the optic nerves. They are two eminences placed near each other, between the poſterior portions or extremities of the corpora ſtriata. They are cloſely united, and at their convex part form one body. Immediately under the union of the thalami nervorum opticorum lies a cavity, called the third ventricle of the cerebrum. This cavity communicates at its upper and fore part with the paſſage between the two lateral ventricles, and ſends down from its under and fore part a paſſage through the infundibulum; it has a communication backwards with the fourth ventricle. The] infundibulum is a ſmall medullary canal, ſituated between the baſe of the anterior pillar of the fornix, and the anterior part of the union of the thalami nervorum opticorum. It runs downwards, and terminates by a ſmall membranous canal in a ſoftith body, ſituated in the ſella turcica of the ſphenoidal bone, and called glandula pituitaria. This ſubſtance was ſo named by the ancients, from ĩts ſuppoſed office of cleanſing the brain from ſerous fluids. Its real uſe is wholly unknown. In ruminant animals it is much larger than in man. The nates and teſtes, or as they are otherwiſe denominated, tubercula quadrigemina, are four tubercles, fituated behind the union of the thalami nervorum opticorum, adhering to each other. They are externally white, and their internal ſubſtance is greyiſh. Between the two anterior tubercles and the convex part of the thalami nervorum opticorum is an interſtice called foramen commune poſterius. This, however, is cloſed by the pia mater, nd does not open into any cavity. Above the tubercula quadrigemina, and behind the thalami nervorum opticorum, is fixed the pineal gland. This body is of an oval form, about the ſize of a pes, and is connected to the lower part of the thalami by two very white medullary pedunculi. It ſeems to be moſtly formed of cortical ſubſtance, particularly at its upper part, and adheres cloſely to the plexus choroides, with which ĩt is covered. This ſmall body has been rendered famous by Deſcartes, who ſuppoſed it to be the ſeat oſ the ſoul. It is often fcund, on being cut into, to contain a gravelly ſubſtance, which reſiſts the kniſe. Below the pineal glend there is a tranſverſe medullary cord, called the poſterior commiſſure of the hemiſpheres of the cranium. The cerebellum is ſituated under the tranſverſe ſeptum, in the poſterior and lower part of the cranium. Like the cerebrum it is compoſed of cineritious and edullary matter. It diſfers from the cerebrum, however, in having no circumvolutions on its ſurſace; inſtead of theſc, we here obſerve numerous furrows running paraliel to each other, and nearly in a tranſverſe dire ction, into whih enter folds of the pia mater. Under the tranſverſe ſeptum it is covered by a vaſcular texure which communicates with the plexus choroides. It has four eminences which are turned in diſferent directions, and which from ſome reſemblance to the rings of an earth-worm are named appendices vermiſormes The cerebellum is divided into two lateral parts by the ſmall falx; on the back part it is divided into two lobes ſeparated by the occipital ſeptum of the dura mater. By cutting deeply into the ſubſtance of the cerebellIum in the direction of ĩts falx, ve obſerve an oblong cavity which ĩs called the fourth ventricle; this terminates Back wards like the point of a writing-pen, and this end of it has therefore been called calamus ſcriptorius. At the beginning of this cavity we meet with a thin medullary lamina which has been conſidered as a valve. This ventricle is lined like the others with the pia mater, which is continued through all theſe cavities. The ſubſtance of the cerebellum appears very different, according to the direction in which it is cut. By dividing it vertically we find the medullary part diſpoſed ſo as to exhibit the appearance of a tree. Theſe ramiſications unite to ſorm a medullary trunk; the middle, anterior, and moſt conſiderable part of which forms two proceſſes, the crura cerebelli, which uniting with the crura cerebri conſtitute the medulla oblongata, which will be next deſcribed; when the cerebellum is cut horiZzontally this appearance is entirely loſt. l The medulla oblongata is ſituated in the lower and poſterior part of the cranium, and is formed of two conſiderable medullary proceſſes of the cerebellum, and oſ the two larger proceſſes of the cerebrum called their crura. It may therefore be conſidered as a medullary maſs common to hoth cerebrum and cerebellum, by the reciprocal continuity of their ſubſtances through the great notch in the tranſverſe ſeptum. The medulla oblongata can only be ſeen when removed from the cranium, and the deſcription can only apply to the parts when viewed in their inverted ſituation. The crura cerebri ariſe ſrom the middle and lover part of each hemiſpheree. Where they ariſe from the cerebrum they are ſeparate, but converge as they run backwards ſo as to reſemble the letter V. Where they unite they form a middle tranſverſe protuberance called the pons Varolii, becauſe that anatomiſt compared it to a bridge, and the two crura cerebri to two rivers. This compariſon, however, conveys no idea of the real appearance of the parts, and the pons Varolii is to be conſidered merely as an eminence formed by the union of the crura of the cerebrum and cerebellum. Between the crura cerebrſand near the anterior edge of the pons Varolii are two white eminences, named eminentiæ mamillares. From the poſterior part of the pons Varolii the medulla oblongata ĩs contracted, and deſcends obliquely backwards to the foramen magnum of the os occipitis, where it terminates in the medulla ſpinaliss. In this part of it ſeveral appearances are to be noticcd. We obſerve four eminences, two named the corpora olivaria, and the other two the corpora pyramidalia. Immediately behind theſe we diſcover the beginning of two grooves, one above and one below. Theſe becoming deeper divide the medulla oblongata into two cylinderss. When we ſeparate theſe with the fingers we obſerve ſeveral medullary cords which croſs each other in paſſing from one lateral portion to the other. The corpera olivaria and pyramidalia are whitiſh eminences ſituated Iongitudinally near each other immediately behind the pons Varolii. The corpora olivaria are outermoſt and are nearly oſ an oval ſhape. Between them are the corpora pyramidalia, each of which terminates in a point. It is obſervable, in general, with reſpect to the eminences of the medulla oblongata, that thoſe which are edullary witout are chiefly cortical withinn. What are the diſtinct functions of theſe ſubſtances which appear ſo different to the eye, and what purpoſes are anſwered by their intermixture, are points which muſt remain undetermined till we can diſcover the connection between the mind and the body, and enter into the ſecret mechaniſm of this wonderful engine of ſenſation and intellect. The brain of birds is covered with the common membranes,. but its external ſurface is not formed into ſo many gyræ or convolutions as ours. Its anterior part is quite ſolid, oſ a cineritious colour, and ſo far has a reſemblance of the corpora ſtriata as to give riſe to the olfactory nerves. The whole of it appears to us imperfect, and we can ſcarcely diſtinguiſn whether there is any thing analogous to a third or fourth ventricle: neither the corpus calloum, fornix, nates nor teſtes, can be obſerved here: which parts thereſore cannot be conſidered as neceſſary to the functions of life; we mighr, however, be led to imagine, that they are ſubſervient to the ſuperior intellectual povers of the human mind, did we not find that quadrupeds have theſe parts as well as men. Theſe appearances ſeem rather to depend on the various diſpoſition and direction of the fibres which compoſc ithe brain; and the particular uſes which have been aſigned to the different parts of the brain ſeem to have no other foundation than the fancy of authors, vho have indulged themſelves in fruitleſs ſpeculations. Thoſe birds which ſeek their food below rhe ſurface of water, mud, &c. have large nerves which run quize to the extremity of the bill, by which the ſenſation of that part is rendered more acute. From the medulla oblongata, which is formed by the union of the cerebrum and cerebellum, ariſe not only the ſpinal marrow, but almoſt all the other nerves which perforate the baſe of the cranium. The medulla ſpinalis, or ſpinal marrow, is a continuation of the medulla oblongata, which paſſes through the great foramen of the cranium, and is continued down the bony canal formed by the vertebræ?. The figure of the ſpinal marrow is compreſſed, being flatter behind than before, where we obſerve a continuation of thoſe grooves which divide the medulla oblongata into ĩts lateral portions. In the medulla ſpinalis theſe appear like two cords cloſely applied to each other, but which may be eaſily ſeparated both before and behind till we come to their middle, where they are joined together by a thin layer of cineritious ſubſtance paſſing from one cord into the other,. The ſpinal marrov, like the parts of which it is a continuation, conſiſts of ever, is here placed without; the cineritious is placed vithin, and by a tranſverſe ſection of the medulla ſpinalis it appears to be in the form of a horſe- ſhoe, the convex ſide of which is turned forwards and its extremities backward. The ſpinal marrow is inveſted both with the dura and pia mater. The former of theſe in paſilng out of the foramen of the os occipitis, forms a kind of funnel, adhering at its upper part to the ligamentary ſubſtance which lines the bony canal of the vertebræ. Lower down there is no adheſion, except where the nerves paſs through the notches of the ſpine, where the dura mater, which inveſts the medulla ſpinalis, ſends out on each ſide the ſame number of ſheaths as there are ganglions and nervous trunks. The pia mater is connected with the dura mater by means of a thin tranſparent ſubſtance, which from its indentations between the ſpinal nerves has been named the ligamentum denticulatum. Its uſe is to ſupport the medulla ſpinalis, that it may not affect the medulla oblongata, or ſpinal nerves by its weight. The lower end of the ligamentum denticulatum runs to the os coccygis far below the termination of the ſpinal marrov. Each lateral portion of the medulla ſpinalis ſends off, both from the fore and back parts, flat faſciculi of nervous fibres. The anterior and poſterior faſciculi are ſeparated ſrom each other by the ligamentum denticulatum; then paſſing outwards they proceed through the dura mater by two diſtinct openings very near each other. Having penetrated the dura mater, the poſterior bundle forms a ganglion, from the oppoſite end of which the trunk comes out again, and is there joined by the anterior bundle. The membrana arachnoides is here very diſtinct from the internal lamina of the pia mater; ſo that by blowing through a hole made in the arachnoides, it vill ſwell from one end to the other like a tranſparent inteſtine. The ſpinal marrow gives riſe to about thirty pair of nerves. Thoſe which come out between the vertebræ of the neck are thinrer than the reſt, and are placed almoſt tranſverſely; as we deſcend, we find them running more and more obliquely downwards, and when we arrive at the ſecond vertebra of the loins, the ſpinal marrov is ſplit into numerous thread- like fibres, and from its appearance is called cauda equina, or the horſe's tail. The nerves which ariſe ſfrom the different parts of the bræin and ſpinal marrow vill be treated oſ C n1 A P. XXVIII. STRUCTURE AND GENERAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE NERVES. Origin of the Nerves Extreme ſubtilty o ihe Nervous Fibres Ganglions.Plexus. Fontana'ls Microſcopical Obſervations on Nerves. Nerves from the BrainOlfactory and Optic Nerves,  c. Auditory Nerves, & c.Lingual Nerves, &c.Sympathetic NerveNerves from the Spinal Marroav.Phrenic Nerve. Derſal and Brachial Nerves, &c.Lumbar and Crural Nerves, & c.Sciatic Nerve. ] E RVES are white cords diſtributed from the brain over the whole body; they riſe, as was intimated in the preceding chapter, either immediately from the brain, or mediately from it by means oſ the ſpinal marrow, which is itſelf a continuation of the fibres of the brain, and might without impropriety be conſidered as the largeſt nerve in the body. The nerves, as they paſs off from the brain and ſpinal marrow are irveſted, and collected into firm cords, by the dura and pia mater. The former, however, is ſoon reflected back, but the latrer accompanies them through all their ramifications, and is ſuppoſed to be only thrown aſide where they terminate in their ſentient extremities. As the medullary fibres are obſerved to decuſſate each other in different parts of the brain, and as injuries of one ſide oſ the head have often been obſerved to produce a palſy of the oppoſite ſide of the body, it has been ſuppoſed that all the nerves originate from the ſide of the brain oppoſite to that at which they come out. This opinion, however, is far from being eſtaT bliſhed, becauſe a decuſſation in ſome parts is by no means ã prooſ that ĩt obtains univerſally; aænd though there are inſtances of injuries of the head, which have produced a palſy of the oppoſite ſide, there are others in which the injury and palſy were both on the ſame ſide. Nerves are compoſed of threads of the ſmallneſs ot which we have probably no adequate idea. To aſiiſt us in forming one, we muſt conſider how uniſormly nerves are aiſt ributed to even the moſt minute fibre of the body, and yet were they all conjoined, they would not make a cord of an inch diameter. It ĩs deuuced from actual obſervation, that each fibre in the retina of the eye, or expanded optic nerve, cannot exceed in diameter the thirty-two thouſand four hundredth part of a hair. Different nerves in theſr courſe often meet together, and form oblong reddiſh maſſes, called ganglions, larger than the nerves which form them, and alſo of a firmer conſitencee. Within the ganglions the fibres of the nerves ſeem to be thoroughly mixed, ànd to approach more nearly to the nature of medullarv matter. BY ſome phyſiologiſts ganglions are ſuppoſed to be ſrall brains, whence the nerves acquire new pover and energy. Others, obſerving that the nerves which ſupply the muſcles of involuntary motion, as thoſe of the heart and inteſtines, are particularly ſupplied with ganglions, have conſidered them as deſigned to intercept the operation of the will. Their real uſe is unnown to us, but ſfrom whetever cauſe it may happen, the nerves which proceed from a ganglion are rather larger thon the ſm of thoſe which form ĩit Several nerves frequently meet together, and by numerous junctions produce an appearance ſimilar to that of net-work, and this ĩs called a plexus,. Nervous cords have very little. elaſticity compared with ſome other parts of the body. The Abbẽ Fontana has taken great pains to aſcertain the primitive ſtructure of nerves. On examining a number of nerves with microſcopes of low powtrs, ſo as not to magnify more than four or five diameters, they always appeared to be ſurrounded with white ſpiral bands not unlike the eſfect which would be produced by a ribbon twiſted round a eylinder. The ſpiral bands were ſometimes perfectly regular, ſo as to be of equal width along the whole length of the nerve examined, and to leave a ſpace of a leſs bright colour of the ſame widih between them; at other times they were irregular and croſſed each other æt uncertain diſtances; this latter appearance, however, was found on further examination to proceed from the nerve ſubmitted to examination being compoſed of many others: for where he carefully ſeparated a nerve from thoſe which adhered to it, and examined it by itſelf, he always found the ſpiral bands regular. He ſaw theſe appearances very plainly in nerves not larger than a hair, with lenſes of very ſmall power, and was therefore perſuaded that this appearance of bands was not an optical illuſion. The ſame nerve, however, which to the naked eye, and by a lens of ſmall power exhibited this appearance, when examined by a microſcope of high powers, appeared to conſiſt merely of parallel but tiſting fibres. He next removed the cellular tiſiue or meath of a nerve, without injuring its texture; but ſtill with a microſcope of high powers he could perceive nothing but waving and twiſting fibres, and nothing but ſpiral bands vith the naked eye. After applying, Rowever, to theſe obſervations for two or three days, he found, that by merely moving the reſlecting mirror, he ſometimes ſaw twiſting fibres and ſometimes ſpiral bands with the ſame lens. He is therefore under a neceſſity of giving up his ſuppoſed diſcovery, and of allowing that the ſpiral bands were merely an optical deception. From his obſervations he can deduce no more than that nerves are formed of a great number of tranſparent, homogeneous, uniform, and very ſimple cylinders. That theſe cylinders are formed by an extremely thin tunic, uniformly filled by a gelatinous tranſparent humour, which is inſoluble in water; each of theſe cylinders is covered by an external ſheath, which is compoſed of a great number of twiſting threads. Many tranſparent cylinders conſtitute a nerve which is ſcarcely viſible to the naked eye, and many of theſe form the nervous cords which are ſeen in animals. The Abbẽ Fontana alſo ſubmitted to the microſcope the medullary and cortical parts of the brains of ſeveral æanimals. In theſe, however, the appearances were ꝑretty ſimilar, and the ſubſtance of both appeared to be organic, vaſcular, tranſparent, and twiſting, like inteſtines. The nerves proceed from the encephalon and ſpinal marrow. Ten pair are uſually enumerated as ariſing from the former, and thirty from the latter. Iſhall firſt deſcribe the origin and courſe of thoſe of the encephalon. Anatomiſts mention theſe in the order in which they preſent themſelves when the brain is lifted from the cranium; thoſe which come from the anterior part of the cerebrum are therefore placed before thoſe which aeriſe lower down from the cerebellum and medulla oblongata. The firſt pair of nerves is the olfactory, which proceed from the corpora ſtriata; they approach the cribriform plate of the os ethmoides, where they ſplit into a great number of filamehts, which paſs through the perforations of that bone. Afterwards being joined by a branch from the fifth paſr, they are ſpread on the internal membrane of the noſe, and conſtitute the organ of ſmelling. The ſecond pair of nerves is the optic, which are continued from the thalami nervorum opticorum, and are of a large ſize; they firſt make a large curve outards, and then run obliquely inwards and forwards, till they unite at the fore part of the ſella turcica; they then divide, and each runs to ĩts proper foramen in the ſphenoĩd bone. They are accompanied to the eye by the ocular artery, and are at length expanded into the tender and pulpy ſubſtance of the retina, which receives the impreſſions of light. The union of the optic nerves has been thought to explain ſome phenomena of viſion, as our ſeeing objects ſingle with two eyes, and their uniform motion. The union of the optic nerves generally appears ſo conſiderable, that ſome anatomiſts have thought that they decuſſated each other, and went to the eye on the oppoſite ſide of the head from that whence they aroſe. In many fiſhes the optic nerves evidently croſs each other, but this does not ſcem to be the caſe in man. They are inſerted into the eyes, not directly at their poſterior part, but rather towards that ſide which is placed next the noſe. We are unable to ſee with that part of the retina where the optic nerve enters. The third pair called motores ocul ariſes from the crura cerebri, near the pons Varolii; they run along the ſide of the ſella turcica, and paſs out at the forerins lacera, aſter which each of them divides into branches; one of theſe, after forming a ganglion, is diſtributed to the globe of the eye; the others are ſent to the muſculus ductor, deprimens, and obliquus minor muſcles of the eye- ball. The fourth pair of nerves called pathetici, are the ſmalleſt of all; they ariſe from near the tubercula quadrigemina; they paſs out at the foramina lacera, and are entirely ſpent on the muſculi trochleares or ſuperior oblique muſcles of the eye-balls. The ſifth pair is the largeſt of thoſe which proceed from the head; they riſe from the crura cerebelli, where they join with thoſe of the cerebrum, to form the tranſverſe protuberance or pons Varolii. In their progreſs they appear thicker at the ſides of the ſella turcica, where each forms a diſtinct ganglion, from which proceed three branches, which paſs out of the cranium. The firſt branch of the fifth pair ĩs the opthalmic; it paſſes out of the foramen lacerum, and is in its paſſage connected with the ſixth pair; it afterwards communicates with the firſt and third pairs, and is chieſly ſpent on the orbit and the appendages of the eye. One branch paſſes through the foramen ſuperciliare of the o⸗ frontis, to be diſtributed on the ſorehead. The ſecond branch of the fiſth pair is chiefly ſpent on the parts of the upper jaw, and is therefore called maxillaris ſuperior; it is diſtributed on the upper jaw bone and its teeth, on the fore part of the palate, the cheeks, upper lips, and noſtrilss. This branch communicates with the ſixth pair of nerves, and with the portio dura of the ſeventh pair. The third and moſt conſiderable branch of the fifth bair is the maxillaris inferior; part of this is loſt in the tongue; another part goes to the teeth of the Iower jaw, to each of which it ſends a ſeparate twig; it is partly alſo diſtributed on the muſcles of the lover jav. The ſixth pair of nerves is ſmall, and is chieiy diſtributed on the abductor muſcle of the eye; it ariſes ſrom the ſore part of the corpora pyramidalia, and in its progreſs towards the foramen incerum paſſes through the receptacul a at the ſides oſ the ſella turcica, where it is immerſed in blood, but for what purpoſe is unknown. In the paſſage of this nerve below the dura mater, it lies very contiguous to the carotid artery, and at this part a twig from it deſcends with the artery to form the beginning of the intercoſtal nerve. I The ſeventh peir comes out from the lateral part of the tranſverſe protuberance, and appears to be double, each being accompanied with a larger artery than moſt other nerves; it then enters the internal meatus auditorius, where ĩt ſeparates into two diſtinct portions; one of theſe goes to the internal parts of the ear, and is there e: pended in producing a pulpy membrane reſembling the retina; this diviſion of the nerve is called the portio mollis; the other, the portio dura, communicates with the fiſth pair, and piercing through the parotid gland is divided into numerous ramifications, which are ſpent on the upper part of the neck and ſide of the head. The eighth pair of nerves, which from the Iength of its courſe and the variety of parts to which it is diſtributed is called par vagum, ariſes from the lateral baſis of the corpora olivaria in ſeparate fibress. The eighth pair is ſoon joined by the nervus acceſſorius, which is derived from the tenth pair of nerves, and from ſeveral of thoſe of the neck; thus united, they paſs out of the cranium through the ſame opening with the internal jugular vein; when they get out of Nerves of the Heart, Stomach, &c. ſBook IX. the cranium the nervus acceſſorius Ieaves the eighth pair, and paſſing through the ſterno maſtoideus muſcle, is diſtributed on that and the trapezius. The eighth pair now diſperſes various branches to the tongue, larynx, and pharynx, which are united with branches of the fiſth pair, with the portio dura of the ſeventh pair, with the recurrent nerve, with the great intercoſtal, and with the ninth pair and all the cervical nerves. Being ſeparated from theſe nerves it runs down on the external ſide of the carotid artery, and as it is about to enter the thorax, a conſiderable nerve called the recurrent is ſent oſf on each ſide. The right recurrent nerve takes a turn round the right ſubclavian artery, and the left round the aorta; and both of them running up again at the ſide of the œſophagus, to vhich they give branches, are ſpent on the parts of the larynx. We find from many inſtances that nerves court the neighbourhood of arteries, but what are the purpoſes of ſuch a diſtribution ĩt ĩs not eaſy to determine. At the part from which the recurrent nerves ariſe, are alſo ſent oſf twigs which join with the branches oſ the intercoſtal, and which are diſtributed on the heart, where they form a plexus on the pericardium. The two trunks of the eighth pair now deſcend by the æſophagus to the ſtomach, where plexuſes are produced, whence the ſtomach is plentifully ſupplied with nerves, and ſome are ſent to the diaphragm, the liver, and the pancreas. From theſe are ſent branches, which contribute to form plexuſes on the ſpleen and kidneys. Near the cæliac artery the eighth pair alſo unites with the great ſemi- lunar ganglion, formed by the two intercoſtal nerves. I have been the more particular with regard ro the eighth pair of nerves, Chap. 28. Sympathetic Nerve, &. 287 plex manner in which the nerves are united to each other, and to evince the carefſul proviſion which is made to ſupply the moſt important viſcera from a voriety of ſources. The ninth pair or lingual, riſes from the inferior part of the corpora pyramidalia, and paſſes out through the occipital bone. Afſter they have arrived on the outſide of the cranium, they adhere firmly for ſome way to the eighth and the intercoſtal; then aſter ſending a branch to communicate with the cervical nerves, they enter the tongue and are loſt in ĩts ſubſtance. The tenth pair of the head is by ſome anatomiſts conſidered as the firſt of the vertebral. It riſes by ſeparate threads from the ſide of the ſpinal marrov, paſſes out between the os occipitis and firſt vertebra of the neck, and after having given branches to the great ganglion of the intercoſtal, and ſome of the cervical nerves, is Ioſt in the adjoining muſcles. It has been already mentioned that a brancli of the ſixth pair of nerves, joined by a twig from the fiſth, accompanies the internal carotid artery through its bony channel, and paſſing out of the cranium, both united conſtitute the beginning of the great intercoſtal or ſympathetic nerve. As ſoon as the nerve has got without the cranium, it is connected a little way with the eighth and ninth pairs ; ſeparating from theſe it forms a large ganglion, into which enter branches ſrom the tenth of the head and from the firſt and ſecond pairs of the cervical nerves. Thence running down the neck with the carotid artery, and diſtributing nerves to the adjoining muſcles, it forms another ganglion as ĩt is about to enter the thorax, whence nerves are ſent to the trachea and heart; thoſe which go to the heart being united with nerves from the eighth pair. Below the ſubclaviãn artery the fibres of the intercoſtal unite to form a third ganglion. After this the trunk oſ the intercoſtal paſes down by the ſpine, cloſe to the tranſverſe proceſes, through the cavity of rhe thorax. In this courſe all the dorſal nerves as they come from the ſpine contribute to ĩts increaſe by the addition of twigs on each ſide. Deſce nding ſtill lower it receives ſimilar acceſſions from the nerves which come out between the lumbar vertebræ and os ſacrum. At the extremity of the os coccygis the intercoſtals of the oppoſite ſides are turned inwards, and unite with each other. The intercoſtal is larger in the thorax than it is eſther above or below. From the part whence the ſiſth, ſixth, ſeventh, eighth and ninth dorſal nerves are ſent ro the intercoſtal, come out as many branches, which form an anterior trunk called the ſmall intercoſtal nerve. This paſſes through the poſterior part of the diaphragm to form with the greatintercoſtal of the oppoſite ſice, and vith the eighth pair, a large ſemi- lunar ganglion, ſituated between the cæliac and ſuperior meſenteric erteries. Trom this ganglion, as from a center, nerves are ſent to the liver, pancreas, ſpleen, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, and a large part oſ the colon. Several fibres alſo paſſing downwards on the aorta, are joined by other nerves from the poſterior trunk of the intercoſtal, and form plexuſes, which ſupply the kidneys, glandulæ ſuprarenales, &c. They alſo form a plexus about the inſerior meſenteric artery, which accompanies its branches to that part of the colon vhich lies at the leſt ſide of the abdomen, and to the rectum. The fir«t cervical pair of nerves comes out between the firſt and ſecond cervical vertebræ; the ſecond cervical pair between the ſecond and third. Theſe nerves communicate with each other, and with thoſe nerves of the head which paſs down to the neck. They are aſterwards chieſly ſpent on the extenſors of the head, the levators of the ſcapulæ, and the neighbouring integuments. The third cervical nerve paſſes ſfrom the ſpinal marrow, between the third and fourth vertebræ, and joining with the fourth cervical, forms the phrenic nerve, which paſſes down by the ſubclavian veſſels in its way to the diaphragm, on which it is expended. The other branches oſ the third pair are diſtributed to the muſcles of the neck and top of the ſoulde. Hence it has been attempted to account for the pain at the top of the right ſhoulder in inflammations oſ the liver. The diaphragm is ſuppoſed to be aſiected either by its contact with the liver, or by the increaſed weight of that viſcus pulling it downwards; and the moulder i is thought to ſympathize with the diaphragm, becauſe it receives nerves ſrom the ſame ſource. This explanation, however, is very unſatisfactory, ſince nothing is more common than for parts to be ſupplied by the ſame nerves without having any ſuch ſj ympathy. The ſourth cervical nerve, aſter having given off that branch which joins with the third to form the phrenic, paſſes to the axilla, where it forms a plexus with the fiſeh, ſixth, and ſeventh cervical nerves, and with the firſt of the dorſal. After giving ſeveral conſiderable nerves which are diſtributed on the muſcles of the thorax, they form ſeveral branches which paſi down on the arm, and ſupply the whole ſoperior extremity. The dorſal nerves are twelve in number, and all contribute to the formation of the great intercoſtal. The firſt of the dorſal nerves diſfers from the reſt in contributing to the formation of the brachial nerves, and in forming æ large ganglion with the intercoſtal nerve. The dorſal nerves alſo give branches backwards to the ſtrong muſcles ſituated on the ſpine, and which ſerve to erect the body. Their principal trunks accompany the intercoſtal arteries in the groove at the bottom of eàch rib, and are diſtributed with them to the ſides and anterior parts of the thorax. The ſix lower dorſal nerves alſo give branches to the diaphragm and abdomen. The twelfth joins the firſt and ſecond oſ the lumbar, and beſtows nerves on the quadratus Jumborum, pſoas, and iliacus internus. The firſt and ſecond of the Iumbar nerves ſend branches which join with others from the thiægd and fourth, and ſorm a large nerve which paſſes through the ſoramen thyroideum, and is ſpent on the muſcies and integuments at the inſide of the thigh; it is called the obturator or poſterior crural nerve. By brarches from the four upper lumbar nerves is alſo formed the anterior crural nerve, which paſſes out of the abdomen under the ligament of Fallopius, and is dæſtributed on the integuments and muſcles at the fore part of the thigh. A branch oſ this nerve alſo attends the vena Qp he ena to the foot. T he fourth and fifth lumbar nerves contribute with the three ſuperior ſacral nerves to form the largeſt nerve of the body, the ſciaticc. This nerve, aſter giving nerves to he muſcles about the hips, paſſes behind the tuberoſity of the iſchium, and then downwards, cloſe to the poſterior part oſ the] os femoris. Diſtributing nerves through its whole progreſs it runs down the back part of the leg, and terminates in the ſole of the foot. The fourth, fiſth, and ſixth anterior ſacral nerves are much ſmaller than the ſuperior, and are chieſly diſtributed on thè bladder, rectum, and anus. Small lll nerves nerves paſs through the poſterior openings of the os ſacrum, which are diſtributed on the hips and neighbouring muſcles. Nerves may more properly be ſaid to be connected vith the brain than to be produced ſrom it, ſince ſœtuſes have been born with a brain not larger than a hazel ntt, and yet with nerves of the uſual ſize. The uſes of the nerves are very important, but are beſt difcovered ſfrom obſerving the eſfect of their abſence. When a nerve is cut or tied, the part to which it belonged is inſtantly deprived of ſenſation, and the will has no longer any command over it. The nerves are therefore the inſtruments of ſenſation, and the organs by means of which the brain maintains a communication with the moſt diſtant parts of the body. Aſter having conſidered the ſtructure of the different parts of the human body, can we reſrain from pauſing a few moments to contemplate ſo wonderful a fabric? But man is only a ſingle inſtance oſ the wiſdom of Providence; every part of the world contains animals, the ſtructure of which is not leſs complex than our own, and the conſtitutions oſ which are ſuited to the climates they inhabit. All of them are furnihed with organs for their ſubſiſtence, their defence, and their enjoyment, and theſe organs are adapted to their ſeveral neceſſities, and have correſponding relations in the objects, as vell animate as inanimate, which ſurround them. Not only the ſurface of the earth, however, but the atmoſphere, the ocean, the herbage, the ſoil, teem with the animal creation. How far this ſyſtem may extend we know not; but obſervation has hitherto continually enlarged our proſpects, without marking a ſingle limit; and it is not improbable, that the animal vhich duells on the body of another, may itſelf be a theatre of life, on which ſtill more minute animals take their ſport and paſtime. From theſe views ſhall we turn to the heavenly bodies, and ſuppoſe that ſuch vaſt maæſſes of matter are deſtitute of inhabitants? The planets as well as the earth receive the rays oſ the ſun, and ſome of them which are far removed from his light, are furniſhed vith moons. Were theſe moons, which are only viſible by the teleſcope, deſigned for our amuſement, or for the uſe of beings placed ſufficiently near to profit by their influence? What ſhall we think of thoſe ſtill larger bodies, the ſtars, which multiply upon us without end, in proportion as we are furniſhed with more extenſive means of obſerving them. But the Deity has placed no bounds to our admiration; for he has made ſpace appear to the human mind neceſſarily infinite, and time, everlaſting. The figure in the annexed plate (XIV.) repreſents the diſtribution of the nerves. a, A part of the firſt branch of the fifth pair of nerves, called the ophthalmic branch, going out of the orbit, and windir upon the forehead. b, The orbital branch of the ſecond branch of the fiſih pair, going out at the foramen below the orbit, and diſtributing Its branches on the lower part of the face below the eye. c, A part of the maxillary branch of the third branch of the fiſth pair of nerves, going out by a canal in the lower jaw-bone by the ſide of the chin and lower lip. ã, The trunk of the eighth pair of nerves, joined with the recurrent nerve,. 12. The trunk of the eighth pair of nerves cut off. The ſpinal recurrent nerve. g&, A brarch of it belonging to the cleidomaſtoideus and ſterno- maſtoideus muſcle. The conjunction of the recurrent nerve with the third of the cervical nerves. Aſterwards the recurrent winds backwards. i, i, The left intercoſtal nerve. The upper cervical ganglion of the intercoſtal nerve. A branch of the ſecond cervical nerve, going to join the ganglion æ. A branch of the firſt cervical nerve, going to the ſame ganglion æ. 9, Branches from the cervical nerves, going to the intercoſtal nerve. The ganglion of the intercoſtal nerve in the upper art of the thorax. 7, &c. Branches, by which the intercoſtal nerve is conjoined with the ſpinal nerves; viæ. by the ſeventh and eighth of the cervical, and all the dorſal and lumbar. 5, The extremity of the intercoſtal nerve, belonging to the firſt nerve r, and the ſecond s of the os ſacrum. A conſiderable nerve, ariſing ſfrom the intercoſtal near the vertebræ of the back; here indeed it has ſix beginnings, according to thoſe branches by which the intercoſtal is joined with the fourth, fifth, ſixth, ſeventh, eighth, and ninth dorſal. Which nerve, here cut off, paſſes through the diaphragm into the abdomen, where it joins itſelf with the eighth pair oſf nerves oſ the brain, and with other branches oſ the intercoſtal nerve, &e. A branch of thę intercoſtal nerve. W, w, &c. Branches by which the right intercoſtal nerve is joined with the ſpinal nerves. x, 57 Thoſe branches of the right intercoſtal, which r, s, repreſent of the left. z, 2, Branches. A, A, Branches. B, B, The firſt pair of cervical nerves. C, C, Branches, by which the ſecond pair oſ cervical nerves is joined with the third. D, D, The fecond pair of cervical nerves. E, E, Branches, by which the third pair of cervical nerves is joined with the fourth. F, F, The third pair of cervical nerves. G, G, The fourth pair oſ cervical nerves. H IX, HIKL, The phrenic nerves, ariſing by two origins, the one H from the fourth cervical 7air, and the other I from the fifthh X, X, Their rtfrunks, the leſt oſ which, upon account of the point of the hearts being turned to the leſt ſide, is bended towards the left. L, The extremity of the right, branched out upon the diaphragm. M, M, The fifth pair of cervical nerves. N, N, The ſixth pair of cervical nerves. O, O, The ſeventh pair of cervical nerves. P, P, Branches of the firſt pair of dorſal nerves, going to join the eighth pair of cervicals. Q R, &c. The coſtal branches of the dorſal nerves, which run according to the length of the ribs. Q, Q, The firſt,  R , the ſecond, S, S, the third, T, T, the fourth, U, U, the fiſth, V, V, the ſixth, V, W, the ſeventh, X, X, the eighth, Y, Y, the ninth, Z, Z, the tenth, æ, æ, the eleventh, 6, B, the telſth. 3, A bianch of the ſecond coſtal nęrve, which paſſes through the external intercoſtal muſcle, inmedintely under the origin of the ſerratus magnus, vhich proceeds from the ſecond rib; aſtervards it bends itſelf back wards according to the directions of the origin oſthe ſerratus magnus, and then diſributes itſelf upon the cutſide of the lauſimus dorſi under the ſkin. lll A ſimilar branch of the third coſtal nerve, paſſing through in the ſame manner, and diſtributed as the former. A ſimilar branch of the fourth coſtal nerve, which when it has got under the ſkin, winds partly buckwards, ænd partly forwards and downwards. A ſimilar branch oſ the fifth coſtal nerve, which paſſes firſt through the external intercoſtal muſcle, then through the head of the external oblique, that part of it which riſes from the fiſth rib, and afterwards runs along under the ſkin. , n, Branches of the ſeventh ſ, the eighth,, and the ninth coſtal nerve æ, diſtributed to the internal part of the external oblique muſcle of the abdomen. A branch of the tenth coſtal nerve, which,. aſter having paſſed through the external intercoſtal muſde and the tranſverſe, runs forwards between the tranſverſe and internal oblique muſcles towards the rectus muſcle, and paſſcs through it likewiſe by the aponeuroſes of the oblique muſcles o the parts below the ſin. A branch of the eleventh coſtal nerve, hiea follows the ſame courſe with that of the tenth, A branch of the tenth coſtal nerve, beſtowed t on the inſide of the internal oblique muſcle. A branch of the eleventh coſtal nerve, beſtowed the ſame way as the Iaſt, .. o, /, Theſe appear to be branches of the twelſth coſtal nerve, running between the tranſverſe and internal oblique muſcles. e, This is a branch of the ſirſt peir of lumbar nerves, running likewiſe between the tranſverſe and interal oblique muſcles. , 5, Branches of the twelſth pair of coſtal nerves. æ, 7, The firſt pair of lumbar nerves. v;, A branch of the firſt pair of lumbar nerves. ò, The ſecond pair oſ lumbar nerves. x The ſecond of the lumbar nerves, joins with the third, and with the upper root of the nerve I. v, A nerve, marked ò, on the leſt ſide, ariſing here by a double origin, one from the firſt pair of lumbar nerves, and the other from the ſecond. u, The third of the lumbar nerves. T, The fourth of the lumbar nerves. A, A branch, which is ſent from the fourth pair of lumbar nerves to join the ſciatic. ], 0, The fifth pair of lumbar nerves. A, A, The firſt pair of nerves of the os ſacrum. E, E, The ſecond pair of nerves of the os ſacrum. That on the right ſide is joined by an intermediate branch with the third. .m, §, The third pair of nerves of the os ſacrum. 3, 2, The fourth pair of nerves of the os ſacrum. , A nerve, whoſe origin is marked F on the leſt ſide, emerging from the great pſoas muſcle, and going down along with it into the groin. v, A nerve, which ariſes by a double origin from the ſecond lumbar nerve 9, where its roots are cut through. ., A branch of the crural nerve, which is conjoined into one vith the nerve, . 1, 1, A conſiderable nerve on each ſide, which ariſing by two roots, the one from the ſecond and third, and the other from the fourth of the lumbar nerves, runs down firſt under the great pſoas muſcle, then by the ſide of the pelvis to the upper part of the foramen thyroldeum, where it divides into two branches, the anterior, 2, and the poſterior, 3. 2, The anterior, goes out immediately above the obturator muſcle by a ſinus, in the upper part oſ the foramen thyroideum. 3,3, 4, The poſterior, paſſes through the ſame ſinus, and, running immediately down between the two obturators, gives a branch to the external; it goes ont then by that external branch, 4. 5, The ſciatic nerve. 6, 6, The crural nerves. 7,7, Branches of the crural nerves, golng to the internal iliacs. 8, 8, The external branches of the crural nerves, which running down the thighs, give branches to the internal iliac muſcles, the muſculi recti of the leg, the vaſti interni, the crurei, and the vaſti externi. 9, 9, The internal branches of the crural nerves, which run down the thigh, and in their courſe give of branches to the vaſti interni. 19, 10, The roots of the nerves. 1I, 11I, The roots of the nerves. 12, Here the internal branch of the right crural nerve, emerging between the muſcles gracilis and ſartorius, is cut off. 13, The root oſ that branch. r4, The internal branch of the left crural nerve cut off. 5, Branches of the ſciatic nerves. They produce the branches, 17, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21: of which 17, 17, belong to the lorg extenſors of the toes; 18, to the peroneus longus; 19 is ſubcutaneous, and divides itſelf into tvo branches, vhich anſwer to the brunches 20 and 215 20, 21, are a variation of the branch Iꝗ, dividing itſelf ſooner into 20, 2I. 22, The fiſth, ſixth, ſeventh, and eighth pair oſ cervical nerves. A brarch, which, ariſing ſrom the above nerves in their courſe to the axiila, is diſtributed to the inſide of the pectoral muſcle. A branch, which, ariſing in the ſame manner from the above nerves, is beſtowed upon the inſide of the ſerratus anticus. 25, A branch, which, going off like the former from the above nerves, belongs to the muſcle called latiſſimus dorſi. A branch of the ſixth pair of cervical nerves, beſtowed upon the ſerratus magnus muſcle, running down according to the direction of that muſcle, and aſterwards under the latiſſimus dorſi. 28, 29, 30; 27, 28, 29, 30. The four large brachial nerves, in which thoſe running on each ſide by the axillæ principally terminate. 27, 27, The firſt, which in a manner perforate the muſculi coracobrachiales. 28, 28, The ſecond, which run according to the length of the humerus as far as the bending of the arm, and  thence by the fore-arm, down to the palm of the hand. 29, 29, The third, which run on the bac part of the humeri. 30, The fourth, which run down, according to the length of the humerus, to the poſterior part of the large condyle, and thence by the forearm to the palm of the hand. A branch of the third brachial nerve 29. The firſt of the brachial nerves 27, after it has run a little way under the coracobrachialis muſcle, makes its way through it, and afterwards runs under the ſhorter head of the biceps, giving branches to this, and the internal brachial muſcle; it is cut off, at 33. A branch of the firſt ofthe brachial nerves, which jt ſends off to join the ſecond. The ſame in the left arm. 35, Here the ſecond trunks of the brachial nerves 28, 28, give branches to the pronatores and teretes, the radiales interni, the ſublimes, and palmares longi muſcles. 36, Conſiderable branches oſ the ſecond brachial nerves, which ſend off branches to the profundi, and the long flexors of the thumbs; and afterwards 37, 37, get in between theſe muſcles, and run down to the pronatores quadrati muſcles. This ſecond of the brachial nerves, paſſes through the ligament oſ the wriſt on the inſide; aftervards, 39 proceeds to the wriſt, where it divides itſelf into five branches, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44Of which The firſt, gives a branch to the third lumbricãl muſcle, aſter which it divides itſelſ into two; one branch running along the ſide of the ring finger next the middle finger, and the other along the ſide of the middle finger next to the ring finger. The ſecond, gives a branch to the ſecond lumbrical, and afterwards divides likæwiſc into two; one branch running along the ſide of the middle finger, next the fore finger, and the other along the ſide of the fore finger next the middle finger. The third, gives a branch to the firſt lumbrical, and aterards runs upon the ſide of the fore finger next the thumb. The fourth, gees to the thumb, and, there dividing into two, runs upon each ſide oſ it. The fiſth, which is here cut off, gives a branch to the ſhort abductor of the thumb. And then it gets between the ſhort flexor and the muſculus opponens of thæe thumb, and belongs to the opponens. 45, Continuations of the brachial nerves. The third pair of brachials 29, 259, aſter having run backwards by the ſhoulder-bones from the axillæ, and then between the external brachial muſcles on the one ſide, and the long and ſhort heads of the bicipites on the other, and aſterwards between the internal brachials and long ſupinators, emerge here 45, 45, between theſe Iaſt- mentioned muſcles, and thence proceed to the inſide of the fore-arm, where having given oſf branches to the long ſupinators and external radial muſcles, they paſs through the ſhort ſupinators 46, 46. 47, Nerves cut oſf. 48, Branches of the fourth brachial nerve, 30, going to the external brachial muſcle 49, 49, to the internal ulnar, 50, to the profundus. A branch of the ſame, which paſſes under the internal ulnar to the back part of the extremity of the fore-arm, and makes a ſubcutaneous nerve. r giving o this branch, the fourth brachial nerve runs beſore the ligament of the wriſt invards, towards the palm of the hand, where it divides into the branches 52, 53, 534. Of which The firft remarkable one, ſpreading itſelf in the vriſt under the tendons of the profundus and the lumbricales inuſcles, its branches are diſtributed principal lly to theſe, viz. the abductor of the little finger, the adductor of the fourth metacarpal bone, the interoſæous muſcles, the adductor of the thumb, the ſhort ſlexor oſ the thumb, and the abductor of the fore finger. The ſecond, afier it has given off the ſubcurareous branch which is here cut away, and another to the abductor of the little finger, runs along the back pert oſ the little finger. The third, dividing into two at the roots of the ring finger and little finger; one branch runs along the ſide of the litrle finger next the ring finger, and the other along the ſide of the ring ſinger C mn a Pp. XXIX. CIRCULATION OF THE BLOOD. Structure f the Heart, and Circulation in cold-Llocdled Animoli — Cireulution in the avcarm-lcoded Adnimals Courſe f the Blood through the Lungs Through the reſt of the B:dyRanifcations f Arteriesl alvular Structure of VeinsDifierent from ihe Structure of Lymphatics / H E ſtructure and uſes of the organs concerned A in the circulation of the blood have been already conſidered, and it was farther remarked that the heart of man is of a dupſex conſtruction, in other words, that it has rwo auricles and rwo ventricles. With a view to perſpicuity, before we proceed to the circulation in the human body, it will be neceſſary to mention the ſtructure of the heart in certain animals in which it is more ſimple. In frogs, ſerpents, and other cold- blooded animals, the heart conſiſts of only two cavities, an auricle and a ventricle; from the auricle the blood paſſes into the ventricle, from the ventricle it is driven into the arteries, from the arteries it is received into the veins, and by the veins is again brought back to the auricle. ] This being well underſtood, it cannot be difficult to comprehend the courſe of the circulation in man, and the warm-blooded animals, in which the only difference is, that the heart being double, or conſiſting of ſour cavities, the blood performs two circles inſtead of one. From the anterior auricle the blood paſſes into the anterior ventricle; from the anterior ventricle ĩt ĩs conducted by the pulmonary artery to the lungs, and from the lungs, the pulmonary veins bring it back to the boſterior auricle; from the poſterior auricle it paſſes into the poſterior ventricle; from the poſterior ventricle it ĩs carried to every purt of the body, by means of the aorta and its branches, and thence is again brought back by the venæ cavæ to the anterior auricle, whence it proceeded. In this manner, throughout life, the bloòd is conſtandy performing two circles; a leſſer between the heart and the lungs, and æ larger between the heart and the reſt of the bod ] The two auricles and ventricles are of equal capecity, and corre ſpon id in their contractions. From theſe circumſtances it is evident, that the ſame quantity of blocd paſes through the lungs in a given time, as through all the reſt of the body, and, conſequently, that the circulation muſt be much more rapid in the lungs than in other paris. It is ſuppoſed that about two ounces of blood arc thrown from each ventricle of the heart at every contraction. The heart, however, though the moſt remarkable, is not the only organ of circulation; ſince every veſſel through which the blnod paſſes aſiſts, by its contractile powers, to propel ĩts contents. The ſudden contractions oſ the heart, by which the blood is thrown into the arteries, occaſion their pulſation, which is moſt violent in the lurge ”unks, gradually becombs leſs remarkable as they ramify and recede from the heart, and is not at all perceptible in the veins, which receive their blood ſrom the arteriess. The contraction of the ventricles, by which the blood is propelled from the heart, is called the ſyſtole; the dilatation, by which the blood is received into them, the diaſtole, The ſtructure oſ the heart in the tortoiſe and ſome other amphibious animals is intermediate between that of cold- blooded animals and warm-blooded. The heart has two diſtinct auricles, without any communication: and under theſe, there is the appearance of two ventricles ſimilar in ſhape to thoſe of the latter claſs: but they may be conſidered as one cavity; for the ventricle ſends out nut only the pulmonary artery, but likewiſe the aorta; for there is a paſſage in the ſeptum, by which the ventricles communicate freely, and the blood paſſes from the left into the right one. From the aorta the blood returns into the right auricle, while that from the pulmonary artery returns to the leſt auricle, from which it is ſent to the left ventricle, &c. ſo that only a part of the blood is ſent to the lungs, the reſt going immediately into the aorta; hence the animal is not under the neceſſity of breathing ſo often as otherwiſe it would be. The ends of the arteries are the beginnings of the veins, which uniting, as the arteries divided, at length form large trunks, which generally correſpond with the trunks of the arterſes, ſrom which, by the medium of ſmaller branches, they received their contents. But though all arteries terminate in veins, yet the minuteneſ of their ramifications, before this takes place, is various; while ſome tranſmit the red globules, others exclude them, and tranſmit nothing but ſerum. A circumſtance contributing greatly to the progreſs of the blood in the veins is their valvular ſtructure, ſitting them for deriving aſſiſtance from preſſure; and ve find accordingly in the limbs, and wherever elſe any advantage could be obtained from this circumſtance, that the veins are furniſhed with valves, while in the cavities of the body, where they are not ſo much preſſed by the action of muſcles, this part oſ their ſtructure is vanting. The motion of the fluids of the valvular lymphatic ſyſtem is quite diſtinct from the circulation of the blood. Theſe veſſels begin by open mouths, which perform the office of abſorption, and their contents are not derived, like thoſe oſ the red veins, from the extremities of arteries; their fluids are therefore propelled, without any aid from the heart, by their own contractile powers. The moſt remarkable functions, to which the circulation of the blood is ſubſervient, are ſecretion, the nouriſhment of the body, and certain changes which the blood undergoes in its paſſage through the lungs; of theſe it will be proper to treat in the chapters immediately ſucceeding. C H A P. XXX. SECRETIOVN, EXCRETION, ABSOR?PTION, AND NOURISHMENT. General Effects of Secretion. Thæ Glandi —E vcretion, Secretion ef Bile —Hoa this Function is performed in Fihes.æAborption ILymphatic Glands Nouriſbment or Retaratica if the Rod; Bires become more ſelid in old Age. HERE is no function of the body which is more calculated to excite our aſtoniſhment and admiration, than that of ſccretion. By ſecretion ve ſee one ſluid, the blood, modiſied more variouſly and more exquiſitely than the human mind can eaſily conceive, or ever hope to explain; in one part, ſecreted fluids, varying in different races of animals according to their food, are endued with a power of diſſolving the aliment, and fitting it for the nouriſhment of the body; in other parts, ſecretion furniſhes fluids for Iubricating the organs concerned in the various functions of the animal machine. In ſome animals the moſt poverſul odours, in many the moſt deadly poiſons, and in all, that wonderſul fluid by which their race is perpetuated, are the products of ſecretion. So far are we from diſcovering the nature of ſecretion, and the cauſes of the different properties of the ſluids which are ſecreted, that we in reality know little more of this ſunction, than the general outlines of the ſtructure of the parts concerned in it. We ſee a gland, with an artery, vein, and excretory duct connected to it, but whether the ſecreted ſiuid is formed by exudation through the coats of the minute arteries diſn tributed in the gland, or whether it is poured out from the open extremities of arteries into ſmall receptacles, and is thence received into the excretory duct, or in what other mode the change wrought on the blood conveyed to the gland is efſected, we are entirely ignorant. So different, however, are the properties of ſecreted ſiuids from thoſe oſ the blood, that it is probable ſomething more happens than a mere ſeparation of principles, which previouſly exiſted in that uid. By ſome phyſiologiſts it has becn imagined, that ſecretion may be explained on the ſimple ſuppoſition of a difference of diameter in the veſſels from which the ſecreted ſluids are poured out. On this idea it has been advanced, that the thinneſt iuids are formed by the arteries oſ the ſmalleſt diameter, and the more denſe by arteries of a larger ſize; but ĩt is evident, that though the ſmaller arteries would exclude the larger particles, ſtill the larger arteries would ſuſfer the ſmaller particles to paſ5s through them, and thus the ſecretion be in ſome meaſure confounded. Excretion, like ſecretion, is perſormed in general by arteries. The term ſecretion is applied to the formation of thoſe fluids which are ſubſervient to ſome purpoſe in the animal machine; that of excretion to the formation of ſuch as are apparently of no particuler uſe, and which ſeem to be ſeparated for no other end than to be diſcharged from the body. It is diſficult, however, to apply theſe diſtinctions to particular caſes, ſince there is hardly any one of theſe fluids, the production of which is not in ſome way uſeſul, and but very few which may not be conſidercd as in ſome degree excrementitious. Both ſecretion and excretion are in many paris of the body performed by the minute ramifications of arxXxa teries opening on the ſurface of membranes, without the intervention of glands. Fluids, which are deſigned for the lubrication of paſſages, are very geerally diſcharged into ſmall bags or ſollicles, whence they are expreſſed, when their preſence is moſt neceſſary. Few of the ſecreted fluids are diſcharged from the body exactly in the ſtate in which they were firſt prepared, but gradually become more viſcid or acrid; ſince, while they remain in the receptacles deſtined for their preſervation, their more watery parts are continually talken away by the action of the abſorbents. We have hithertd conſidered ſecretion to be on every occaſion the work of arterics, but it is now neceſſary. to take notice of a remarkable exception to this rule, ænd to inform the reader, that the moſt copious ſecretion in the body is pe rmed by veins. The blood, which is carried by th rteries to the body at large, ĩs generally returned by the readieſt paſſages to the heart; but ĩt is ordered otheiviſe with reſpect to that which is ſent to the bowels. The blood from the abdominal viſcera is received by a large vein, furnihed with remaerkably denſe coats, and called, from entering the liver as through a gate, the vena portarum; this vein is diſtributed through the ſubſtance of the liver, in the ſame manner as arteries are diſtributed through other glands. The liver, however, is furniſhed with an artery which may poſſibly have ſome influence in the preparation of the bilee The ramifications of this artery inoſculate vith thoſe of the vena portarum, and the blood from both is returned together to the heart, by veins which empty themſelves into the vena cava. A fact ſo contradictory to the analogy of the other ſecretions cannot fail to excite our wonder and curioſity. Our curioſity we cannot hope to gratify, ſince the preſent ſtate of our knowledge, with reſpect to the nature of ſecretion, gives us little room to expect a diſcovery of the advantages which are derived from this br any other peculiarity in our frame; but our wonder will be leſſened by conſidering, that the ſame peculiarity takes place in certain animals, under circumſtances ſtill more remarkable In fiſhes, a ſingle artery ariſes from the ventricle of the heart, which is entirely diſtributed on the gills; from the gills the blood is gradually collected into a large veſſel, correſponding to the aorta in man, and diſtributing the blood to every part of the body. From the bowels, however, the veſſels ſtill again unite, and form a large trunk, which, entering the liver, performs the ſecretion of the bile, in the third circle of the blocd, ſince it paſſed through the heart; whereas in man the blood, in paſſing through the liver, ĩs only in its ſecond circle or courſe. Abſorption, as was before remaerked, is performed by a ſyſtem of veſſels quite diſtinct from thoſe concerned in the circulation of the blood. Their appearance, ſtructure, and courſe through the body, have been already deſcribed. The uſes of the abſorbents in the animal œconomy are of the moſt important naturee. By the abſorbents all the nouriſhment of the body is conveyed from the inteſtines towards the heart; and by the abſorbents thoſe particles, which have become uſcleſs in any of the organs, are taken up, conveyed into the maſs of circulating ſluids, and ultimately diſcharged from the body. The bones themſelves aſſord evidence oſ the action of the abſorbents, as their component particles are continually changing throughout life, and as all the bones loſe conſiderably of their weight in extreme old age. At the ſame time, however, that their actual weight is leſſened, their ſpeciſic gravity is increaſed; for the bones of old people are thinner and more compact in their ſides, and have larger cavities. By chemical analyſis, the proportion of earth is ſound to be increaſed in the progreſs cf life. The abſorbents are particularly numerous in glands, and very probably have their influence in producing the phenomena of ſecretion. The ſluids, which are ſecreted, ſor lubricating the joints and muſcles, and for moiſtening the ſeveral cavities of the body, are continually renovated by the abſorbents, which take up what is already eſfuſed, while more is ſupplied by the arteres. The uſes of the glands connected with the lymphatic veſſels are not well underſtood, but from their being univerſal, and from our not being able to find a ſingle lymphatic veſſel, which does not, in its progreſs towards the heart, paſ's through ſome of them, it may be concluded that their uſes are very impoitant. One of ihe purpoſes, however, which they ſerve, ĩs, probably, to impede any thing injurious, which may be taken up by the abſorbents, from entering the maſs oſf blood; and in this way the minute ramiſications, into which the lymphatics are divided in their paſſage through theſe glands, may perſorm the office of a filter. There are ſeveral arguments which might lead us to believe, that the lymphatic glands belonging to the lacteals have ſome ſhare in digeſtion, or in fitting the chyle for entering the maſ of circulating fluids; but their influence in this reſpect is not proved, nor does it ſeem eaſy to aſcertain it. Several hypotheſes have been formed by ingenious men, with a view to explain the mode in which the abſorbents act in taking in their contents; but as they are but hypotheſes, I ſhall paſs them over in ſilence. As the abſorbents are continually taking away the ſubſtance of the bocly, it was neceſſary that there ſhould be organs, which, by ſurniſing freſh particles, might counterbalance their eſfects; and theſe organs are the arteries. It has been already obſerved that the arteries, for an important purpoſe, convey the blood to every part of the ſyſtem; by means of the blood, however, the arteries not only produce the ſecretions, but furnifh matter to every exhauſted organ of the body; and from one fluid, reſtore the loſt particles of the bones, the muſcles, and the nerves, or whatever other ſolids ſtand in need of repaſ. This oſfice, however, of the arteries, pre-ſuppoſes that there muſt be a ſource, from which they are themſelves ſupplied with the ſubſtance they furniſh to the other organs; and this leads to the conſideration of the important function of digeſtion. C H A Pr. XXXI. D I G E SST I ON. Senſations of Hunger and ThirſtDProgreſi of the Food io the Stomach. Digeſtion, hoav performed by Men and Quadrupeds B) Birds. The Gizuæard of Fols, and its Uſes.Birds of PreyReaumurs Experimenis on the Digeſtion of, FowlsMotion of the Stomach and GixæardDBalls cf Hair found in ihe Stomachs of Quaarateds. Gaſiric Fluid —Stomaeb itſilf parily diſsolved by its Action after DeathFernentation ouly tates place in diſeaſed Stemacs What Subtances are digeſtible, and the contraryPocers of Diglion in different AnimalsCarnimorous.GranivorousGramenivorcusSlceping Auimals —Accommodating Pover of ihe Stomach. lll NIMALS are powerfully admoniſhed to repair the waſte of their bodies by an averſior from the ſenſations of hunger and thirſt, and a deſire of that pleaſure which attends the gratification of theſe appetites. Solid food, being taken into the mouth, is maſticated by the teeth, and mixed with ſaliva and mucus, which, by the preſſure and action of the parts, are very copiouſly exuded. Thus ſoftened and lubricated, the food is conveyed to the root of the tongue, and the lower jaw being now fixed by the ſhutting of the mouth, we are prepared to act with the muſcles which paſs the bone of the lower jaw to that which ſupports the tongue, called the os hyoldes. A convulſive action of theſe muſcles ſuddenly draws forwards the os hyoĩdes, the root of the tongue, and the larynx; the pharynx is enlarged, the food is forced into the gullet, and in ĩts paſſage preſſes down the epiglottis, ſo as to prevent any thing from getting 31.] Po of the Foot 232:3 jnto the windpipe. The parts beſore thrown. into action are now relaxed; the food is received by the gullet, and is regularly but rapidly conveyed to the ſtomach. Fluids are conveyed to the ſtomach in the ſame manner as ſolidsss. So perfect and exact is the action of the gt ullet in propelling its contents, that even air cannot lude i its graſp, which is broved by our having the power of ſwallowing air, by taking a mouthful i it, and uſing the ſame efforts which ve employ in ſwallowing our foodl. Aſter the food nas reached the ſtom h. it is ſtinn further ſoſtened, and at length reduced to a pulpy conſiſtence, by means whi ich we ſhall preſently examine. It now paſſes through the pylorus, or right orific of the ſtomach, into the duodènum, where it is retained for ſome time, and attenuated by the admixture of the bile from the liver, and the pancreatic juice from the pancreas. From the dnodenum it paſſes into the jejunum and ileum, in which it is moved back wards and forwards by the muſcular contraction of their coats, called their periſtaltic motion. As it proceeds, its more fluid parts are continually taken up by the lacteals, and it conſequently gradually becomes of a thicker conſiſtence. From the ſmall inteſtines it paſſes through the valve of the colon into the large. Here it probably undergoes ſtill further changẽs, and more of its fluid parts are abſorbed by the lacteals. It is at length received by the end of the inteſtinal tube, called the rectum, and being of no further 1ſ, is diſcharged from the body. The chyle, which is the produẽt of. the digeſted aliment, aſter it enters the lymphatics, is conveyed to the heart, and mixed æith the maſs of blood. Let us now examine the inſtruments, which nature employs in ſo wonderſul a proceſs, as that of fitting dead matli ter for receiving active properties, and being endued vith life.  A great many ſubſtagces ma ĩ enter the lacteals along vith the ch yle, even ſolids reduced to fine powder. When indigo has been thrown into the- inteſtine of a ſheep, I have ſeen the chyle rendered quite blue: now indigo is not ſoluble in water, but is a ſolid reduced into a very fine powder. So muſk gets into the chyle, giving it a ſtrong ſmell, and a great variety of other ſubſtances of various colours, various taſtes, and various ſmells, each of them giving colour, or taſte, or ſmell, to the chylee. Nevertheleſs the lacteals ſeem to poſſeſs ſome power of rejection, ſince green vitriol, either exhibited along with the food, or thrown into the inteſtine aſter the animal has been opened, vhile chyle was forming and abſorbing, gives no colour on infuſion of gall being applied to the chyle; nor if galls are thrown into the ſtomach along with the food, or if an infuſion of them is in like manner thrown into the inteſtine, when an animal is opened, during the time that the chyle is flowing into the lacteals, do they give any colour upon a ſoluton of green vitriol being appſiea to the chyle ?. Dr. Fordyce mentions ſeveral inſtances of the ſtrong aſſimilating powers of the ſtomachs of certain animals; ; ſuch as fiſn thriving, increaſing in ſize, and excluding fæculent matter when confined in ſpring water, without any perceptible ſource of nouriſhment, and even when a communication with the air was cut off. He alſo remarks, that not only farinaceous and other bland ſubſtances are found to be attacked by inſects, but àlſa jalap, ſcammony, hemlock, and the moſt deadly vegetable poiſons. Even cantharides are greedily dej a Fordyce on Digeſtion, P2?z?2 lli voured by two ſpecies of inſects, not part of them picked out from other parts, but the whole entirely, vithout leaving a veſtige of any the leaſt part of the cantharis undevoured. Dr. Fordyce has procured theſe inſects from cheſts of cantharides imported from Sicily, and which had lived upon the cantharis for ſeveral months. After being waſhed with vater ſlightly, theſe inſects have juices perfectly bland, ſo that if they are bruiſed and applicd to any the moſt tender and ſenſible ſurface of the human body, they produce no inflammation, nor is there any appearance of their poſſeſſing any matter having a ſtimulating quality. There are two different proceſſes, which in general ſeem eſſential to digeſtion; viæ. trituration and the action of a certain fluid or menſtruum All quadrupeds are furniſhed with teeth, by which they in ſome meaſure deſtroy the texture oſ their ſfood beſore ĩt paſſes into the ſtomach. The inſtrument of, trituration in granivorous fowls, and which anſwers the purpoſes of the teeth of quadrupeds, is the gizzard, through which all their food paſſes, before it enters the organ, which may properly be denominated their ſtomach. Among fowls, however, there are ſome which have a ſtomach purely membranous, as the eagle, the hawk, and birds of prey in general. Theſe have neither gizzard nor teeth, but they are furniſhed with a ſharp and crooked beak, which, by tearing their food to pieces, ſerves in ſome meaſure to prepare it for the action of the other inſtrument of digeſtion, a fluid endued with peculiar qualities, and which, as far as our obſervations extend, ſeems to be in common to all animals. The gizzard is an organ compoſed of very thick and ſtrong muſcles; it is lined internally with a ſubſtance ing down glaſ;, and which is always found to contain ſmall ſtones of the hardeſt materials the bird can procure. y the e help of theſe ſtones, and by means of the herd internal coat of the gizzard, and the force of ts muſul: coat, the focd is eſfectually ground down, and fitted for entering the inteſtines.  Spalanzani, and others, have denied (fſays Dr. Fordyce) that they were of this uſe, and have affirmed that the ſtones werę picked up by mere accident, the animals miſtaking them for ſeedss. But I have examined this partcularly in experiments I made in hatching eggs with artificial heat; I have hatched vaſt numbers, and frequently have given the chickens ſmall ſeeds whole, taing care that they ſould have no ſtones. In this caſe the ſeed was hardly digeſted, and many oſ the chickens diedc With the ſame treatment in every reſpect, others who had their ſeeds ground, or have been allowed to pick up ſtones, have none of them been Ioſt. With tolerable care, when common chickens are once hatched by artificial heat, they are eaſily brought up without a hen, as by inſtinct they will keep in that part of the furnàæ where there is the proper degree of heat, and the proper expoſure to air. Inſtinct alſo teaches them what ſubſtances they ſhould chooſe for focd, and vhat quantit of ſtores it is neceſſary to intermix with it. For if a very large quantity of ſmall ſtones is mixed with a ſmall proportion cf grain, they will pick out the grãin, ſo that the proportion of ſtones which they ſallow hall be very little, if at all greater than when only a few were intermixed. In thoſe I examined the proportion of ſtones were not at all greater when there was a lerge quantity of them mixed with the grain, than when there was a ſmull proportion; and I have oſten obſerved them chooſing one picce of ſtone, and rejecting another. Birds have alſo an evident inſtinct even to diſtinguiſh one kind of earth from another, as may eaeſily be ſeen in Canary birds; the hen, at the time of her laying her egęs, requires a quantity of calcareous earth, otherwiſe The is ſiequently killed by the eggs not paſſing ſorward properly, as I have in many inſtances obſerved; to one ſet of hens a piece of old mortar was given, which they broke down and ſwallowed, certainly not miſtaking it for Canary ſceed, or any ind of food, but diſtinguiſing it ſfrom a piece of brick, which they did not either brea down or ſvallow; another ſet at the ſame time were kept without any calcareous earth; many of theſe died, while the others, although otherwiſe exactly in the ſame circumſtances, were none of them loſt. It appears therefore that birds have a neceſſity for ſtenes being ſwa llowed for digeſtion, and earths for other purpoſes, and that they have an inſtinct which diſpoſes them to chooſe the proper quantity and quality required. Moreover, as Mr. Hunter obſerves, the noiſe of the grinding may be heard, and therefore there can be no doubt that this ſtomach Is made to contain ſtores for the ſame purpoſes for which teeth are employed *. The Iobſter is furniſhed, for the comminution of its food, with an apparatus which is ſituated at the pylorus. It conſiſts of two bonv ſurfaces, ſormed into ridges, which are applied to each other like thoſe of the molares. They are alſo' covered, like our teeth, with enamel, and furniſhed with muſcles, by vhich the action of grinding is performed. In order to diſcover the power of the giææard, Reaumur gave to a turkey ſnull tubes of glũ, five Iines in length and four in diameter; theſe were broken in the gizzard in twenty four hourss. In the place oſ glaſs tubes he ſubſtituted ubes of tinned * Fordyce on Digeſion, ꝑ. 24, &e. li iron, ſeven lines in length and two in diameter, cloſed vith ſolder at each end. Some of theſe were indented by the action of the gizzard, and others cruſhed quite flat. Similar tubes, phced between the teeth of a vice, required a force of four hundred and thirty-ſix pounds and a half to produce the ſame effects. Incloſing in tin tubes, properly perforated, ſome grains oſ barley, ſome unboiled, ſome boiled, and others peeled, and letting them remain a day or two in the ſtomach, he ound them only a IttIe ſwelled. The ſame experiment being tried with meal, the ſame conſcquences were obſcrved, as it did not become in the ſmalleſt degree gutiid. IFrom theſe experment Reaumur concluded, that digeſtion, in birds provided with a gizzard, was chieſly performed by means of trituration. Such are the powers oſ the gizæard; but thoſe of the membranous ſtomach, though oſ a very different nature, ære not leſs aſtoniſning. It is well known that birds of prey, which allov every part of the animal they de vour without much di*tintion, have the pover oſ throwing up ſuch parts of their food as they cannot digeſt. Taling advantage õſ this circumſtance, the ſame naturaliſt gave tubes, ſimilar to thoſe above mentioned, and iilled with fleſh, to a buzzard havk; in twenty-four hours the tubes being thrown up, the meat wEich they contained was reduced to an olly pulp, and with no appearance of putridity. At the end of forty eight hours, the decompoſition was ſtill more perſect, the pulp vas more attenuated and blanched, and that conſtæantly without any ſæell. The tubes being filled with the bones oſ young pigeons, inſtead of butchers meat, theſe were converted ; into a jelly in twenty- four hours. Beef bones, very hard, and deprived both of fleſ: and marro, out of forty grains Ioſt eight in twenty-four hours, and in three days were totally diſſolved. Grain and ſruit expoſed to the ſame proceſs, were very little iſ at all affected. Digeſtion, therefore, in birds of prey is perſormed by a fluid, which acts only upon animal matter. This fluid is very abundant in the ſtomachs oſ theſe animals. Small pieces of ſponge, of thirteen grains, ſhut up in the tubes, weighed three grains more when thrown up. Notvithſtanding theſc eſfects of the digeſtive organs, the motions of the ſtomach and the Siæẽur are ſcarcely perceptiblee. There is reaſon, however, to believe, that the little motion they have is very regular. On examining the ſurfate of the balls of hair vhich are found in the ſtomachs of animals which lick theĩr coats, the hairs in each hemiſphere ſeem to ariſe from a center, and to have the ſame direction, which ĩs circular, and correſponding with what would appear to he the axis of motion. This regularity in the direction of the hair could not be produced if there was not æ regularity in the motion of the ſtomach. The ſame is proved in ſome birds, as the cuckov, which ſometimes feeds on hairy caterpillars. The principal inſtrument of digeſtion in moſt animals, is however now generally ſuppoſed to be the gaſtric juice; a ſiuld which diſtils from certain glands, ſituated in the coats of the ſtomach, and mixes vith the food as ſoon as it ĩs received into that organ. The Abbẽ Spalanæani, in order to obtain a ſight of the gaſtric juice, introduced tubes, containing bits of ſponge into the ſtomach of a crow. In four hours the tubes were vomited up, and the ſponges, being preſſed, ylelded thirty-ſeven grains of gaſtric ſor which was frothy, oſf a turbid yellow colour, had a taſte intermediate between bitter and ſalt, and being iet to ſtand in a watch glaſs, depoſited in a few hours a copious ſediment. As the ſediment might be attributed to the ſood ſuſpended in the gaſic juice, the experiment wa; repeated on a crow, the ſtomach of which was empty. The fluid obtained in this caſe vas of a trenſparent yellow colour, depoſited very Iittle ſediment, but the taſte was the ſame. Th] gaſtric juice did not burn when thrown on hot coals, and paper moiſtened with it would not burn till the fiuid was evaporated. The motion of the ſtomachi alſo aſſiſts in mixing and intimately blending this Aid with the proper parts of the aliment, ſo as to enable ĩts ſolvent powers more completely to act upon it. The ſenſible qualitios of this ſiuld are, however, not ſuch as to lead us to attribute to it any ſuch power; and I do not know that it has been completely analized by any chemical proceſs, at leaſt by any which enables us to explain its ſolvent property. A French * author, indeed, obſerving the power which inflammable air has in diſſolving the texture oſ animal matter, has intimated an opinjon, that a portion oſ the oily matter which is taken in with the food, may be modified by the ſtomach into inlammable air, and may perform this part of the proceſs of digeſtion. Digeſtion diſfers from all other proceſſes, and can bè compared neither to putreſaction nor chemical ſolution. A remarkable circumſtance alſo with regard to digeſtion is, that by it both animal and vegetable matter is converted into the ſame ſubſtance. Dr. Fordyce fed a dog with farinaceous matter, and another with muſcle, and opening them both (in which he dees not appear to have been juſtifiable) M. Sage. lll during the time that the chyle was ſlowing through the lacteals, he collected from each as much chyle as he was able. On examination they were found ſo ſimilar, that the difference could not be diſtinguiſhed by any experiment which he could contrive. The chyle of a cat living on ſleſh, according to the ſame gentleman, cannot be diſtinguiſhed from that of an ox or ſheep. Live or freſh vegetables, when taken into the ſtomach, are firſt killed, by which a flabbineſs of texture is produced, as if they had been boiled, and then they begin to be acted on by the gaſtric juice:. This fluid, indeed, ſeems to have no power to act on living matter, ſince worms remain uninjured in the ſtomach. Digeſtion, however, as far as relates to the diſſiolution of aliment, may be carried on out of the body by means of the gaſtric juice, and the application of heat equal to that of the human body. This proceſs is continued for ſome time after death, and the ſtomach, no longer protected by the living principle, is ĩtſelf partially diſſolved by the gaſtric juice. In the ſtomæchs of large ſiſh are commonly ſound ſmall fiſhes, ſtill retaining their natural ſorm; but when touched, they melt down into a jelly. From this circumſtance, and from the great quantity of fluids poured into their ſtomachs, we may conclude, that digeſtion is ſolely eſſected in them by the diſſolving power of a menſtruum, without the aid of trituration. Neither animal nor vegetable ſubſtances can undergo their ſpontaneous changes, while digeſtion is going on in them. The gaſtric juice even has a power of recovering meat already putrid; for let putrid meat be given to a dog, and the contents oſ his ſtomach vill be found ſeet, and free ſrom all putreſaction, if he is killed a ſhort time after. Bread, which has remained in the ſtomach of a dog for eight hours, is ſo much changed, that it will not run into the vinous fermentation, but when taken out and kept in a warm place becomes putrid. Its putrefaction, however, is not ſo quick as that of a ſolution of meat which has been in the ſtomach for ſome time. The effects are ſimilar when milk and bręad are the food Whohen the cigeſtive power, however, is not perfect, then the vinous and acetous fermentation will take place in vegetable matters, and the putrefactive in the ſtomachs oſ animals which live wholly on fleſh. The gaſtric juice apparently preſerves vegetables from running into fermentation, and animal ſubſtances from putrefaction, not from an antiſeptic quality in that ſiuid, but from a power oſ making them go through another proceſs. In moſt ſtomachs there is an acid, even though the animal has lived entirely upon me⸗t ſfor many wecks; this, however, is not always the caſle. The acid ſometimes prevails ſo much as to become a diſeaſe. The ſtomachs of many animals have a power of coagulating milk; this is continually ſeen by infants throwing up theĩr milk in a coagulated ſtate, and the ſame thing may be obſerved by feeding a dog with mil, and killing him half an hour aſterwards. The ſtomach of the calf, and gerhaps that of other animals, preſerves this power after death, and is kept dried, for the purpoſe of making cheeſe. Indeed milk, raw egg, and ſeveral other ſubſtances, require to be coagulated, before they can be digeſted. If we throv milk into a portion of the jcjunum, that milk will be abſorbed by the lacteals; but if we throw milk into the ſtomach of the Tame animal, the fore an argument might be brought, that the abſorbents of the ſtomach would refuſe what the abſorbents of the jejunum would readily take up. But it muſt be conſidered thar the milk is inſtantly coagulated in the ſtomach, and not in the jejunum, which coagulation will perſectly prevent it from being abſorbed; but all thoſe ſubſtances which are not changed by the coagulating juice of the ſtomach will be, and are equally taken up by the lymphatics in the ſtomach and lacteals. There is, therefore, a converſion of the food in the ſtomacly into a new ſubſtance, whoſe properties are at preſent unknown, which new ſubſtance is the only one which can be converted into chyle in the duodenum and jejunum, exactly as we may form farinaceous matter, mucilage, and native vegetable acid into vine; but before they can poſſibly be converted into wine, they muſt, firſt be formed into ſugar. So in a ſimilar manner farinaceous matter, gum, and white of egg, are all capable of forming chyle; but before they are formed into chyle, they muſt be converted into a matter certainly not ſugar, but a matter of a particular ſpecies in the ſtomach, and by the operation of the ſtomach, this particular ſpecies of matter is aſterwards converted into chyle in the duodenum and jejunum. Dr. Young, of Edinburgh, ſound that an infuſion of the inner coat of the ſtomach, which had been previouſly waſhed with water, and then with dilute ſolution of mild fixed vegerable alkali, ſo that it was not poſſible that any acid could have remained in it, coagulated milk very readily. He found alſo that it had the power of coagulating ſerum, and other animal mucilages. The coagulating power of this ſubſtance is very great. Dr, Fordyce mentions that ſix or ſeven grains of the inner coat of the ſtomach infuſed in water, gave a liquor which coagulated more than æ hundred ounces of milk. All fermentation is quite foreign to perfect digeſtion, and When it does take place, is always proportioned to the diſorder of the ſtomach, ſince very little if any wind or flatulency is generated in the ſtomachs of thoſe, whoſe digeſtion is moſt quick and eaſy. It is nęt uncommon, however, for milk, vegetables, wine, and whatever has ſugar in its compoſitinn, to Eecome ſooner ſour in ſome ſtomachs than if leſt to undergo a ſpontaneous change out of the body; and even ſpirits, in certain ſlomachs, almoſt immediately degenerate into a very ſtrong acid. All oily ſubſtarces, patticularly butter, become rancid ver7 ſoon after being taken into the ſtomaech, and this rancidity is the firſt proceſs in the ſermentation of oll. Animal food does not ſo readily ſerment in diſeaſed ſtomachs, when combined with veęetables, as when ĩt is not. Fleſh meat appears to undergo no change preparatory to digeſtion, but ſeems ut once to ſubmit to the action of the gaſtric juice. It appears firſt to loſe its texture, then becomes of a cineritious colour, next gelatinous, and laſtly, is converted into chyle. In order to aſcertain whether the production of any degree of acidity is eſſentiul to digeſtion, Dr. Fordyce mace ſeveral experiments, from which he concludes, that in perfect digeſtion no acidity whatever is produced. li If the gaſtric juice is applied to æa ſubſtance out of the body, in a proper temperature, it will produce changes in it, ſimilar to thoſe which take place in the commencement of digeſtion; but by applying gaſtric juice, the watery fluids of the ſtomach, the ſaliva, the bile, the pancreatic juice, altogether or ſeparately, in no caſe has chyle, or any thing like it, been formed. It is not yet aſcertained what are the circumſtances Vhich contribute to render different articles uſed as food, digeſtible or indigeſtiblee. Something is urdoubtedly to be aſcribed to firmneſs of texture, ſince cuticle, horn, hair and feathers, which are indigeſible in their natural ſtate, became digeſtible and nutritious when reduced to a gelatinous form by Papin's digeſter. That the ſolubility or inſolubility of a ſubſtance in the ſtomach is not, however, merely owing to the degree of ſolidity, is proved from a circumſtance already mentioned, viZz. that boĩled barley was not acted on by the gaſtric juice of a buzzard hawk, while pieces of hard beef bone, expoſed to its action in the ſame manner, were completely diſſolved. But ſubſtances muy even be rendered too ſoft; ſor a ſluid is diſicult of digeſtion, and its continued uſe very injurious to the ſtomach. It may be remarked, that nature has given us very few ſluids as articles of food. It thereſore ſeems, that ſubſtances may be either too compact or too lax in their ſtructure, to render them fit ſuctjects to be acted on by the digęſtive powers. The degree of eaſe, however, with which ſubſtances are digeſted, ſeems in many caſes owing to a difference in ſolidity. Brain, liver, muſcle, and tendon are digeſtible in the order in which they are here inſerted. Boiled, rcaſted, and even putrid meat is eaſier of digeſtion than raw. Huſs oſ ſeeds and the hulls of fruits are indigeſtible in their natural ſtate, but to what circumſtance this is owing is not fully aſcertained. The whole of our food is ſometimes not digeſted; this may ariſe from two cauſes, either from ſome parts of the food being of too firm a texture to be diſſfolved ſo ſoon as the other parts are converted into chyle and carried into the duodenum: or from the ſtomach being ſo much diſordered as to digeſt imperfectly. This diſorder of the ſtomach ſometimes proceeds ſo far, that the food paſſes through the budy almoſt unchanged. In ſome caſes food has been retained on the ſtomach for twenty-four hours, and thrown up without being altered in the leaſt. The eſſential olls of animals and vegetables are indigeſtible; they are ſoluble, however, either in the gaſtric juice or the chyle, by which means they become medicinal from their ſtimulant powers. The eſſential oils of vegetables, but more particularly thoſe of animals, ſeem to pervade the very ſubſtance of the animals whoſe food contains much of them. Thus ſea birds, which feed on fiſh, taſte very ſtrongly of them, and thoſe which live on that focd only during certain times oſ the year, as the wild duck, have that taſte only at certain ſeaſons. TWo ducks were fed, one with barley, the cther with ſprats for about a month, and Eilled beth at the ſame time; when dreſſed, that fed on ſprats was hardly catable. Animals eat Ieſs in proportion as their food is more nutritious. Thus carnivorous animals require much leſs food than the granivorous, and theſe, than the graminivorous; animals, indeed, of the laſt kind, employ almoſt the whole of their time in eating A correſponding relation is alſo obſerved with reſpect to the digeſtive organs in theſe ſeveral races of animals; carnivorous animals have only one ſtomach, granivorous animals very generally two, and graminivorous animals four ſtomachs, with a greater length of inteſtines. lected, that graſs is more difficultly aſimilated than grain, and grain than fleſh. The ſirſt ſtomach in ruminant animals, ſuch as the bull, the ſheep, &c. is a receptacle which has a very weak action on the food, and ſrom it the animal has the power of returning the food into the mouth, to undergo a ſccond maſtication. In Mr. Hunter's paper on Digeſtion, publiſhed by the Royal Society, there is the following curious obſervation, vhich illuſtrates very much the uſe of theſe previous ſtomachs: milk ſucked in by the calf does not remain in any of the previous ſtomachs, but paſies down inſtantiy into the digeſting ſtomach, not requiring any previous operation; but graſs remains for a length of time in the previons ſtomachs. ] If it is allowable to extend our views beyond the animal kingdom, we might fancy that the digeſtive proceſs in vegetables is ſtill more difficult than it is in the graminivorous animals, ſince vegetables are continually taking in nouriſhment, and conſume an immenſe quantity of air and water in proportion to their growth and bulk. When vegetables, however, are furniſhed with matter which has undergone more preparation than mere air and water, viz. putrified vegetable matter, their growth is far more rapid; and they flouriſh ſtill more on the remains of the animal kingdom. ] Sleeping animals do not digeſt during vinter. Worms and pieces of meat were conveyed down the throats of lizards, which were going into winter quarters, and which were afterwards kept in a cool place. On opening the animals at different periods, the ſubſtances were found entire and without alteration. Some oſ the lizards voided them in the ſpring with little or no alteration produced in them. DiY geſtion is therefore regulated by the ſtate of the other functions of the body . By hunger and cuſtom animals may be taught to eat, and even to prefer, a very different kind of food from that naturally deſigned for their nouriſhment: thus pigeons have been made to live entirely on fſleſh. Whether the gaſtric juice is altered in its nature by a difference of food, or in what other way the ſyſtem accommodates ĩtſelf to ſuch a change, it is not eaſy to determine. C n a r. XxxII. RESPIRATION AND ANIMAL HEAT. ſ ' , \ Reſpiration in part an involuntary FunctionFcur Stages of ReſpirationUVes of ReſpirotionReſpiration of Inſcts diferent from that of ciher Animaliht reã Colour of the Blood derived from ibe Air in ReſpirationDr. Prieſiley's Experiments. Dr. Goodavyn's Experimentshe oxygenous Part of the Air dinii iniſbed by ReſpirationFixed Air generuted in th? Lungs in Reſjiration and expired. Animal Heat produced by ReſpirationInſia anced in different AnimalsDr. Crufords Ingeniuis Theory. TNINT ERRUPTED reſpiration being neceſſary to our exiſtence, it ĩs viſely ordainẽq; that this ſunction ſhould be ſ far involuntary as not to require a continual and irkſome attention. For other purpoſes, as that of ſpeech, reſpiration I is no leſs wiſely ſubmitted in ſome meaſure to our direction, ſo that vithin certain limits we cai ãaccelerate or retard ĩt at pleaſure We are ſufficiently prevented, however, from ſuſpending reſpiration to ſuch an extent as to interſere ith other proceſſes abſęlutely neceſſary to the ſupport of life, by being ſubjected, whenever we ceaſe to breathe, to a ſenſation inexpreſſibly diſtreſſing, and which compels us to uſe every. eſfort in our power to inhale air into the lungs. The thorax, or that bony caſe which ſurr ourds and protects the lungs, is furniſhed with a number of muſcles, ſome of Which, by drawing the ribs upwards, enlarge its capacity, and others, by drawing them downwards, diminiſh it. Its capacity, however, ĩs ſtill more influenced by the muſcular organ called the diaphragm, vhich from the breaſt bone and lower ribs paſſes obliquely downwards to the loins, and ſeparates the thoracic from the abdominal viſcera. By the contraction of the diaphragm, the abdominal viſcera are preſſ'ed downwards and forwards, by which the lungs are permitted to expand themſelves in the ſame direction; when the diaphragm is relaxed, and the abdominal muſcles are thrown into action, a directly oppoſite motion t2es placeũ the viſcera of the abdomen are preſied upwards and backwards againſt the lungs, from which part of the air is conſequently expelled. lli The air, which is to be conſidered as poſſeſſing many properties in common with other fluids, poſſeſſes this, that by its weight ĩt enters where it Is Ieaſt reſiſted. Part oſ the reſiſtance to the entrance of the air into the lungs being taken oſf hy the action of the muſcles dilating the thorax, it ruſhes in through the vindpipe, in the ſame manner as it ruſhes into the cavity of bellows, when the boards are ſeparated from each other. Inſpiration and expiration therefore are not performed by the lungs themſelves, ſince air would be equally drawn into and expelled from the cavity of the thorax when deprived of lungs, ſuppoſing that the parts of the thorax could be made to perſrm their motions perſectly well aſter death. The Iungs may therefore be compared to the cavity of bellows filled with any downy ſubſtance, the bones of the thorax to the boards oſ the bellows, and the muſcles of the thorax to the hands by which the bellows are moved. Reſpiration may be divided into four ſtages or periods; ſirſt, inſpiration; ſecondly, a pauſe when the lungs ere filled; thirdly, expiration; and laſtly, a pauſe when the Iungs are emptiedc We are equally ſtimulated to inſpiration and expiration by a ſenſation of uneaſineſs, but that which is felt when the Iungs are kept too long inſlated aſter a full inſpiration, is of a different kind ſrom that which is perceived when they are preſerved too long empty aſter expiration. In the ſormer caſe the uneaſineſs is reſerred to the head, in the. latter to the cheſt. To what theſe ſenſations are oving we cannot altogether determine; they are probably, however, to be attributcd to the anterior cavities of the heart and the veſſels of the head being overloaded with blood, which cannot ſo readily paſ through the lungs while their motion ĩs ſuſpended. The truth of this opinion is much conſirmed by the ſluſhing of the face, and the burſting of blood veſſls, which ſometimes happens from impeded reſpiration. The air, after paſſing through the windpipe, is conveyed by its ramifications to the air veſſels of the lungs. Afſter inſpiration the air veſſels, which are to be conſidered as very minutè bladders with thin coats, are fully diſtended. The minute and very numerous ramifications of the pulmonary artery are diſtributed on the membranes of theſe air veſſcls; and through the membranes, withont coming into direct contact with the blood, the air produces thoſe changes on it, which are found to be abſolutely neceſſary for the continuance of life. The chief uſes oſ reſpiration, as far as our knowledge extends, are, 1ſt. To effect certain changes in the maſs of blood; and 2d. To produce animal heat. Theſe eſfects, though no doubt intimately connected, I ſhall take the liberty of conſidering ſeperately, for the ſake of greater perſpicuity. The compoſition of the atmoſphere has already been deſcribed, and it is at preſent only neceſiury to remind the reader, that rather leſs than three-fourths of the atmoſphere is azotic gas, rather more than one fourth oxyg en gas, and one Or two parts in the hundred fixed alr. The azote is not proved to have any effect in reſpiration, and ſeems to be merely a diluent of the oxygen gas, which is the principal agent. The fixed air contained in the atmoſphere i is probably alfo completely ĩnert with reſpect to reſpiration. Previous to a more particular conſideration of the nature of this function, it may not, however, be improper to throw together àa few miſcellaneous obſervations on that ſubject. : ilill Animals breathing air contaminateã by reſpiration, not only ſuffer for want of the pure part of that air, vhich is deſtroyed, but alſo from the fixed air which is produced. Mr. Cavendiſh aſſerts, that in certain diſeaſes, and by certain perſons, the air is much ſooner rendered unreſpirablee According to the obſervations of Dr. Prieſtley, inſects appeared to breathe fixed air, or air otherwiſc contaminated, as readily as pure air. Flies, however, and other winged inſects, have the property of deſtroying the ſalubrity- of air by their own reſpiration, as may be obſerved by confining a few of thoſe animals in a phial. Theſe animals, indeed, appear leſs of the amphibi ous kind, and much more delicate, than when in the vermiform or maggot ſtate. ſ Inſects, and ſome exſanguious animals, vill exiſt à conſiderable time without any thing equivalent to reſpiration. The ſame has been proved to be the caſe vith fiſhes, though it is impoſſble to  define the limits of their xiſtence- li A veſſel in which, when Alled with common- air, a mouſe could not live more than half an hour, was filled by Dr. Prieſtley with vital air; a mouſe then hived i in it for three hours, and being taken out alive, the air was ſtill found better, by the nitrous teſt; than common air. ; : From ſome experiments made by Dr. Gooduyn, he concludes that the lungs contain 109 cubic inches of air aſter a complete expiration; and that this quantity receives an addition of fourteen cubie inches by inſpiration. The dilatation of the lungs, therefore, aſter expiration, is to their dilatation aſter inſpiration as Ioꝗ to I2ã. li DOne inſpiration is commonly perſormed for every four or five pulſations. of the heart, which latter, in different healthy perſons, vary from ſixty to Dinety in a minute. The blood undergoes remarkable changes of colour when circulating i in the veſſels. of an animal; in the lungs it acquires a florid hue, which is gradually loſt, while the blood is paſſing through the other parts of the body, again to be reſtored in the lungs. That the red colour, of blocd is owing to the inſluence of vital air is manifeſt ſrom actual experiment. Dr. Prieſtley introduced different portions oſ ſheep's blood into different kinds of air, and found always that the blackeſt parts aumed a bright red colour in common air, and more eſpecially in vital aitr; hereas the brighteſt red blood became preſently black i in any air unfit for reſpiration, as fixed air, inflammable, azotic, and nitrous gas, and after becoming black in the laſt of theſe kinds of air, it regained i its Ted colo ut on being expoſed to common or vital air, the ſame portions becoming alternately black and red. It is proper, however, to mention,  that Dr. Goodwyn introduced four ounces of florid blocd, freſh drawn, into a glaſs receiver, containing fixed air, and confined it there ſor a conſiderable time; and alſo received blood from the carotid artery oſ a ſheep into a phial filled with fixed air, but in ncither of the experiments was the florid colour alteredc Theſe experiments do not æccord with thoſe of Dr. Prieſtlcy, but the following is intirely conſonant with them. Dr. Goodwyn inclofed a quantity of vital air in a glæſ receiver inverted in quickſilver, and introduced into it four ounces of blood, freſh drawn from the jugular vein of a ſeep; the blood became inſtantly very ſloriq; and aſter ſeveral minutes the quickſilver aſcended two or three lines, which evidently proved, that while the blood was altered in colour, the air was at the ſame time diminiſhed in quantity. It is well known that blood, when it coagulate; on being expoſed to common air, aſſumes on the ſurſace a bright red colour, while the inſide is much darker, bordering upon black. ; An objection, however, ſeems to ariſe to this hypotheſis, viz. that though the blood in the lungs is not more than a thouſændih part of an inch ſrom the air, yet it never comes into actual contact with it. In order to examine the ſoundneſs of this objection, Dr. Prieſtley took a large quantity of black blood, and put it-into a bladder moiſtened with a little ſerum, ærd tying it very cloſe, hung ĩt in a free expoſure to the air, though in a quieſcent ſtate, and next day found, upon examination, that all the Iower ſurface of the blcod, which had been ſeparated from common air only by the intervention of the bladder, had acquired a coating of a florid red colour, and as thick apparently as it would have acquired if immediately expoſed to the open air.lIn this caſe it is evident, that the change of colour could not have been owing to evaporation, as ſome havę imagined. A piece of the craſſamentum, ſurrounded by ſerum, acquired (not only on that part of the ſurface which was ex poſed to the air, but in thoſe parts which were covered ſeveral inches with ſerum) a florid red, ſo that the deep covering of ſerum, which muſt have prevented all evaporation, was no more an impediment to the action of the air than the bladder. That it is really the air, acting through the ſerum, and not the ſerum itſelf which gives the florid colour, is clearly aſcertained by the followinge: periment : two equal portions of black blood were put into two cups, containing equal quantities oſ ſerum, which covercd the blood in both to the depth of half an inch. One of the cups being leſt in the open air, and the other being placed under the exhauſted receiver of an air pump, the former preſently acquired a florid colour, while the other continued twelve hours as black as at firſt. In another experiment, the reverſe oſ the former, the inſluence of the air upon the blood was no leſs deci ſively proved; for red blood became black through the depth of two inches of ſerum, when the veſſel containing it was expoſed to azotic gas. Putiefaction, however, will produce a ſimilar effect; for a ſmall quantity of perſectly florid blood being put into a glaſ's tube fealed herme. tically, and thus cut oſf from 2ll communication with external ſubſtances, became black in a few days. Except ſerum, milk is the only animal ſluid, through which the air can act upon blood. By ſome ſubſequent experiments made by Dr. Prieſtley, he found that the intervention of a bladder by no means prevents the action of ſome airs on each other, as the nitrous on common air, &c. The ſame induſtrious philoſopher found alſo, that the air and blood employed in the above experiments undergo oppoſite changes; for vital air was vitiated by expoſure 1o venous blood, and, on the contrary, inflammable air was abſorbed, and foul air improved, by expoſure to arterial blood. It has alſo been proveq, that inflammable air will produce a change of colour in the blood, when introduced into the veins of a living animal. IE The moſt remarkable change produced on air, which has been ſubſervient to reſpiration, is the difappearance of the vital air, and the production of fixed air. On account of the production of fixed ar, indeed, an animal can only breathè a given quantity of air for a certain time, after which it fickens and dies. Ifa jar filled with vital air is placed over mercury, and an animal confined in it, after a time it will be obſerved to breathe vith dificulty, and become very uneaſy; if the animal is then taken out, and cauſtic alkali is introducèd, a great diminution in the bull of the air will take place; by the repeated introduction of the animal and the cauſtic alkali, almoſt the whole of he air may be made to diſappear, which proves that the vital air ĩs by reſpiration converted ĩ into fixed air. Illi ; When we conſider the compoſition of fined air, which conſiſts of the carbonaceous principle united with oxygen, we muſt conclude that the oxygen gas is converted into fixed air by the addition of that principle, which, in a ſtate of extreme diviſion, ſeems to be extricated ſfrom the lungs. By ſome phyſiologiſts, the extrication of this noxious principle has been conſidered as the only end anſwered by reſpiration. That this is not all, however, is proved by the conſideration, that though part of the cxygenous gas is converted into fixed air by the addition of the carbonaceous principle, yet the weight of the air expired does not exceed that which is inſpiredl. This naturally ſuggeſted the opinion, that a part of the inſpired air was abſorbeq, nearly correſponding in weight with the matter diſcharged by the lungs. Dr. Prieſtley, by a ſeries of experiments recorded in vol. Ixxx. p. 106. of the Philoſophical Tranſactions, has accordingly proved, that a conſiderable quantity of vital air is abſorbed by the blood A very ſmall portion of water is alſo thrown from the lungs at every expiration, which may be either an aqueous exhalation from the lungs, or may be formed by an union of vital air with inflammable gas. Mr. Lavoiſier aſcertained that when the aæir out of doors conſiſted of, 27 parts oxygen ãir, 73 azotic air. 100 The air in the loweſt ward in the General Hoſul at Paris, contained but 25 parts of oxygen air, 71 of azotic air, 4 of fixed air: 100 This proportion varied in different parts of the room. At the top the air contained the following proportions: 181 parts ofc oxygen air, 79 of azotic air, 22 of fixed air: 100 The production of animal heat next t property claims our attention. That reſpiration is really the cauſe of animal heat can ſcarcely be doubted; for thoſe animals which are furniſhed with lungs, and which continually inſpire the freſh air in great quantities, have the power of keeping themſelves at a temperature conVo. ſiderably higher than the ſurrounding atmoſphere, but ſuch animals a; are not furniſied with reſpiratory organs, are very nearly of the ſame temperature with the medium in which they livee Among the hot animals, thoſe are the warmeſt which have the largeſt reſpiratory organs in proportion to the bulk of their bodies. Thisĩ is particularly the caſe with birds, which have the greateſt degree of animal heat. In the ſame animal, the degree of heat is in ſome meaſure proportionable to the quantity of air reſpired j in a given time. Thus we find, that animal heat is increaſed by exerciſe and whatever accelerates reſpiration. BY the word heat I do not in this place mean a ſenſation, but caloric, or a peculiar fluid, having attractions for other ſubſtances, with which it is capable of forming combinations, and preducing many important phenomens. We muſt careſully avoid eſtimating the quantity of heat or caloric contained in a body by its temperature, as indicated by the ſenſes, or even by a thermometer; for water, wax, metallic bodies, &c. in paſſing from a nuld to a ſolid ſtate, loſe a vaſt qua intity of heat without any diminution of temperature; ; and it js well known, that a quantity of wax, &c. partly ſolid and partly fluid, is always oſ the ſame temperature, whether it tends towards the ſolid or the fluid ſtate; that is; whatever the temperature of the ſurrounding medium, If ne wax is in a melting ſtate, it abſorbs the ſuperſiuous caloric, uhich becomes latent; ; if on the other hand it is congealing, its latent heat ĩs continually extricated, and ſuſtains ĩts temperature at a fixed point. Caloric may thereſore exiſt in a latent tate, i in which i it cannot affect the thermometer. There is ſtill another diſference vith reſpeẽt to the quantity of heæt or caloric contained in bodies, indeperident of any change of ſorm, ſimilar to that which takes place in the combination of heat with ice conſtituting water. This latter difſerence is called a diſference in capacity for heat, by which is underſtood an inequality in the quantity of abſolute heat in two bodies, though their temperatures and weights are equal. Thus, if a pound of vater and a pound of diaphoretic antimony have a common temperature, the quantity of abſolute heat contained in the former is nearly four times that contained in the latter. The following is a brief ſtatement of Dr. Crawfords ingenious theory oſ animal hea. He made a ſeries of experiments, by which he found, that the fixed air and aqueous vapour, which are diſcharged from the lungs, contain only about one-third part of the abſolute heat contained ĩn the atmoſpherical air, previous to its being reſpired: air, therefore, in becoming ſubſervient to reſpiration, loſes part of its heatt. He has alſo ſhewn that the abſolute heat of ſflorid arterial blood is to that oſ venous nearly as eleven and an halſ to ten; ſince, thereſore, the blocd, which is returned by the pulmonary veins to the heart, has its quantity of abſolute heat increaſed, he ſairly concludes that it muſt have acquired this additional heat in the lungs. From the preceding obſervations it appears, that the production of animal heat depends on a proceſs analogous to chemical elective attraction, and which is regulated by the following principles. Vital air contains more abſolute heat, in proportion to its temperature and weight, than fized air. The blood is returned to the lungs impregnated with the carbonaceous principle; the blood has leſs attraction for that principle than vital air has; in the lungs, thereſore, it quits the blood to unite with the vital air. By this combination the vital air is changed into fixed air, and depoſits part of its heat: the capacity of blood for heat is at the ſame time increaſed; the blood therefore receives that portion of heat which was detached from the air. The arterial blood; in its paſſage through the capillary veſſęls; is again impregnated with the carbonaceous principle, and the baſis of inflammable air, by which its capacity for heat declines; it, thereſore, in the courſe of the circulation, gradually gives out the heat which it had received in the lungs, and diffuſes it over the whole body. Thus it appears, that in its circulation through the lungs the blood is continually diſcharging carbonaceous matter and abſorbing hear, and that in its paſſage through the other parts oſ the body it is perpetually imbibing carbon and emitting heat. In this account of animal heat T have entirely omitted the abſorption of vital air. This abſorption was not admitted hy Dr. Craſord, and, though eſtabliſhed by the experiments of Dr. Prieſtley, does not at all invalidate the theory of the former philoſopher. It is conſiſtent with either hypotheſis, that the blood in the lungs gains the heat which is loſt by the air; and upon the truth of this propoſition reſts the theory of Dr. Crawſorẽ. By the different capacity which blood poſſeſſes for heat in ĩts diſferent ſtates, it is capable of ſupplying the different parts oſ the body with heat, while ĩits own temperature remains the ſame. If this difference of capacity for heat did not exiſt, the extremities of the body could not be properly ſupplied with heat ſfrom the lungs, unleſs the Iungs themſelves were expoſed to a degree of heat which would be certainly prejudicial, and, perhaps, ſuch as no organiſed ſubſtance could ſupport without deſtruction. Dr. Cranſord has morcover proved, by a courſe of ęxpcriments, that when an animal is placed in a cold medium, the venous blood acquires a deeper hue; that a greater quantity of air is vitiated in a given time, and, conſequently, that more heat is abſorbed by the blood. It appears, therefore, that nature has in this, as in many other inſtances, connected the occaſion vith the means of ſupplying it. Since, thereſore, it is proved, that heat is abſorbed ſrom the air in reſpiration, and ſince the quantity abſorbed is not only adequate 50 the purpoſe, but propertioned to the occaſion, we may conſider ourſelves as greatly indebted to Dr. Crawford ſor having thrown great light on a moſt important function, but which muſt ſtill be enumerated, on ſome accounts, among thoſe obſcure proceſſes of nature, on vhich human ingenuity may exert its powers, but vhich ĩt can probably never completely reveal, The analogy between combuſtion and reſpiration cannot fail to ſtrike every perſon acquainted with the nature of theſe proceſſes. Air, in which a candle has remained till extinguiſhed, is incapable of ſupporting animal life. On the other hand, air, in which an animal has remained till it expired, will not ſupport the ſlame of a candle. In both theſe caſes heat is loſt by the air employed; becauſe gaſſeous compounds are formed which have leſs capacity for heat than oxygen gas poſſeſſes. There is one remarkable difference, however, between combuſtion and reſpiration; n combuſtion, the heat derived from the air becomes immediately perceptible, and ſrequently riſes to an intenſe degree. In reſpiration, GE the heat is gradually evolveq, in conſequencę of an admirable law of the animal economy, which has already been adverted to in explaining Dr. Cràwſord's theory of animal heat. What oily and ſpirituous ſubſtances are to a lamp they are alſo to the animal body, and no animal is capable of ſubſiſting for a conſiderable time without food containing ſome portion of theſe principles. This is particularly obvious with regerd to the food of carnivorous animals, and it is no leſs certain that grain and even graſs contain the ingredients of oil and ſpirituous liquors. Our food may therefore be conſidered as fuel, and animal heat as a gentle combuſtion. Hence, ſuch perſons as eat and drink large quantities of inflammable ſubſtances, increaſe the heat of their bodies eyond the proper ſtandard, and in ſcientiſic 25 well as common language, may be ſaid to burn themſelves up. This conſideration may ſerve to confirm the eſtabliſhed practice of withholding from febrile patients the uſe of inflammable matters as food, and of giving acids, the nature of which is directly oppoſite. Towards the end of ſome fevers, however, particularlu typhus, when the heat ſinks below the proper ſtandard, brandy and æther are found to be highly uſeful In the Medical Extracts, in which there are ſome ingenious and new obſervations on this ſubject, ĩt is mentioned that Dr. Withering wrote to Dr. Beddoes to the following effect:The late Mr. Spalding, who did ſo much in improving and uſing the diving bell, was a man of nice obſervation, and had he not fallen a ſacrifice to the negligence of drunken attendants, would have thirown much additional light upon more than one branch of ſcience He particularly informed me that when he had eaten animal food, or drank fermented liquors, he conſumed the air in the bell much faſter than when he lived upon Vegetable food and drank only water. Many repeãted trials had ſo convinced him of this, that he conſtantly abſtained from the C n a Pr. XXXIII. TH E VOICE. Iiſtrument of the Veice in the Animal Boly.Vlæ Larynx. Exteriments on the l&indpipes of diſſcront Animle lt hether the Lurynx acts as a aviud or ſiringed IuſtrumentSiugin &, ho terſormed. &teakingltbiſpering. EãEE A L L animals, as far as our obſervations extend, have the power of communicating their ſenſations or ideas to each other, and the principal means of this communication is the voice:. Man is indebted to this function ſor the ſatisfaction of ſicial intercourſe, and in a great meaſure alſo for his diſtinguiſhed preeminence above other animals in mental acquirements. The inſtrument of the voſce is the larynx, and the immediate occaſion of iĩt is, the expulſion oſ the air from the lungs through this organ exciting a vibratory motion in the whole larynx, but more particularly in the ligaments which paſs from the ſcutiform to the arytenoĩd cartilages. That the larynx is really the inſtrument of the voice has been fully proved by an ingenious anatomiſt? of our times, who, after detaching the vwindpipe from the bodies of different animals, by relaxing or ſhortening the tendinous bands at the extremity of the windpipe, and blowing in at the oppoſite end, found means to produce all the different cries and tones of which the living animals were capablee. On the diſferent ſtructure of the larynx depends the different voices of animals; thus birds, which have a ſhrill æ Ferrein. and piercing note, are found to be poſſeſſed of a narrow larynx; animals, which are hoarſe or mute, of à wide one. The ſame fact ĩs proved in ourſelves. We may perceive, by applying the finger to the throat, when we endeavour to produce a ſhrill tone, that the larynx is contracted, rendered tenſe, and elevated; when we produce a grave ſound, it is enlarged, relaxed, and depreſſed; by endeavouring to produce a graver tone than we are capable of, the larynx is too much relaxed to perform its office, and the air paſſes through it without producing any ſound whatever. Bonnet obſerves, that birds are furniſhed with what may be called two larynxes, the one at the ſuperior extremity of the windpipe, as in men and quadrupeds; the other (Which is the principal organ of ſound with them) at the inferior extremity, and cloſe to the bronchi?. The chief inſtrument for the modulation of the voice in this lower larynx is a membrane ſituated tranſyerſely between the two bronchiæ, communicating with other membranes, reſembling the reed of a hautboy. On the greater or leſs elaſticity of theſe membrænes depends the tone of the voice, in the ſame manner as in other animals ĩt depends on the tenſion or relaxation of the cords of the glottis*. It has been much debated, whether the Iarynx, in producing the voice, acts as a wind or a ſtringed inſtrument; but there can be little doubt, from the ſtructure and motions of the larynx, that ĩt poſſeſſes the advantages of both. Singing is a modulation of the voice, through various degrees of acuteneſs and gravity, and is performed almoſt ſolely by the larynx, though the noſe and mouth are in ſome degree concerned in improving and ſoftening the tones. During ſpeech, the larynx is nuch at reſt, as very gravity or acuteneſs oſ being produced in the o letters, ſyllables, and the tongue and lips. all, employed in whiſpſ : C u A P. XXXIV. MUSC UL AR MOT ION. z ũ r wvhther an Thiug equivclut to m uſcular? otion is to bi ſour i in the cther Paris õ lerort H;potbeſes concerniug thę Cas of muſeular ſticn. Iis Degendenee cn he illCcntrai: Pocr 7 Mkaſles afic- DeathEntent of the Contraction of MuſclesAddVantege frem ithe Oll.zuity of cortain Muſcles Inſcrtion of the Tendonscrce of Muyles. H E power of contraction, with which the muſcles oſ animals are endued, and by which they perform all the motions of the body, is different ſrom any property inherent in any other kind of matter. But though the moſt remarkable examples of muſcular contraction are obſerved among animals, yet we are by no means authorized to conclude, that the vegetable kingdom is wholly deſtitute of ſimilar powers; on the contrary, the expanſion and contraction of the flowers and Ieaves of plants, according to the degree of heat, and the circulation of their ſap, are ſtrong arguments in favour of the opinion that they are furniſied with organs truly muſcular; and the convulſive motions excited by touching the ſtamina of certain plants ſeem to place this matter beyond diſpute. Under the head of anatomy, the general outlines of the ſtructure of the muſcular organs have been already conſidered; but nothing further was advanced on the preſent ſubject, than that muſcles are contractile maſſes compoſed of numerous minute, and in general red *, fibres, combined together in bundles by cellular ſubſtance. Such, thereſore, being the ſtructure oſ muſcles, little credit appears to be due to the ſuppoſition, that muſcular contraction depends on an influx of blood or any other fluid into minute bladders or cells; and it muſt remain undetermined, whether the ultimate moving fibres are tubular or ſolid; whether they conſiſt of chains of rhomboidal veſſels, as has been imagined by ſome phyſiologiſts, or whether, as others hæve thought, they contain a kind of down or woolly ſubſtarce. When muſcles are thrown into action, they become ſhorter, broader, and more denſe, or ſolid, to the touch; their bulk does not ſeem to be on the whole increaſed, nor are they found to be of a paler colour. Muſcles never act but from ſome exciting cauſe; of theſe one of the moſt frequent and curious is volition, by which every day’s ex eperience teaches us we have the power of throving the greater number of our muſcles into action. Over ſome of ovr muſcles, however, as thoſe oſ the inteſtines, and the heart, the will has no influence, and theſe are therofore called muſcles of inveluntary motion. What is the nature of the influence which the will exerts cver muſcles, we can never hope to diſcover; but it is of importarce to remark, that the nerves are the organs by which this inſluence is exerted; for the nerve leading to any particular limb being divided, we are no Tonger able to move that limb at our pleaſure. Beſides, however, being influenced by the will, muſcles are thrown into action by ſeveral other cauſes, - The colour proceeds from the blood, hich they contain n minute veſſels. ſuch as chemical or mechanical injury, and ſtill more remarkably by the electric ſnock, which influences muſcles inſenſible to every other known ſtimulus. Muſcles retain a contractile power for a conſiderable timæ aſter they are removed from the living body; this power, however, gradually diminiſhes, till, ſooner or later, according to a variety oſ circumſtances, it ceaſes altogether. The muſcles of invoIuntary motion, when emoved from the reſt oſ the body, retain their contractile power longer than thoſ of voluntary motion; the former, indeed, from this circumſtance, as well as from their uninterrupted motion in the living body, ſeem to be poſeſſed oſ a capacity for contrction beyond that of the othe muſcles. What has been hitherto ſtated, relates principally to the more remarkable muſcular contractions, by which the actions of the body are performed; but it is to be remembered, that beſides theſe occaſional contractions, there is a continual tendency in the muſcular fibre to ſtorten iĩtſelf; and even aſter death, when a muſcle is divided, the wounded extre mities recede from each other. A ſtrong illuſtration of this circumſtance is obtained, by obſerving the conſequence of dividing a muſcle in the lving body, for in this caſe its antagoniſt will conſtantly draw the pert which theſe muſc ũles vere deſigned to move, towards its own ſide. That power by which the diſferent parts of a muſcle, divided aſter death, recede from each other, is called the vis mortua, and is common to muſcles and other animal fibres. The power by which a muſcle obeys a ſtimulus after being ſeparated from the body, or after its communication with the ſenſorium has been cut off by other means, as by dividing or tying its nerves, has been called its vis inſita. This power is more peculier to life; and though it may continue for a few hours after death, vet it diſappears much ſooner than the former. It was ſuppoſed by Haller to exiſt wholly independent of the nerves, but this opinion has neither been eſtabliſned nor refuted. The capacity of muſcles to obey the influence of nerves, is called the vis nervea. The power which we poſſeſs of calling the muſcles into action by a voluntary effort, depends on a relation eſtabliſhed by God, and not on the directing influence oſ the human ſoul, ſince we have no conception of the intimate ſtructure either of the nerves or muſcles. It ĩs true, that by habit we acquire a more exact command over our muſcles in moſt inſtances, yet the operation of ſucking, in which a vãriety of muſcles operate in a complex manner, ĩs performed by a new-born infant; arnd. the young of many animals can walk immediately aſter birth. The extent of the contraction of a muſcle has been Iimited by ſome anatomiſts to one-third of its length. This ſtatement, however, though it may be nearly juſt vith reſpect to the greater number of muſcles, is by no means true with reſpect to all. The muſcular coat of the bladder, for example, will admit of that organ containing a quart of fluid matter, without much inconvenience, and at the ſame time is ſo contractile as to be capable of expelling almoſt every drop in a very fhort time. But the extenſive eſſect of muſcular contraction is not owing only to the degree to which a muſcle can ſhorten itſelf, but alſo to the direction oſ its fibres. Thus oblique muſcles produce a much more extenſive motion than thoſe which are ſtrait, and this extenſiveneſd of motion is proportioned to the obliquity of the muſcle. What is gained, however, in extenſiveneſs of motion by the obliquity oſ fibres, is loſt in force; but this is more than compenſeted by the oblique ſtructure allowing ſpace for a much greater number of muſcular fbres. Oblique muſcles have therefore in both reſpects the advantage over thoſe which are ſtrait, and are accordingly much more numerous in the animal machine. There is no pert of the ſtructure of the atimal body, which is more calculated to excite our admiration, than the manner in which the tendons of muſcles are inſerted into the bones. If, for inſtance, the muſcle called the biceps, which lies at the inſide of the o; humeri, and which is deſigned to berd the fore-arm, inſtead oſ terminating at the upper part of the radius, had been inſerted half way between the elbow and wriſt, it is evident, that when the muſcle had contracted itſelf ſo as to bring the fſore-arm to a right angle with the os humeri, the tendon muſt have ſtarted ſeveral inches ſrom its place, and have given the limb a very unpleaſant appearance, and muſt alſo have been attended uith ſeveral real inconveniences. By the tendon, howgver, being inſcrted rear the joint, the motion of the limb is perform cd without ſo great a riſing of the tendon as to prove troubleſome. By this ſti ucture moreover, the motions of the Iimb are much quicker than iſ the tendon had been inſerted lower dovn tovards the writt. BY the tendon being inſerted nearer the axis of motion, it is alſo evident, that a much ſmaller contraction of the muſcle is ſufficient to prodũce an effect, than muſt have been neceſſary to produce the ſame had the inſertion of the tendon been half way between the elbow and the wriſt. That univerſal rule city Is loſt in force, it muſt be remarked, is applicable to this caſe, ſo that ſome loſs of ſtrength neceſſarily attends the acquiſition of ſuperior celerity. But this inconvenience has been obviated by a very ſimple expedient, that of making the muſcle ſtronger than would otherwiſe have been neceſſary. Many very erroneous calculations have been made with reſpect to the force of muſcles. Borelli has been led to conclude that the heart at every contraction xerts a force equal to 100,000lb. while others have pretended ro diſcover that this ſorce does not amount to many ounces. With reſpect to the heart, however, we really have not data on which we can oceœt vith any tolerable degree of preciſionn. There is no muſcle in the body more conveniently ſituated for having the force of iĩts contraction determined than the biceps of the arm. It will be foreign to our preſent purpoſe to mention all the ſteps of the calculation, with the groſs reſult of which I ſhall in this place preſent the reader; it is indeed merely mentioned as probable, that when we raiſe forty pounds weight by means of the fore-arm, the biceps exerts a force at leaſt equal to five or ſix hundred pounds. The ſurprizing muſcular force of the turkeys giæzard, has been already noticed. From theſe obſervations, it appears, notwithſtanding the great viſible exertions of muſcular force, that the greater part of their real power produces no apparent effect. For all muſcles are inſertd nearer the center of motion than the weights on which they act, and their effect is therefore leſs in proportion to the ſnortneſs of the lever on which they act. In moſt of the limbs the muſcles are inſcrted at very acute angles, which throws their force more nearly in the direction oſ the center oſ motion, and conſequently leſſens their effect. Many muſcles paſs over projecting bones, which increaſe friction. But beſides all theſe cauſes diminiſhing the power of muſcles, one half of their ſtrength is exerted on their fixed extremity; for a muſcle in action, like an extended cord, exerts an equal force C n A P. XXXV. ANIMAL ELEC TRICITV. Acidental Diſeovory of M. GalvaniAnimal Electricity only exciteã by MetalsExperiments on dead AnimalsCecnductors and Noaconductors of this PowerExperiments on the living SubjectOn Earih Worms, Qe.Analogy betaveen this Poer and Eicin —3&hoct of the TorpedoNervous Energy. M O NG the late diſcoveries in philoſophy, there is not any more curious than that relation which is found to exiſt between certain metals and the nervous and muſcular ſyſtem of animals, which has received the name of animal electricity. How far it is conſiſtent with truth to refer this influence to the laws of electricity may be a proper ſubject of inquiry, and perhaps of ſcepticiſm; but it will be neceſſary previouſly to relate the principal facts which have been aſcertained on a ſubject ſo novel in phyſiology, and ſo Iittle analogous to the known principles of animal exiſtence. The ſhock which the muſcles of the human frame receive from the touch of the torpedo, and of the electrical eel, had long been known; but that the animal fibre when deprived of the principle of vitality ſhould be ſubject to a ſimilar inſluence, was a diſcovery reſerved for the preſent age M. Galvani, the profeſſor of anatomy at Bologna, obſerving one day certain involuntary contractions and motions in ſome ſrogs, which, with little credit to the profeſſor's humanity, had been hooked by the back-bone and ſuipended from the iron paliſadoes of his garden, his curioſity was powerſully excited, and on examining miVou. nutely into the cauſe of theſe contractions, he found that he could produce them at pleaſure, by touching the animals with two different metals at the ſame time in contact with each other. From later obſervations it ſeems to be ſuſficiently aſcertained that theſe involuntary contractions cannot be excited by any ſubſtances whatever, whether ſolid or fluid, except the metals, and that the mutual contact of two metals with each other is, in every caſe, neceſſary to the effect. Zinc has been found by far the moſt efficacious, eſpecially when in contact with gold, ſilver, molybdena, ſteel or copper, although theſe latter excite feeble contractions when in contect only with each other. Next to zinc, tin and lead ſeem to be the beſt excitorss. When the pieces of metals employed, and the ſurface of the animal fibre with which they are in contact, are large, the contractions excited are in general more conſiderable, but by no means in proportion to theſe circumſtances. In order to obſerve the phenomena in queſtion, cut off the head of a frog. When it has ceaſed to ſtruggle, apply a plate oſ Zinc under iĩts body, and a plate of gold to the ſuperior ſurface. Then ſlide the gold plate till it comes in contact with the zinc, when the muſcles which are further from the brain and ſpinal marrow than the metals, will be viſibly agitated. This effect will take place, although the frog with the metals are placed on an inverted glaſs jar, nd ⸗ ſtick of ſealing-wax is interpoſed between the hond of the operator and the metals, that is, although the animal as well as the metals is inſulatedl. I mentioned gold as being the moſt powerful of the metals, but a ple of ſilver, a crown-piece ſor inſtance, will anſwer the purpoſe. Cut off the thigh of a frog, juſt &illeq, cloſe to the body, and lay bare the ſciatic nerve. Place the nerve in contact with a piece of Zinc, and let ĩts foot reſt on a piece of ſilver; on bringing the two metals into contact, the muſcles of the limb will be convulſed. If a piece of braſs wire is made to touch at the ſame time the metals diſpoſed as above deſcribed, a communication will be formed between them, and the contraction of the muſcles will equally take place. If the nerve is made to reſt on a piece of zinc, and the Zinc is touched with a plate of ſilver held in one hand of the operator, while with the other he tales hold of the foot of the frog, the influence will paſs through the body of the operator, and the limb vill alſo be convulſed. Theſe experiments muſt be performed before the nerve becomes dry by expoſure to the air. In order that theſe contractions ſhould be produced, it is not neceſſary that either of the metals ſould be in actual contact ith the animal in which the convulſions are to be excited; as the interpoſition of pieces of boiled or putrid beef were found by Dr. Monro not to prevent the effect. BY an experiment oſ Dr. Fowler the ſame fact ĩs provedl. He found that if a frog, of which the head ſhould be firſt cut oſf, is divided into two parts, juſt above the origin of the ſciatic nerves, and put into a baſon of ater, the hind legs may be thrown into ſtrong contractions, by bringing Zinc and ſilver into contact with each other, at the diſtance of at leaſt an inch ſrom the divided ſpine, ſo long as they are kept nearly in a line with it. Water in this caſe is the only communication between the metals and the origin of the nerves. Dr. Fowler remarks, that he has frequently paſſed this influence through a great length of thin braſs wire, and through the bodies of five perſons communicating with each other by dipping their fingers in baſons of water placed between them; yet it did not appear to have loſt any of its force in this Iong and diffuſed paſſage; for the contractions excited in the frog's leg were equally ſtrong, as when ĩt had paſſcd only through one perſon. Dr. Fowler made many experimenæ in order to diſcover what ſubſtances were conductors and what non-conductors of this influence. He found that all metals when pure were excellent eonductors; that they were not quite ſo good when in the ore; and as far as he could aſcertain, leaſt ſo when in the ſtate of metallic ſaltss. From trials which he made with ſome of the calces oſ metals he coneludes, that in that ſtate theſr capacity as conductors is quite deſtroyed. Stones eemed to be poſſeſſcd of no conducting power. The different non- conductors of electricity were found to be non-conductors of this influence. Living vegetables afforded it a ready paſſage, probably from the ſluids which they contain. Oils of all kinds were ſo far from conducting, that if the ſingers of the perſon holding either the probe or the zinc have perſpired much, even this operates as a complete obſtruction to ihe paſſage of the influence; the inſtant the perſpired matter has been wiped away, and the fingers have been dipped in water, it again paſſes and excites contractions. Dr. Fowler iſhed to aſcertain whether it paſſed over the ſurface or through the ſubſtance of metals; he coated ſeveral rods of diſferent metals with ſealingvax, leaving nothing but their ends, by which they vere held, uncovered. Contractions were excited as readily through the medium of theſe, as if they had tion in paſſing from link to link of ſeveral chains, even when no preſſure, except that of their own weight, is uſed to bring them into contact. Dr. Fowler was led from this to hope, that he ſould be able to make it paſs through a very thin plate of air. He therefore coated a ſtick of ſealing- wax with a plate of tin-foil, and then made an almoſt imperceptible diviſion acroſs it witha ſharp pen- kniſe; but even this interruption of continuity in the conductor was ſuſficient effectually to prevent its paſſage. Dr. Fowler next proceeds to examine whether the capacity of diſferent ſubſtances, as conductors or nonconductors, was at all aſfected by differences of their temperature; but this was not the caſe with Zinc, iron, water, coal, or a common crucible, the only ſubſtances with which he tried the experiment. The eſffects of this influence may be felt in ourſelves by a very eaſy experiment. If a piece of lead is applied to the upper part of the point of the tongue, while a piece of ſilver is applied to the under part, upon bringing the two metals into contact, a ſomewhat pungent ſenſation vill be felt, accompanied by a ſtrong metalline taſte of ſome durationn. The ſame ſenſation takes place though both of the metals are prevented from touching the tongue by the interpoſition of moiſtened paper, Dr. Fouler ſays, he could never perceive that the ſenſes either of touch or ſmell were in the leaſt aſfected by the metals; but the effect which they produce on they eye is very remarkable. Having laid a piece of tin-foll on the point of his tongue, he placed the rounded end of a ſilver pencil-caſe againſt the ball of his eye, in the inner canthus, and ſuffered them to remain In theſe ſituations till the parts were ſo accuſtomed 10 them, that he could examine the ſenſations proAaj duced; he then brought the metals into contact with each other, and, to his ſurpriſe, perceived a pale flaſh of light difſuſe itſelf over the whole of his eye. His tongue was at the ſame time affected with a ſimilar ſenſation to that produced when both of the metals are in contact with it. On darkening the room the flah became more diſtinct and of a ſtronger colour. If the experiment is made with Zinz and gold, inſtead of tinfoll and ſilver, the flah is incomparably more vivid. BV inſinuating a rod of ſilver as far as poſſible up the ncſe and then bringing it into contact with a piece of Zinc placed upon his tongue, he alſo ſucceeded in producing the ſenſation of a flaln of light, rather more vivid than vhen the ſilver was in contact with the ball of the eye. Dr. Fowler alſo mentions that his friend, Mr. George Hunter of York, diſcovered that by placing one of the metals as high up as poſſible between the gums and the upper lip, and the other in a ſimilar ſituation with regard to the under lip, a flalh was produced as vivid as that occaſioned by paſſing one of the metals up the noſe, and placing the other upon the tongue. It differs, however, from the flaſh produccd in the other way, in the ſingular circumſtance of not being conſined to the eye alone, but appearing diffuſed over the whole facee. On repeating the experiment myſelf, and attending to the concomitant ſenſations produced by this diſpoſition of the metals, I perceived that a ſenſe of warmth, at the inſtant that they were brought into contact, diffuſed itſelf over the whole upper ſurface of the tongue, proceeding from its root to the point. Dr. Rutherford, to vhom Mr. Funter had communicated this experiment, remarked, on repeating it, that a ſlah is produced not only at the inſtant the metals are brought into contact, but likeviſc main in contact no flaſh is obſerved. Theſe curious phenomena demonſtrate the free communrication which ſubſũiſts between the ſeveral branches of the fiſih pair of nerves. The following curions fact ĩs alſo taken from Dr. Fowlers ingenious and entertaining book on animal electricity. He laid a leech on a crown- piece of ſilver, placed in the middle of a large plate of zinc. The animal moved its mouth over the ſurface of the ſilver without expreſſing the leaſt uneaſineſs; but having ſtretched beyond it and touched the zinc plate with its mouth, it inſtantly recoiled as if in the moſt acute pain, and continued thus alternately touching and recoiling from the Zinc, till it had the appearance of being extremely fatigued. When placed wholly upon the zinc, it ſeemed perfectly at its eaſe; but when at any time its mouth came in contact with the ſilver lying upon the zinc, the ſame expreſſion of pain was exhibited as beforee. With the earth-worm he found that the experiment ſucceeded ſtill more deciſively. The animal ſprang from the zinc in writhing convulſions; if, when the vorm ſtretched itſelf forwards, one of the folds came upon the zinc, it expreſſed little uneaſineſs in compariſon of what it ſnewed when the point of its head touched the Zinc. Whether this influence, whatever it may be, is derived from the metals alone, or whether the animals contribute to its production, is not eaſy to determine. On re-conſidering the phenomena exhibited by this newly diſcovered influence, we ſhall perceive that in ſome reſpects it remarkably reſembles electricity, and in others as remarkably differs from it. Like the electric fluid, it ſtimulates muſcles to contraction. Like that, its progreſs is arreſted by glaſ, ſealing-wax, &. while it is conducted by metals, moiſture, &c. Dr. Valli inſorms us, that he obſerved the hairs of a mouſe, attached to the nerves of frogby the tin-foil with which he ſurrounded them, alternately attracted and repelled by each other, whenever 2nother metal vas ſo applied as to excite contractions in the ſrogs. Like the electric fluid, it excites a ſenſation of pungency in the tongue; and paſſes with ſimilar rapidity through the bodies of animals. It diſfers ſfrom the electric fluid in many reſpects. In order to excite the electric power, it is neceſſary that there ſhould be motion or friction between two ſubſtances, an electric and a conductorr. Animal electricity is produced by two metals, which are botl conductors and without friction. According to Dr. Fowler, charcoal is a better conductor oſ electricity than the fluids of animal bodies. Whereas he never could make the influence in queſtion paſs through charcoall Dr. Fowler in oppoſition to Dr. Valli alledges, that he could not obſerve that the niceſt electrometers were affected by this influence. The ſame author remars, that the moſt important and characteriſtical diſference which he has yet been able to diſcover between this new influence and electricity, conſiſts in their effects upon the contractile power of animals and of plants. The contractions of animals excſted by electricity, have a tendency to deſtroy that power upon which contractions depend. But the contractions excited by the application of the metals, have in all his experiments had the directly oppoſite eſfcct. The more frequently contractions have been in this way excited, the Ionger they continue excituble; and the longer are the parts upon which ſuch It is ſaid that a ſtream of electricity paſed through a ſenſitive plant, produces an almoſt immediate collapſe of its leaves; but the influence in queſtion produced no ſuch eſfect in an experiment made by Dr. Fowler. The ſame attentive experimentaliſt electriſied both poſitively and negatively frogs, whoſe heads had been ſeparated from their bodies. In theſe circumſtances the effects of the influence in queſtion took place in the ſame manner and degree as when no artificial electricity was preſent. VWhen there is a breach of equilibrium in the diſtribution of the electric fluid, all that is required in order to reſtore the equality of diſtribution, is the interpoſition of a ſingle conducting ſubſtance between the place in which it 2bounds, and that in which there is a deficiency; whereas if the phenomena of animal electricity are to be attributed to the ſame cauſe, it does not appear why rũwo condusting ſubſtances ſould be neceſſary. In eſtabliſhing a comniunication between two oppoſite electricities, as, for example, between the two ſides of a charged phial, it is matter of indiſference to which the conductor is firſt applied; but it is by no means ſo, in producing the phenomena of animal electricity; for if one branch of a conductor is applied to the tin-foll arming a nerve, beſore the other branch has been applied to the muſcles, it frequently fails to excite contractions. If firſt applicd to the muſcles, this is very ſeldom the caſe. From ſome trials which Dr. Fouler made with the artificial and natural loadſtones, and a very ſenſible magnetic needle, he ſaw no reaſon to ſuppoſe that this new influence was in any way connected with magnetiſm. Animal electricity is even found to differ, in ſome reſpects, from that power by which the torpedo, gymnotus, &c. produce their ſockss We are told by Mr. Cavendiſh, that Mr. Walſh found that the ſhock of the torpedo would not paſs through a ſmall braſe chain. It reſembles the power of the torpedo, however, in producing its effects almoſt equally well, when both it and the ſubject upon which it acts are inſulated from ſurrounding conductors. The ſhock of the torpedo, &c. ſeems to depend entirely on the vill of the animal; but the will of the animal has no ſhare in the production of the phenomena diſcovered by Galvani. That this influence is not the ſame with the nervous energy appears from ĩts not being ſtopped by a tight ligature, or by the tranſverſe inciſion of æ nerve, provided iĩts parts are again brought into cloſe contact. The nervous energy is effectually ſtopped by a tight ligature or a tranſverſe inciſion; and placing the divided extremities into the cloſeſt contact, has no eſfect in reſtoring its influence on the parts of the body to vhich the divided nerve was diſtributed. On the whole, it may be remarked, that the influence diſcovered by Galvani reſembles electricity more than any other known law of nature. But it diſfers in ſo many inſtances even from it, that in the preſent ſtate of our knowledge, we muſt conſider it as a newly diſcovered law in nature; though future experience and more extenſive obſervation may lead to a different C H A P. XXXVI. SENS ATION. Digrculty of the Subject Senſation the Efect of certain Relaticns labliſbed by the CreatorOdbjects of diſereut Senſes. Influence of ihe Nerves in conveying Senſutions to the Braiu7he Brain the Reoſitory of IdeasInſiinct of Animals as corneẽted avith the nervous SyſtemHarmony of the SenſesDuraticn of senſible Improſions The Five Senſes. ROM the conſideration of the other functions to that of ſenſation, the tranſition muſt be abrupt and without gradationn. We now enter on àa ſubject above all others the moſt intricate and diſficult, and on which, ſince reaſon is engaged in diſcovering the ſource whence it derives thoſe ideas on which it acts, we muſt neceſſarily reaſon in a circle. Senſation is the link by which the Deity has connected the material to the immaterial world. Without ſenſation, in vain would the ſtars have beſpangled the firmament of heaven, in vain would that glorious object the ſun have been appointed to illuminate and cheriſh the productions of the earth; they could have been nothing to beings who muſt have been unconſcious even of exiſtence: and the material world would have been a work without utility or deſign. Senſation is the conſequence of certain eſtabliſhed relations between objects; of theſe relations we can give no account, for they appear equally above our comprehenſion with the principles of gravitation, electricity, or magnetiſm. Relations between the matter of light, the objects of viſion, and the eye, produce ſight; ſelations between certain vibrations oſ the æir and the ſenſorium of the ear produce hearing, and ſo of the other ſenſes. We by no means, however, can pretend, in. any of theſe caſes, to determine æll the intermediate cauſes and efſects between the quality in a body, which renders ĩit an objcct of ſenſation, and the perception in ourſelves; nor are ve by anv means authorized to conclude, that our perceptons ær emblems of the objects which occaſion chæm. But this circumſtance, upon which ſo much has been ſaid, can be to us of little importarce, ſince it ſtill remains equally true, that our ſenſations are regulated by fixed laws eſtabliſhed by the Pity himſelſ, and ſince ve muſt ſuppoſe that the reator of the univerſe has ordered æll things in wiſdom and goodneſs. We are ignorant of the means by which the objects of ſenſation aſæt the body; but the moſt obvious and ſimple idea that we can form on this ſubject is, that they act by impulſe. Thus the rays of light are known to travel with aſtoniſhing velocity, and to poſ© a pover of moving light bodies. Sound is a tremulous metion of the r, capable of being communicated to bodies in harmonic proportion with it. Cdcrous particles require the aſſiſtance and motion of air to affect the organs of ſcont. The objects of taſte cre more perſectly perceived by being preſſed between the tongoe and palate. In order to feel any thing, iĩt is neceſſery that the ſkin ſhould be preſſed againſt it vith a certain degree of force, or, what ĩs ſtill morę eſſectual, rubbed over its ſurface. The inſtruments, which are deſigned to convey the cffects produced by material objects on the organs of ſenſaætion to the brain, are the nerves, which have been elready deſcribed as diſtributed to the ſeveral parts o Chap. 36 Olecis and our Sents. 365 oſ the body, and more particularly to the organs of ſenſation. What is the diſference of ſtructure, which adapts the ſeveral nerves to the ſeveral organs of ſenſation, ve know not, nor can ve determine whether certain parts of the brain correſpond with the nerves connected with certain organs of ſenſation, and are deſtined to preſerve the ideas received by theſe particular organs, or whether the whole brain is common to the whole ſtock of our ideas and ſenſations; though theſe have been ſabjects of much ſpeculation, it has not even yet been aſcertained, whether any material impre ſſion whatever takes place in the brain in conſequence of impreſſions on our ſenſes; and until this queſtion is determined, we cannot be prepared to examine the other. That the brain, hovever, is really in ſome way or other the repoſitory of our ideas, we may venture to conclude, ſince a perſon who loſes an organ of ſenſation does not loſe the ideas previouſly acquired by it; and ſince perſons ſometimes complin of pain, ſeated in the extremity of a limb of which they have long ſince been deprived. There have been of late years ſome curious ſpeculations among philoſophers with reſpect to the material cauſe of inſtinct in animals, and as there is ſome plauſibility in their reaſonings, it may be worth while briefly to mention the outlines of their ſyſtem. They ſuppoſe that the motions of animals, commonly called inſtinctive, ariſe ſfrom a connection of the nerves belonging to different parts in the brain. In this manner, when the young bird hears the call of its mother, and opens its beak, they ſuppoſe this eſfect to be owing to an original connection between the auditory nerve and the nerves communicating with the muſcles employed in opening the bird's beak. When a new-born quadruped performs the complex action of ſucking, in conſequence of the application of ĩts noſe to the teat of its mother, they attribute its capacity for executing a function, in which ſo many muſcles are employed, to a connection originally exiſting between the nerves of its noſe and thoſe which belong to the organs employed in ſucking. The moſt complex inſtinctive actions of animals, according to theſe philoſophers, may be explained on the ſame hypotheſis. The qualities of bodies, as perceived by one ſenſe, are very frequently connected with others perceived in the ſame bodies by the other ſenſes: thus, apparent unevenneſs of ſurface, is united with a roughneſs to the touch; apparent vibration, with ſound; and there is a certain analogy between the odours and taſtes of maeny bodies. Theſe concluſions, however, are to be referred to our previous experience, and by no means authorize us to think that there is any ſimilitude in the mode of perception between the ſenſes of ſeeing and hearing, ſeeing and feeling, or taſting and ſmelling. It is ſaid, that there have been perſons who could diſtinguiſh colours by the ſenſe of feeling; but if they did, it muſt evidently have been from ſome difference of roughneſs, ſmoothneſs, &c. reſulting from the materials employed in colouring, and not from any property inherent in the different colours as objects of ſight. It is ordained by our Creator, for the moſt important purpoſes, that our ſenſations ſould not be too evaneſcent; and ĩt requires ſome time after one impreſion is made on an organ of ſenſe, before that organ can receive another. This is nroved by a very ſimple and deciſive experiment. All of us hæve probably obſerved, vhen a ſtick lighted at one end, or a co⸗], is whirled round with a certain degree of velocity, that minated, and that we cannot determine at what point of the circle the fire really is, and the ſame circumſtance may be obſerved in the blending of colours, which are yet marked diſtinctly on a wheel before it is turned. The evident cauſe of theſe appearances is in the eye; and in the firſt caſe, when we fix our eye on any point of the circle made by the evolution of a lighted coal, the illuminated object again returns to that point before the ſenſation previouſly produced is worn off: and the blending of the colours on a wheel is explained in the ſame way; for the impreſſion made by one colour remains till the other arrives and mixes with it. It is alſo well known, that perſons who have the beſt and quickeſt ears for muſic cannot judge accurately of more than a certain number of notes in æ ſecond of time. Innumerable facts, indeed, may ſerve to convince us, that the mind cannot well attend to two or more ſenſations at the ſame time ?. Hold your tongue, ſaid a Frenchman, you talk ſo I cannot taſte my meat. The Frenchman was certainly right; for attention of mind ĩs not leſs neceſſary to full perception, than a healthy ſtate of the organ of ſenſe. All authors are agreed, that our knowledge of external objects is entirely acquired through the medium of ſenſation, though ſome perſons of the higheſt rank in literature and philoſophy ſtill contend, againſt Mr. Locke, in favour of the exiſtence of certain innate and e The contemptible vanity of Cæſar, in pretending to perform ſeveral mental operations at once, proceeded from a real ignorance of the human mind. The reply of the juſtly celebrated penſionary De Witt was much more judicious, and ought to be impreſſed on the mind of all young perſons. On being aſked how he contrived to tranſact ſuch a multiplicity of buſineſs in the courſe of a day without neglect or diſorder, he anſwered,  I make it a rule always to attend to one object at a time,” inſtinctive principles; but iſ I was diſpoſed to erter into the diſpute, this would not be the proper place. The ſenſes are five in number: touch, taſte, ſmelling, hearing, and ſight. Of theſe I ſhall endeavour briefly to treat in their order. I have in general conſidered it as more conducive to perſpicuity, to ſeparate the anatomical deſcription of the organs from the functions to which they are ſubſervient; but as the organs of ſenſation are ſmall, and at the ſame time not much connected with the great outlines in the ſtructure of the body; and as the organs oſ ſome of the ſenſes, particularly that of hearing, are complex, and very diſicult to be retained in the mind, I have, in this inſtance, thought ĩs neceſſary to depart from C u A Pp. XXXVII. TOUCH, AND ITS ORG AXS. The moſit extenſive of the SenſesOrgans of Touch.In what Manner it nables us to judge of the Qualities of Bodies/VY. vimg Man couched by CheſcldenRemaris on his Caſe. N order to protect the body from injury, almoſt every pert of it is ſo formed as to give warning to the mind when any thing injurious aſſàils it. The whole body may therefore, in the moſt extenſive ſenſe of the word, be deemed an organ of touch. The internal parts of the body, however, though they are capable of feeling, yet convey no other idea but that of pain, and give us no information with reſpect to the nature of what is applied to them. The ſurface of the body is endued with a much more extenſive pover, and informs us of ſeveral qualities of matter; but the lips, the tongue, and, above all, the fingers, afford us the moſt accurate inſormation of thoſe qualities of bodies which are the objects of this ſenſe. Whhen the epidermis is removed from the true ſkin, we obſerve ſmall obtuſe papillæ, which ſeem  be the parts which more particularly receive the impreſſions of external objects. Theſe papiliæ are ſomewhat more remarkable in the ſkin at the ends of the fingers, and here we may perceive, that they have nerves, though from the extreme minuteneſs of them they are hardly obſervablee We judge of heat and cold from the object being hotter or colder than our fingers*; of the weight of a body, from its degree  The tonguc is a more nice teſt of the warmth of a body than the fingers, for we can feel a warmth at the larger end of an eg vith the tongue, which is not perceptible by the finger:. of preſſure compared with its bul; of its moiſture, by its coldneſs, or the preſence of water; of its ſoftneũ, by its yielding; of its hardneſs, by the yielding of the finger; of its figure, by applying our hands to its different purts; of diſtance, by compariſon with what we know to be the length of the finger, hand, or arm. All our concluſions, however, are ſo regulated by previous experience, and we ſo ſeldom truſt to the cvidence oſ touch without alſo calling in the aſſiſtance of viſion, that without the latter ſenſe the concluſions drawn from the other would be very limited and imperfect. Touch is the ſenſe by which we acquire a knowledge of the diſtance of objects, which, independent of experience, obtained by means of this ſenſe, ĩs not to be diſcovered by viſion. This circumſtance was beautiſully illuſtrated in the caſe of a young maen, as ſtated in Cheſeldens anatomy. This young man, born blind, and being ſuddenly enabled to ſee, in conſequence of a ſurgical operation, imagined that every thing he ſaw touched his eyes, and it was only by repeated trials of the diſtance of objects, by means of touch, that he was taught to correct his error. From this fact, however, it is not perfectly evident, that an infant, born with all its ſenſes perſfect, would naturally conclude that the objects of viſion touchæd its eyes. Might not the young man, from being ſo accuſtomed to judge of objects by their feel, cr by applying them to his tongte or noſe, have acquired the idea, that nothing could be perceived which was not in contact with the body ? and thus the concluſion which he drew might really depend on the C nmn a Pr. XXXVIII. TASTE, AND ITS ORGANS. The Tongue the Organ of TeſteDeſiritrion of itHow ſupplieà .th Nervesluſcles of ihe Tongue.Hovm Taſiing is persormed, - H E tongue has been already caſually mentioned s as in ſome reſpects a very accurate organ of touch; but the ſenſe to which it is more particularly ſubſervient is that of taſte. The palate is commonly conſidered as the organ of taſte; but this is a vulgar error, for unleſs the ſubſtance applied to the palate has ſome degrer of acrimony, no ſenfation whatever iĩs the conſequence. The tongue, and more perticularly at the point, and the ſuperior and the lateral p rts of it, is the true organ of taſte. The ſkin, with which the tongue Is covered, is remarkably ſoſt and thin, and is continually preſerved moiſt and warm. On the ſurface of this ſin papillæ, much Iarger then in any other part of the body, and of ſeveral ſorts, are obſervablee. The firſt kind are few in number, and are placed at the back part of the tongue. Theſe are ſurrounded with a ſmall furrow, and their form is almoſt that of an inverted cone. They are not of a very delicate ſtructure, nor are they much concerned in taſting. The ſecond kind, which ære ſmaller and ſoſer than the preceding, and into which the firſ gradually degenerate, have ſomewhat of the ſorm oſ a muſhroom; they are ſcattered on the ſuperior ſurface of the tongue, till, becoming more numerous towards its ſides, they are there diſtributed in diverging lines. The third kind are of a conical form, are mixed with the other kinds, and are very generally diſtributed over the whole ſuperior part ãnd ſides of the tongue. They are endued with a very acute power of ſenſation, and are the true organs of taſte. Theſe conical papillæ differ greatly in their ſize; and ſome of them are extremely minute. On an accurate examination we alſo find ſome filiform papillæ placed in the interſtices of the conical. Theſe papillæ, beſides being copiouſly ſupplied with blood, are alſo furniſhed with nerves, of which the tongue receives more, in proportion to ĩts bulk, than perhaps any other part of the body. The exhaling arteries, which are numerouſly diſtributed on the ſurface of the tongue, have no further concern in the ſenſe of taſting, than as they help to moiſten and keep the papillæ in a fit ſtate to perform their office. On the upper, and towards the back part of the tongue, are two or three openings, which pour out a mucous fluid. The papillæ in man are covered with a thin and ſemipellucid membrane, which anſwers the purpoſe oſ an epidermis. In many animals, as thoſe which feed on graſs, the tongue is covered with a very rough and thick membrane, perforated ſo as to admit the diſſolved ſood to the papillæ, which are placed beneath it. Under the papillæ is placed the muſcular ſubſtance of the tongue. The muſcles, which conſtitute this ſubſtance, are ſo numerous, and are ſo confounded with each other and with the fat, that the moſt diligent anatomiſt is unable to trace the courſe of many of them. By the help of theſe muſcles the tongue is moveable in all directions, and may be rendered broad, narrow, or hollow, at pleaſuree. The tongue is very plentifully ſupplied with blood-veſſels. A circumſtance univerſally neceſſary to a body being taſted is, that it ſould be diſolved in the ſaliva, and Cna r. XXXIX. SMELLING, AND ITS ORGANS. Final Cauſe of this SenſeLeſi acute in Man than in ſome other AnimalsDifſerent alſlo from theirs Deſcription of ihe Organs of ScentCompariſon betaveen ihis Senſe and that of Taſie. S ane principal uſe of the organs of ſmelling is to aſſiſt animals in obtaining proper food, and to guard them againſt what is improper, they are univerſally placed near the mouth. The organs of ſmell differ, like thoſe oſ the other ſenſes, according to the deſtination of the animals to which they belong. This ſenſe in man is far leſs acute than that of many other animals; thus, the dog poſſeſſes a power of ſmelling, of which we can ſcarcely form a conception, and which we happily do not poſſeſs. Birds of prey, however, are ſaid to have the ſenſe of ſmelling ſtill more acute than dogs. The ſenſe of ſmelling in man is ſuch as to fit him for deriving enjoyment from a diverſity of ſcents, particularly thoſe of flowers, to which dogs and other animals, which do not feed on herbs, ſeem perſectly inſenſiblee. The organ of ſmell is a ſoſt, vaſcular, porous membrane, furniſhed with papiilæ, which is ſpread on the internal ſurface of the noſtrils. On this membrane are diſtributed a great number of nervous fibres, which proceed chieſly from the firſt pair of nerves, and which paſ through the ethmoid bone. From the extreme tenuity of the epidermis, which involves the nerves and blood-veſſels in this membrane, heB morrhage from the noſe is more frequent than from any other part of the body. In order to render this ſenſe more acute, the internal cavity of the noſe is variouſly contorted, and enlarged by a communication with ſcveral adjoining cavities, ſo as to increaſe very much the ſurſace on which the ſentient membrane is diſtribured. The cavities with which the noſtril communicates are called ſinuſes; theſe are the frontal, which is ſeated in the ſrontal bone under the eye-brows; the ethmoid, which is a ſpongy cavity in the ethmoid bone; and the maxillary, which ĩis chieſly formed in the maxillary bone, and lies immeciately above the double teeth of the upper jaw. In animals, which ſmell more acutely, theſe proviſions ſor enlarging the internal ſurface of the noſtril are ſtill more remarkable. The membrane of the noſe is deſended and moiſtened by a viſcid mucus; and ſo neceſſary is this to ſmelling, that when it is deficient, this ſenſe is always imperfectl. The noſtrils are furniſhed with muſcles, by which they are dilated, when, in order to diſtinguiſh ſcents more aceurately, we draw in a large quantity of air. A conſiderable difference between ſmelling and taſting is, that the former is only acted on by the inviſible effluvia of bodies which float in the air, the latter, by matter more condenſed and viſible. There ſeems, however, to be a greater ſimilitude betwæen taſting and ſmelling than between any two of the other ſenſes; and when either of them is injured ; Chap. 40.] I C u A P. XL. HE ARING, AND ITS O RGANS. Deſription of the EarAdmirable Structure of this Organ for conveying and echoing Scund Ears of different Animals. blanner in avhich the Pulsess of Air are conveyed to the Ear.Communication by ihe Euſtachian TubeDReaſon ahy Perſins avho liſlen attentively open their Mouths7he Membrana Tympani probably the great Inſtrument of Learing. S by the ſenſe of ſmelling we diſtinguiſh certain particles floating in the air, ſo by that of hearing we diſcover the motions and vibrations of the air itſelf. The parts of the ear are diſtinguiſhed into external and interna. The former of theſe diviſions comprehends all thoſe parts which we are able to obſerve without diſſection, and which are ſeparated from thoſe of the internal ear by the membrana tympani, improperly called the drum of the ear, as it ĩs only a membrane ſtretched beſore the entrance of the cavity which is properly the ear. The external ear, which from its reſemblance to a certain ſea ſhell is called concha, is a cartilaginous funnel of an irregular oval form, moveably connected to the head by ligaments, muſcles, and cellular ſubſtance. The muſcles with which the ear is furniſhed, and which are much employed by quadrupeds, are of little or no uſe to man. ] Different parts of the external ear are known by different names; its upper cartilaginous part is called the ala or wing, to diſtinguiſn it from the ſoſt and pendent part below, called the lobe; its outer order or circle is called the helix, and the ſemicircle within this, the antihelie. The moveable cartilage, placed immediately before the opening of the ear, is named the tragus, and an eminence oppoſite to this, at the extremity of the antibelix, is called the antitragus. The concha, becoming narrower, terminates in the meatus auditorius exterrus, the external auditory canal. Into this are continued the cutis and epidermis, which, as they enter it, become much thinner and more ſenſible, and are furniſhed with minute hairs, by which warning is given when any inſect has found admittance, or vhen any injurious ſubſtance requires to be removed. This paſſage, and the membrana tympani, by which it is terminated, are moiſtened by a viſcid ſecretion called the wax, which by ſtagnation becomes hard, and, when neglected, ſometimes accumulates to ſuch a degree as to occaſion deafneſs. If we were to examine all nature for a contrivance proper for augmenting and echoing ſounds with the utmoſt force nd the greateſt exactneſs, we ſhould find the ear beſt formed ſor theſe purpoſes; by iĩts admirable ſtructure it receives ſounds of all kinds, admits the greateſt quantity in the ſmalleſt ſpace, and echoes each back ithout confuſion. The external ear in different quadrupeds is differently framed, but always adapted to the creature's manner of life. In ſhape it commonly reſembles the oblique ſection of a cone from near the apex to the baſis. Hares, and ſuch other animals as are daily expoſed to injuries from beaſts of prey, have large ears directed backwards, their eye warning them of any danger before; rapacious animals, on the other hand, have their ears placed directly forwards, as we ſee in the lion, cat, &c. The ſ=low hounds, àand other animals that are deſigned to hear moſt diſtinctly the ſounds wards, or their ears are ſlexible, becauſe they move their head for the moſt part with greater difficulty than man. Man again, who muſt equally hear ſounds coming from all quarters, but eſpecially ſuch as are ſent from about his own height, has his external ear placed in a vertical manner, ſomewhat turned forward. In ſhort, wherever we ſee a peculiarity in the make of this organ in any creature, we ſhall, with very little reſlection, diſcover this form to be more convenient for that creature thun another. The animal alſo has the power of directing the cone oſ the car to the ſonorous body without moving the head*. The membrana tympani is a membrane conſiſting of ſeveral laminæ. Externally there is the epidermis, under this the vaſcular cutis, and, laſtly, a dry, elaſtic, ſhining, and pellucid ſubſtance. Theſe laminæ are connected by their cellular ſubſtance. The membrana tympani is never naturally perſorated, and the paſſage of ſmoke from the mouth through the external ear, mentioned by ſome authorst, is fabulous, except, perhaps, in ſome caſes, where a perforation had been accidentally made by violence or diſeaſe. By the action of particular muſcles, the membrana tympani is preſerved in a degree of tenſion fit for receiving the impreſſions of the air. Under it runs a branch of the fiſth pair of nerves, called the chorda tympani. The membrana tympani is ſtretched before a roundiſh cavity of the os petroſum, hence called the tympanum or drum, and which is about ſeven or eight lines wide, and half as many in depth. This cavity is increaſed in the adult by a communication with the cells of the maſtoĩd proceſs, which do not exiſt in the ſœtus. Within, the tympanum is lined by a moiſt and  Monro on Comparative Anatomy. 1 By Dr. Goldſmith in particular. - E 38: Drum of the Ear. IBoo: x vaſcular membrare. The tympanum communicates with the cavity of the fauces, by means of the meatus auditorius internus, or Euſtachian tube. This canal, which is partly bony and partly cartilaginous, begins by a very narrow opening at the anterior and almoſt ſuperior part of the tympanum, increaſing in ſize as it advances toar ds the cavity of the fauces, where it terminates by an oval 6pening behind the noſtrils. Within the tympanum are lodged the lit:le bones of the ear, which are four in number, and from their ſorm have received the following names. I. The malleus or hammer. 2. The incus or anvil. 3. The roundiſh or oval bone. 4. The ſtapes or ſtirrup. The body of the malleus is placæd in the upper part of the tympanum, and a long , proceſs, called the handle, deſcends between the laminæ of the membrana tympani, where it is accurately fixed. It is articulated with the incus by means of two projecting ridges and a furrow between themm. Tne incus, which conſiſts of a body and two legs, and is not unlike a tooth with a double root, exceeds the other little bones of the ear in ſize and ſtrength. Its body is connected ith the maileus; its morter leg ĩs placed at the entrance of the canal, which leads 10 the cells of the maſtoid proceſs; its longer leg takes the ſame direction with the handle of the malIeus, to which it is attached by a ligament, and being bent inwards at its termination, receives the ſmall oval bone, and by means  of this ĩs united to the ſtapes. The reſemblance of the ſtapes to a fisup is ſo ſtrong, that it can ſcarcely eſcape obſervation. Iis head, which i is formed by the union of its two legs, ĩs hollowed for the reception of the little oval bone which connects it with the longer leg oſ the incus. The two legs oſ the ſtapes are bent nearly into a circle, and where they unite at the baſis, cover th: fo æſra ovalis. The ſtapes is ſituated in a part of the ſnm, ſeparated from the other parts &7 particular mę⸗brane. The ſtapes and malleus are each of thern ſurniſhed vith a little muſcle, called, from the bones to whicn they belong, ſtapedius and tenſor tympani. The firſt of theſe, vhich is the ſmalleſt diſtinct muſcle in the body, ariſes from a little cavity at the poſterior and upper part of the cavity of the ympa- and iĩts tendon is inſerted at the back part of the head of the ſtapes. This muſcle, which draws the ſtapes obliquely upwards, aſiſts in ſtretching the membrana tympani. The other muſcle is more remarkable, and as it operates like the former in ſtretching the membrana tympani, has more particularly obtained the name of tenſor tympani. It ariſes from the cartilaginous extremity of the Euſtachian tube, and is inſerted into the back part of the handle of the malleus, which it helps to pull inwards, and by that means to ſtretch the membrana tympani. That part of the ear which is ſituated behind the tympanum is called the lIabyrinth. The labyrinth ĩs ſeparated from the tympanum by a bony partition, and only communicates with it by means oſ two openings of nearly equal ſize, one of which is the feneſtra ovalis, which is ſaut by the baſe of the ſtapes, the other the feneſtra rotunda, which is cloſed by a continuation of the membrane which lines the cavity of the tympanum. In the Iabyrinth of the ear are ſituated the veſtibule, the three ſemi-circular canals, and the cochlea. The veſtibule or porch is a cavity of an irregular roundiſh form, and is placed nearly in the center of the os petroſum, between the tympanum, the ſemicircular canals, 2nd the cochlea. It is open on the ſide of the tympanum by means of the feneſtra ovalis, mnd communicates with the upper portion oſ the cochlea by an oblong foramen, which is under the feneſtra ovalis, from which ĩt is ſeparated only by a very thin partition. The ſemicircular canals in the infant are ſormed of a diſtinct bony ſhell, but in the adult coaleſce with the firm os petroſum, and are three in number. Thev form rather more than ſemicircles, and open at both ends into the veſtibulee. Only five openings, Eowever, are obſerved, ſince two of the canals are united at one termination. The cochlea, ſo called ſrom iĩts reſemblance to the ſnell of a ſnail, is ſormed by a conical nucleus and circumvolutions oſ thin bony lamellæ, which perform two complete circles and an half beſore they terminate at the apex. The canal of the cochlea is divided by a ſeptum into two parts, which are called the ſcalæ; of theſe one begins ſfrom the feneſtra rotunda, and is called the ſcala tympani, the other from the ueſtibule, and is called the ſcala veſtibuli. The ſeptum, vhich divides the ſcalæ from each other, is partly bony and partly membranous; it is deficient at the apex of the cochlea, where the cavities of the ſcalæ communicate. The bony lamella which ſeparates the two canals is exceedingly thin, and ſills about two- thirds oſ the diameter oſ the cana. The reſt of the ſeprum is compoſed of a moſt delicate membrane, which lines the whole internal ſurface of the cochlea. The portio mollis of the ſeventh pair of nerves, furniſhes a film of medullaty matter to the whole internal ſurſace of the veſtibule, the ſemicircular cænals, and the cochlea. Every part of the labyrinth is alſo ſupplied with an aqueous exudation, which is ſuppoſed to receive and propagate to the nerves the vibratory motions imparted by the air. When this ſluid is collected in too great quantity, or is compreſſed by the ſtapes, it is ſuppoſed to eſcape through two minute canals or aqueducts, lately deſcribed by Dr. Cotunni, a phyſician of Naples. One of the aqueducts opens into the bottom of the veſtibulum, and the other into the cochlea, near the feneſtra rotunda. They both paſs through the os petroſum, and communicate with the cranium; they are lined with a membrane, which is ſuppoſed to be a production of the dura mater. The manner in which ſound is propagated by pulſes or undulations of the air has been fully, and, I truſt, clearly explained in a preceding part of this work *; and from what has been now ſtated it will appear, that the ear is an organ admirably adapted for the reception of theſe impreſſions. Sound is, however, not merely conveyed by the external cavity of the ear; but by means of the Euſtachian tube, the air finds admittance to the cavity of the tympanum, and the eſfect of the vibrating air, entering the mouth, may be conveyed to the ear. Hence we perceive the reaſon why perſons who liſten very attentively, and perſons affected with partial deaneſs, open their mouths. When we breathe, the air received by this paſſage preſſes the membrana tympani outwards, and when we make a very full inſpiration, as in yawning, this happens to ſuch a degree as to prevent the impreſſion of ſounds ſrom without, and occaſions a temporary deaſneſs. Notwithſtanding the labour of anatomiſts in tracing the intricate, ſingular, and very curious ſtructure of æ 5æę hosk v. chap. 10. the ear, they have never been able tò diſcover th⸗ peculiar uſes to which all the ſeveral parts are ſubſervient. That the concha ĩs deſigned to catch and reverberate to the mtitory tube the vibrations oſ the air we are certain, from the anal gous eſfect oſ a ſimilar organ, the ear. trumpet. The membrana tympani; and the little bones of the ear, are ſaid to have been deſtroyed by diſeaſe, without depriving the patient of hearing. I cannot, however, ſuppoſe, that any part of the ear is unneceſſary. t therefore ſeems reaſonable to believe, that the membrana tympani, which Is ſtretched æcroſs the paſſage to which the vibrations of the air are directed, is deſigned to receive them, for which uſe, by its elaſtic nature, it is admirably fitted. The malleus is attached to the membrama tympani, the incus to the malleus; the oval bone connects one leg of the incus to the head of the ſtæpes, and the baſis of the latter bone preſſes on the feneſtra ovalis. From this ſtructure we can ſcarely draw any other concluſion, than that the tremulous motion excited in the me mbrana tympani by the impreſſions of the air are propagated through the contents of the tympanum, and imparted to thoſe of the Iabyrinth, which are lined with a delicate nervous film, on which they may operate ſo as to produce the ideas of ſound. When, however, we contempiate the various parts of the labyrinth, we cannot aſign any reaſon for ſo complex a ſtructure, and can onſy admire it as one of the wonders of creation. The analogy of other animals, indeed, inſtructs us in one particular, viz. that the cochlea ĩs not eſſential to hearing, ſince birds and fiſh hear accurately without this part; but why it is not eſſential remains ſtill a queſtion. To conſeſs, however, that we are ignorant of the means by which we perceive ſounds, is not more humble than we muſt alſo be with reſpect to the information derived from the other ſenſes. Why a particular object aſFects our ſenſes in a particular manner, is concealed ſfrom us by circumſtances which our underſtandings cannot diſcover. As objects appear green when ſeen through a green glaſ/, ſo is every object modified by the medium of the ſenſes. It is natural, however, to the human mind, to be deſirous of perceiving things as they really are, and this may be an enjoyment provided for us in a future ſtate, when we may regard the earth merely as a planer, and the ſun as a fixed ſtar; and when the mind, liberated from the ſetters of the body, and endued with new faculties, may at once contract its attention to the lIaws which regulate the exiſtence of the minuteſt animal, and extend its views to the comprehenſion of all C u a r. XLI. S I G H T. Deſecription t&f the e Ees of diferent AnimalsHow Vi iſion i: performedHow all the Parts of an Object are comprehended by the Eye An Inage of every Object painted on the Retina of each Exe, and yet only one Object perceivedCauſe and Cure of ſquinting. The Senſe of Sight limited. By achat Means ave judge of Diſtance. State of the Sight at diſerent AgesCautious for preſerving the Sight. HE eyes, thoſe exquiſite organs which raiſe the perceptive powers of the mind to ſome compariſon with thoſe of ſuperior beings, and which in an inſtant of time admit impreſſions from an almoſt infinite variety of objects, are in their ſtructure extremely ſimple. They are ſituated in two cavities, the orbits, which afford them protection from a great variety of external injuries, and contain a quantity of fat, which anſwers the purpoſe of a ſoft cuſhion, on which they may reſt, and perform their different motions with eaſe and ſaſety. The globe of the eye is immediately covered by the eyelids, which are continuations of the common integuments of the body, doubled inwards, and attached to the eye, by which they produce what is called the tunica conjunctiva. Where the two eyelids are united together, they form the canthi, or angles of the eyes; that next the noſe is called the internal large or inferior angle; the other, on the contrary, which is next the temples, is called the external ſmall or ſuperior anglee. The edges of both eyelids are furniſed vith rims of cartilage called the tarſi; on the margins of theſe, which are called eiliary edges, are ſituated ſebacious glands, which diſcharge an oily fluid for the purpoſc of preventing adheſion. The Eiliary edges of the tarſi are furnied with eye- laſhes. The chief uſe of theſe ſeems to be, to prevent duſt, and other matters floating in the atmoſphere, from ſalling into the eyes. At the internal angle oſ the eye is ſituated the caruncula lachrymalis, which is a ſmaãll reddiſh oblong body., This ſubſtance ſeems to be glandular. EY the aid of a microſcope we obſerve upon it a great number of ſmall hairs, covered by an olly vellowil matter. On ihe globe of the eye, near this glandular body, is a ſemilunar fold formed by the membrana conjunctiva. This fold, which is called the membrana ſemilunaris, is ſhaped like a creſcent, the two points of which anſwer to the puncta la achrymalia, which are the beginnings oſ a canal terminating in the cavity of the noſtrils. The ſurſace of the eye is conſlantly moiſtened by a very fine limpid fluid, the tears, which ære chiefly, and perhaps wholly, derived from a gaænd, ſituated in a ſmall depreſſion of the os frontis, ne⸗r the external angle of the eye. Its excretory ducts pierce the tunica conjuncliva juſt above the cartilaginous borders of the upper eyelids. As this fluid enters the eye at the ſuperior angle; it naturally deſcend⸗ towards the inferior, and ĩs alſo frequently ſpread over the furface of the eye by the motion of the eyelids. When it arrives, aſter thus having waſhed the eye, at the internal angle, it ĩs conducted by the membrana ſemilunaris into the puncta lachrymalia, which lead into the ſacchus lachrymalis, ſrom which it is ultimately diſcharged into the noſe. When the eye is irritated by any extraneous ſubſtance, the tears are diſcharged in greater quantity, and thus ſerve as a defence to this tender organ, and ſometimes waſh avay the cauſe of irritation, or ſacilitate its removal. Affections of the mind alſo ſometimes occaſion an increaled flow of tears; the eſicient cauſe of this connection we cannot trace; but the final cauſe ſeems to be to excite ſympathy, and urge the unfeeling heart to atts of mercy and benevolence. The ball of the eye is a caſe of a globular form. It onſiſts of three coats, an external one called the ſclerotica, which is white and gliſtening like the tendon of a muſcle; an intermediate one, æbcunding with Blood-veſſels, called the choroldes; and an internal coat, called the retina, which is an extremely tender film or network, formed by the expanſion of the optic nerve. This deſcription, however, applies only to the poſterior and lateral parts of the eye, for at the ſore part oſ the eye, inſic⸗ ad of the opake tunica ſclerotica, we obſerve a projecting tranſparent circular part, continued from the ſclerotica, which from its ſubſtance being tranſparent like horn, is called the cornea. This portion is ſomeæhat more convex than the ſeleroties, and repreſents the ſegment of a ſmall ſphere added to the ſegment of a greater, or, to expreſs the ſame idea in more familiar language, it may be conſidered as reſembling a convex watch-glaſs, fixed on the leſs convex ſurface of a watch caſe. The tunica choroĩdes extends from the back part of the eye as far as the termination of the ſclerotica, wherẽ it is firmly connected by means of a white ring projecting inwards, and called the ciliary circle or ligament. From this edge proceeds a very fine weblike membrane or curtaln, called the iris. Its difference of colour in different perſons is a matter of common obſervation. In the middle of the iris is an opening which always agpears black, and which is rendered narrower or vider by the contractile powers of the iris. This opening is called the pupil, through which the rays of light are admitted to the internal parts oſ the eye. The tunica choroides is deſcribed by ſome author: as conſiſting of two Iaminæ. This deſcription, however, applies much better io the eyes of ſome animals, particularly to thoſe of ſheep, than to thoſe of man. Thoſe who ſuppoſe the choroides to conſiſt of two laminæ, deſcribe the external one as terminating at the ciliary ligament, and the internal one as extending further to form the iris. This iris itſelf is deſcribed as conſiſting of two laminæ, and it is very certain that two ſets of fibres may be obſerved. Theſe are ſuppoſed to be muſcular, and from the mobility of the iris there ſeems no reaſon to doubt of their being really ſo. Some of the fibres are orbicular, and lie round the pupil; others are ſtrait, and extend from the circumference of the iris to its center. The iris has motions of ſuch a nature, that the pupil is contracted on the approach of a ſtrong light, and is dilated in proportion as the light is Teꝶ vid. By this admirable yet ſimple contrivance, the eye adapts itſelf to the different proportions of light to which it is expoſed. If the pupil was always as much contracted as it is when expoſed to the light of noon day, a weaker light, ſuch as that of the moon, could not be admitted with ſuſficient ſreedom to anſwer any uſeful purpoſe. On the contrary, if the pupil was immoveably dilated, we might take advantage of the ſcattered rays of light, but ſhould be diſtreſſed and blinded by the glorious eſfulgence ofſ the mid-day ſun. When a ſtrong light ſucceeds to darkneſs, we are under a neceſſity of cloſing the eye- lids, or of turning away the head, till the pupil has been accommodated to the change by the contractile powers of the iris. The choroĩd coat is internally covered with a ſlimy ſubſtance of a dark colour, called the pigmentum nirum. The epithet black, however, ĩs not deſcriptive of this ſubſtance in every race oſ animals. On the contrary, in the ferret the pigmentum is white, and this circumſtance enables that animal to ſee in the dark, faculty well adapted to its habits and mode of life In man, diſtinct viſion in a ſull light is a more uſeful quality than the power of diſtinguiſing objects where the light of dey is excluded. The reaſon, therefore, oſ the black colour of the pigmentum is, probably, that thoſc rays which paſs the retina, which is a fibrous ſubſtance, may be abſorbed, whereas, when it is of a light colour, many of them are reſlected and ſtrike the retina, thus increaſing the power of viſion vhere there is a deficiency of Iight, but producing too great an efſfulgence and glare in ordinary caſes. This reſlection ĩs very obvious in the degree oſ illumination which proceeds from the eyes of a cat in a dark place æ. The poſterior part of the iris Is of the colour of a grape, and was therefore by the ancients called the uvea. The eye, being, therefore, every where provided within, except at the entrance of the optic nerve, with a lining of a dark colour, becomes a camera obſcura, and the light which is admitted through thæ pupll, and puſſcs to the bottom of the eye, ĩs not diſturbed vith light reſlected from other ſurfaces. The ball of the eye is filled with three ſubſtances, yhich diſfer ſfrom each other in conſiſtence, but are al called humours of the eye; they are the vitreous, he cryſtalline, and the aqueous. See plate xv. fig. I, i 2. * Hunter on the pigmentum of the cye. Se] his Animal Jconcry. > The vitreous humour was ſo called from a ſuppoſed reſemblance to melted glaſs; ĩt is a clear and gelatĩnous fluid, very much reſembling the white of an egę It fills about three fourths of the globe of the eye, and extends from the poſterior part of the eye as far as the ciliary ligament. It is contained in a fine tranſparent capſule or membrane, and being dexterouſly removed from the globe of the eye, preſerves its conſiſtence for ſome time, being ſupported by its capſule but afterwards runs off, and the capſule ſirinks by degrees. The thin capſule which ſurrounds the vitreous hummour ſends off a number of me mbraneous proceſſes into the vitreous ſubſtance, where they form cells, which communicate with each other, and afford a greater degree of firmneſc and tenacity to the whole mab. The anteri or part of the vitreous humour is excavated for the reception of the cryſtalline. This body has the conſiſtence of very ſirm jelly, and has the ſform of a lens more convex behind than before. It is moſt properly denominated the cryſtalline lens, and is inveſted with a capſule, which is derived from that of the vitreous humour, or at leaſt connected with it. Steno obſerved, that the lens was compoſed of concentric lamellæ, 2nd Zinn has diſcovered radiated ſtreaks of a pearl colour, dividing it into litile triangles. The colour and ęonſiſtence of the cryſtalline humour varies at diſferent ages. Till the age of thirty it is very tranſparent, and almoſ without any colour. It aſterwards becomes yellowiſh, and that yellowneſs gradually increaſes. Till the age of twenty the conſiſtence of the lens is generally uniform throughout; from this time it becomes hardeſt in the middle, and this hardneſs gradually increaſes, and extends towards the ſurface æ. The  The eryſtalline lens in fiſh is completely ſpherical, and is : more denſe tha; in terreſtrial animals. This diſference is to be The fore part oſ the eye is filled by a fluid tranſparent like the others, but as thin as water, and it ĩs thereſore called aqueous; this occupies all the ſpace between the cryſtalline lens and the prominent cornea. The i iris floats looſely in this fluid, and divides it into two parts called chambers, which communicate with each other through the pupil. The poſterior chamber is that ſpace contained between the poſterior ſurſace o the iris and the lens; the anterior is that between the anterior part of the iris and the cornea. The eye receives its blood from the internal carotid artery. The optic nerve does not enter it immediately behind the pupil at its poſterior part, but rather towards the noſe, ſo that the diſtance berween the pupil and optic nerve is greater when meaſured round the external ſide of the eye next the forehead, than when the internal ſurface is meaſured next the noſe. At that part of the eye where the optic nerve enters, no ſenſe of viſion can be excited. The muſcles of the eye have been already deſeribed in another part of the work. For the human eye, ſee Plate XV. Fig. 1, and 2. The ſather of the preſent Dr. Monro, of Edinburgh, has publiſied, in his comparative anatomy, ſome excellent remarks on the variety in the eyes of different animals, th-n which no more ſtriking inſtance can be produced of the iſdom ænd deſign which pervades creation. F All quadrupeds have, he obſerves, at the internal canthus oſ the eye, a ſtrong firm membrane with a accounted for from the diferent refractive power of the medium in which they live. The rays of light, in paſſing out of one medium into ancther, undergo a refraction proportioned to the diſference of their denſities. As water, therefore, is a more denſe medium than air, the eyes of ſuch animals as inhabit the former muſt have a greater refractive power than thoſe which live in the Iatter, for the production of diſtinct viſion. cartilaginous edge, which may be made to cover ſome part of their eye; and this is greater or leſs in diſferent animals, as their eyes are more or leſs expoſed to dangers in ſearching aſter their food. This membrana nictitans, as it is called, is however not very large in all theſe animals. Cows and horſes have it ſo large as to cover one half of the eye like a curtain, and at the ſame time it is tranſparent enough to allow abundance of the rays of light to paſs through it. Fiſhes have a cuticle always over their eyes, as they are ever in danger in that inconſtant element, the water. In this thereſore we may obſerve a ſort of gradation.  All quadrupeds have a ſeventh muſcle belonging to the eve, called ſuſpenſorius. It ſurrounds almoſt the whole optic nerve, and is fixed into the ſclerotic coat as the others are. Its uſe is to ſuſtain the weight of the globe of the eye, and to prevent the optic nerve from being too much ſtretched, without obliging the four ſtrait muſcles to be in æa continual contraction, which would be inconvenient: at the ſame time this muſcle may he brought to aſiſt any of the other four, by cauſing one particular portion of ĩt to act at a time.  The next thing to be remarked js the figure ofſ the pupil, which is different in diſferent animals, but alvays exactly accommodated to the creature's way of life, as well as to the diſferent ſpecies of objects that are vieved. Man has ĩt cſrcular, for obvious reaſons: an ox has it oval, with the Iongeſt diameter placed tranſverſely, to take in a larger view of its food: cats, again, have theirs liewiſe oval, but the longeſt diameter placed perpendicularly; they can either exclude a bright light altogether, or admit only as much as is neceſſary,. The pupil of different animals varies in wideneſs, according as the internal organs of viſion are more or leſs acute: thus cats and owls, who ſeek their rey in the night, or in dark places (and conſequently muſt have their eyes ſo formed as that a few rays oſ light may make a lively impreſ ſon on the retina), have their pupils in the day time contracted into a ve 7 norrow ſpace, as a great number of rays would oppreſtheir nice organs; while in the night, or where the light is faint, they open the pupil, and very fully admit the rays. In the ſfame vay, vhen the retina is inflamed, a great number of rays of light would occaſion a painſul ſenſation; therefore the pupilĩ is contracted: on the cont rary, in ing people, or in a beginning amauroſis, it is generally diluted, as the eyes on ſuch occaſions are very dificultly aſfected, and in ſome meaſure infenſible. See Plate XV. Fig. 3, 4. 5. cf The poſterior part of the choroid coat, which is called tapetum, is of different colours in different creatures. For oxen, ſeeding moſtly on graſs, have this membrane of a green colour, that it may reſlect upon the retina all the rays of light which come from the objects of that colour, while other rays are abſorbed: thus the animal ſees ĩts food better than it does other objects. Cats and owls have their tapetum of a whitiſh colour; and for the ſame reaſons have the pupil very dilãtable, and their organs of viſion acute: and we ſhall find, that all animals ſee more or leſ diſtinctly in the dark, according as their tapetum approaches nearer to white or black colour. Thus dogs, who hæve it of a greyih colour, diſtinguiſh objects better in the night than man, whoſe tapetum is dark brown, and who, I believe, ſees worſt in the dark of EDY creature; it being originally deſigned that he ſould reſt from all kinds of employment in the night time. The diſference then of the colour of the tapetum, as indeed the fabric ofany other part in diferent creatures, 2lvays cepends on ſome Farticular advartage accruing to to the animal in iĩts peculiar manner of liſe from this ſingularity*. It was neceſſary, in a former part of this work, to notice the ſubject of viſion, in deſcribing the effects and phenomena of Ilight 7. The eye was then mentioned as a mere optical inſtrument, but after the particular deſcription of that organ, which has now been given, a more particular inveſtigation of the ſenſe of ſight ſeems to be required; and ſhould the reader find any thing like repetition in what will now be ſubmitted to him, his candour will, I doubt not, pronounce my apology for endeavouring to render as clear as poſſible a ſubject which is at once both important and diſficult to be underſtood. It has been ſuſfiiently explained, thar from cvery point of a viſible object the rays, or rather pencils, of light are emitted or reflected in every direction; but to produce viſion, it is neceſſary that they ſhould be concentrated or converged to a ſuch point as to make a forcible impreſſion on the retina. Thus from the luminous body A (Fig. 6.) the rays 7, r, r are ſent in various directions. Thoſe which fall upon the tranſparent cornea C C are there reſracted in ſuch a manner as to enter the pupil at ꝑ, and in paſſing the cryſtalline lens or humour they ſuffer a ſecond refraction, and are converged to a point or focus at the point æ on the retina. Now it is evident, that if the rays could have paſſed the humours oſ the eye in their natural direction, that is in the direction of the cone or pyramid C, 4, C, they would have made upon the retina a very extenſive but feeble mpre ſon, ſuch as we know by experience could not produce diſtinct viſion; to obviate this r Monros Comparative Anatomy, it is appeinted by the all- wiſe author of our exiſtence, that by the force of the reſraction which they ſuſfer in te eye, they ſould form another cone oppoſed to the irſt at ĩts baſe, and the apex of which is at 4, and thus an impreſſion ſufficiently forcible to produce diſtinct viſion is made on the retina. In the preceding inſtance, the luminous body A nas conſidered as a point, and what has been ſaid of it vill appl ly to æ ory point of a viſible object, which is apable of tranſmitting or reflecting to the eye a pencil or collection. of rays. Thus we may eaſily ſuppoſe that from every point of the arrov A, D, B, (Fig. 7.) pencils of light may be tranſmitted; theſe, like all pencils or collections of rays, coming from a point, will diverge, and will fall upon the eye in the form of cones or pyramids, ſuch as A, M, C, from the point A; D, e, ĩi fromthe point D; and B, C, N, from the point B. If the eye, therefore, is in a proper ſtate, the divergent rays proceeding from the point D vill be united together into one pencil or maſs, ſuch as they were when they firſt proceeded from the object, at the point 4, upon the retina; the divergent rays, which fall more obliquely from the point A, vill be united on the retina, at the point æ; and thoſe which proceeded from B will, by the ſame rule, be converged and meet at 5. Hence it is evident, that by means of this reſraction there are certain points at which the rays of light, after paſſing the pupil, croſs each other, 2nd the image which is formed on the retina is conſequently inverted. If che humours of the eye, through age or weakneſ;, have ſirunk or decayed, the cornea w ĩl then be too flat, and the rays not being ſufficiently bent or refracted, arrive at the retina before they are united in a focus, - : hind it, as in Plate XVI. Fig. 3. They thereſore do not make an impreſſion ſuſficiently correct and forcible, but form an indiſtinct picture on the bottom of the eye, and exhibit the object in a confuſed and imperfect manner. This defect of the eye ĩs therefore remedied by a double convex lens, ſuch as the common ſpectacle glaſſes, which, by cauſing the rays to converge ſooner than they otherwiſe would, aſford that aid to this defect of nature which the circumſtances of the caſe may require, the convexity of the glaſt being always proportioned to the deficiency in viſion. If, on the contrary, the cornea is too convex, the rays will unite in a focus before their arrival at the retina, as in fig. 95, and the image will alſo be indiſtinct. This defect is remedied by concave glaſſes, which cauſe the rays to diverge, and conſequently, by being properly adapted to the caſe, will enable the eye to form the image in its proper place. As the direction in which the rays croſs each other bears a duæ proportion to the angle in which they are tranſmitted from the object to the eye, it is evident that the image formed upon the retina will be proportioned to the apparent magnitude; and thus we have our firſt ideas of the ſie and diſtance of bodies, which, however, in many caſes are corrected by experitnce. The nearer any object ĩs to the eye, the larger is the angle by which it will appear in the eye, and therefore the greater will be the ſceming magnitude of that body. This fact has been already explained, but to render it ſtill clearer, ſuppoſe the object II (ſee Fig. 10.) to be at a hundred yards diſtance, it will form an angle in the eye at A. At two hundred yaærds diſtance, the angle it makes will be twice as ſmall in the eye at E. Thus to whatever moderate diſtance the object is removed, the angle it forms in the eye vill be proportionably leſs, and thercfore the object will be diminiſhed in the ſame proportion. From ſome late experiments made by Dr. Hoſach end Mr. Ramſũen, it app cor, that the power of charging the focus of the eye, and adapting it to difforent diſtances, does not re e in the eryſtalline lens, buti in the cornea: that the cornea is compoſced of lamſnæ; that it i: elaſtic, and capable of being elongated one eleventh of ĩts diameter, anc of contracting to its former length by its cwn exertions; and laſtly, that the tendons of the four ſtrait muſcles of the eye are continued to the edge of the cornea, and terminate or are inſerted in its external lamina. By the ſame experiments it was found, that in changing the focus of the eye from ſeeing with parallel ravs to a near diſtance, there is a viſible alteretion produced in the figure of the cornea, which renders it more convex; and the alteration by which the cornea is brought back to its former ſtate is equally viſible* Artificial eyes are ſold by the opticians, in which all the humours are made of different kinds of glaſs, and may be ſeparated at pleaſure. At the back part, where the retina is ſuppoſed i in the natural eye to receive the converged rays, is placed a piece of ground glaſ, vwhere the image from the oppoſed objects is painted in an inverted poſition, as in a camera obſcura. The ſame effect may be produced with a natural eye, and the nature of viſion may be thus experimentally demonſtrated: if a bullock's eye is taken freſh, the poſterior coats dexterouſly removed even to æ vitreous humour, and if a piece of white paper ĩs then placed at the part, the image of any bright object which is placed before the eye vill be ſeen itinal; painted on the paper, but in an inverted poſition. iar r ' x It has been a matter of much doubt and diſpute by what means it happens that we ſee every object in its natural upright poſition, when we know it to be inverted on the object of ſenſation. To this the imoſt ſatisfactory anſwer that can be given is, that we do not ſee the picture which is formed at the bottom of the eye, but the object itſell. The picture, or rather the impreſſion made on the retina, is the means of ſeeſng, and thereſore it does not appear oſ material corſequence on what part of the retina the impreſſion is mede. We in fact ſee the image in the direction of that ray which convers to us the ſenſation, or rather in the direction of the axis of that pyramid, which a pencil of divergent rays ſorms in proceeding from any point of an object. Thus in Fig. 7. we ſee the bomt of the arrow (which is indeed depicted in the Iower part of the eye) in the direction oſ the line a, 4, that is, in its proper upright poſition. On theę contrary, we ſee the cther extremity of the arrow hich ĩs painted on the ſuperior part oſ the retina) in the direction of b, B, that ĩs at the lower end of the object. However, therefore, the image, which is formed, muy appear inverted 1o a perſon inſpecting æ a natural eye, as in the preceding experiment, ſtill the eye itſelf diſcerns the object in its proper and natural poſition. As the rays of light are emitted or reſiected ſrom a viſible object in all directions, it is evident, that ſome of them from every part of it muſt reach the eye. Thus the object A, B, C. (Fig. 11.) is viſible to an eye in any purt, vhere the rays A a, Ab, A r, A d, A æ, B a, BS, Bę, B4, B, C q, C C, C 4, and C æ can come. But though rays are reſlected from every point of the object to every point of the circumambient ſpace, yer ĩt is evident, that only thoſe rays which paſ through the pupil of the eye can affect the ſenſe; theſe rays give alſo the idea oſ diferent colours, according to the properties of the bodies which tranſmit or reflect them, upon the principles formerly demonſtrated. It is very diſicult to explain how it happens thae two diſtinct images are painted upon both eyes, and yet that we only perceive a ſingle object. This difficulty has been attempted to be ſolved by having recourſe to the power of habit; but I confeſs I cannot help being of opinion with Dr. Reid, that the correſpondence of the centers of the two eyes, on hich ſingle viſion depends, does not ariſe from cuſtom, but from ſome natural conſtitution of the optic nerves. The caſe of the young man born blind, who was couched by Mr. Cheſelden, and who ſaw ſingly with both eyes, immediately upon receiving his ſight, is very properly adduced by that reſpectable author in favour of this ſuppoſition. He alſo found, that three young gentlemen, whom he endeavoured to cure of ſquinting, ſaw objects ſingly, as ſoon as they were brought to direct the centers of both eyes to the ſame object, though they had never been uſed to do ſo from their infancy; he remarks too, that there are caſes in which the fulleſt conviction of an object being ſingle vill never make the object appear ſo, even by the longeſt practice, as in the caſt of Iooking g through æ multiplying ę glaſs * In thoſe who ſquint the diſtance between the two pupils is conſiderably leſs than in other perſons, for when the pupil of the undiſtorted eye is ſeated in the middle oſ the orbit, as in looking directly forwards, the pupil of the other eye is drawn cloſe to the noſe, ſo that the two axes are never pointed at the ſame obæ Reids Inquiry into Human Mind, ꝑ. 267. / ject, though the muſcles ſo far act in concert with each other, as to move both eyes the ſame way at the ſame inſtant of time. Dr. Jurin obſerves, that this vicious habit may eaſily be contracted by a child, if he is laid in his cradle in ſuch a poſition as to perceive the light with one eye only. The moſt common cauſe of ſquinting is, however, an inferiority in the ſight of one of the eyes. Dr. Reid aſſerts, that having examined above twenty perſons, who ſquinted, he found in all of them a defect in the ſight of one eye. Four of them only had ſo much of diſtinct viſion in the weak eye as to be able to read with it, while the other was covered; the reſt ſaw nothing diſtinctly with the defective eye*. When the eyes are equally good, we ſee with both eyes more diſtinctly than with one, by about a thirteenth part; but when the eves are unequal in their powers, objects appear leſs diſtinct with both eyes than with one. It is no wonder, thereſore, that ſuch perſons ſhould chuſe to make uſe of one eye only, and to turn the other aſide; the weak eye, in this caſe, is generally turned to the noſe, becauſe in that ſituation the direction of its axis is as diſtant as poſſible from that of the good eye; and beſides this, the noſe conꝶceals many objects from its view. This is, however, not the only cauſe of ſquinting it is ſometimes, though rarely, the effect oſ habit, as was intimated reſpecting children being laid in the cradle with one eye turned from the light, or covered. Whahen the eye that ſquints is turned outwards towards the temples, that caſt of the eye is commonly the mere effect of habit. If the eyes differ much in point of goodneſs, the cure will be extremely difficult. When they do not  Reid Inquiry into Human Mind, p. 253. materially differ in this reſpect, the proper and natural cure is to cover the good eye for ſome titne; for in this caſe the diſtorted eye is obliged to act, and to turn itſelſ directly to objects, which in a Iitile time becomes natural and eaſy to it. Even a very weak eye acquires ſtrength by exerciſe; perſons whoſe ſquinting ſeemed almoſt incurable, having covered their good eye for a few minutes only, have been themſelves ſurpriſed to find the ſtrength that their bad eye had acquired by exerciſe even ſor that ſhort period. When the ſquint has proceeded entirely from a vicious habit, a cure has been effected by covering the good eye for a fortnight only * The powers of this ſenſe are limited, as well as thoſe of every other ſenſe and faculty of man. 1ſt. The ſight Is very limited with reſpect to bodies in motion; for with a certain degree of velocity, as that of a cannon ball through the air, they are not viſible, unleſs very luminous. 2. The ſame effect is exemplified by the experiment of whirling a lighted coal, as was already intimated. 3. If two objects unequally diſtant move with the me degree of velocity, the more remote will appear the ſlover. 4th. A viſible object moving with any velocity appears to be at reſt, if the ſpace deſcribed in a ſecond of time is inviſible to the eye. Thus a near object, as the index of a clock, moving ſlovly, or a remote one, as a planet, moving ſwiſtly, appears to be at reſt. 5th. It is well known, that when thie eye is proceeding ſtrait ſorward, as in a boat at ſea, a lateral object, either at reſt, or moving not ſo faſt, appears to move the contrary way. Gth. If, however,  Reiòs Inquity into the Human Mird, p. 253. the object is at a very great diſtance, it will ſcem to go the ſame way, as when a perſon runs by moonlight, the moon appears to accompany him. 7th. If two or more objects move with the ſame velocity, and a third remains at reſt, it willappear in motion while the moving ones ſeem at reſt; this is exemplified by the moon and the clouds. There are ſix natural methods, by which we judge of the diſtance of objects ſfrom the eye. 1ft. By the angle which is made by the optic axes. For want of this direction it has been obſerved, that perſons who are blind of one eye ſrequently miſs their mark in pouring liquor into a glaſs, &c. 2ndly, and I think moſt generally, by the apparent magnitude of objects. By depending upon this method we are very frequently deceived in our eſtimates of diſtance by any extracidinary large obJects, as in travelling to a great city, church, or caſtle, ve fancy them nearer than they really aree This furniſhes us with a reaſon why animals and other ſmall objects ſeen contiguous to large mountains appear exceedingly ſmall; for we imagine the mountain to be nearer to us than it actually iss. When we look down alſo from a high building, the objects beneath us appear much ſmaller than they would at the ſame diſtance on the level ground; the reaſon is plainly, becauſe we have no diũinct idea of diſtance in that direction, ard therefore judge by the impreſſions upon the retina, vhereas cuſtom has corrected our judgment in the other caſlee The third method of determining the diſtance of objects is by the force and vividneſs of the colours, and the fiſth is analogous to it, namely, by the different appearance of the minute parts. When theſe appear diſtinct, we judge the object to be near, and the contrary when they appear faint or confuſed. cthly, We are aſſiſted in judging of the diſtance of any particular objects, by the other objects which are interpoſedl. On this account, diſtances upon uneven ground do not appear ſo great as upon a plain; for the valleys, rivers, and other objects that lie low, are many of them Ioſt to the ſight. This too is the reaſon why the banks of a river appear contiguous when the river lies low and is not ſeen *. In children the pupil ĩs uſually more dilated than in grown perſons. The reaſon of this appears to be, that in childhood the cornea is more flexible, ſo as to be very eaſily. bent into any curvature neceſſary for diſtinct viſion, and conſequently the pupil has leſ” occaſion to contract. In grown perſons the cornea is ſtiffer, they have therefore more neceſſity to contract the pupil. In elderly perſons the cornea grows ſtill more rigid; for this reaſon they are obliged ſometimes to hold the candle between the eye and the paper on which they read; and their doing ſo is a direct indication that they begin to want ſpectacles +. Children read much nearer than grown perſons, both becauſe their eyes are ſmaller, and becauſe their cornea is more ſflexiblee. That elderly perſons ſee better at a great diſtance than yo nger perſons is generally allowed. It is a certain and very important fact, that longſightedneſs may be acquired, for countrymen, ſeilors, ænd thoſe that are habituated to look at remete objects, are generally Iong ſighted, want ſpectacles ſooneſt, and uſe the deepeſt mægnifiers; on the other hand, the far greater part of the ſhort ſighted are to * Eſayon Viſon, queted by Prieſtley. 1 Porterſield on tl.e Eye, quoted by Pneit. Op. Per. . ſL 12. be found among ſtudents, and thoſe who are converſant with ſmall and near objects; every one becoming expert in thet kind of viſion which is moſt uſeſul to him in his particular profeſſion and manner of life. Mr. Adams, in his very uſeful eſſay on viſion, has given ſome rules for the preſervation of the ſight, which, for the benefit of the ſtudious reader, I have thought it proper to inſert. 1ſt. Never ſit ſfor any length of time in 2bſolute gloom, or expoſed to a blaze of light. From this rule may be deduced the impropriety of soing haſtily from one extreme to the other, whether of darkneſę or oſ light, and it may be inferred that a ſouthern aſpect is improper for thoſe whoſe ſight is weri and tender. ædly. Avoĩd reading a ſmall print. 3dly. Do not read in the duſk, ror, if the eyes are diſordered, by candĩe light. 4thly. The eve ſhould not be permitted to dwell on glaring objects, more particularly on the firſt waking in the mornin7 4thly. The long ſighted ſhould accuſtom themſelves to read with rather leſs light, and ſomewhat nearer to the eye than uſual, while thoſe who are ſhort ſighted ſhould uſe themſelves to read with the book as far off as poſſible, C u A P. XLII. THE GESTAIION AND BIRTHEH OF ANIMALS. Varieties in the Production of Animals Proportion of Males to FemalisCGroth of the FœtusOiparous Animols. Mode of Exiſicuce before Birth.Weight of a new born Infant.Miſcellaneous Calculations concerning ihe Proportion of Births to that of Ducths in Infany, Ce. E have hitherto been occupied in conſidering the functions which relate to the exiſtence and welfare oſf animals, let us now direct our attention to thoſe which, æmidſt the decay of individuals, preſerve the continuance of the ſpecies. Among the more minute and imperfect animals, there are ſome which may be multiplied from fragments of the ſame ſpecies, as the polypus; others grow from the bodies of their parents, and are in due ſeaſon ſet at liberty to ſeek nouriſhment for themſelves; ſome animals, at a certain period of their exiſtence, naturally divide into ſeveral parts, each of which aſterwards becomes a perfect animal of the ſame race. As we aſcend in the ſcale of animal exiſtence, a difference of ſex preſents itſelf as a leading diſtinction. We ſind ſome races of animals, of which every individual is poſſeſſed of both male and female organs; others, among which a ſingle female breeds for a whole community, and among which there are very few individuals poſſeſſed of ſexual organs. In general, however, about half,the individuals of a ſpecies are males and half females. It is in ſome meaſure foreign to the objects of thę preſent work to enter on thoſe theories with which philoſophers have amuſed themſelves and their readers concerning the generation of animals. Independent of the indelicacy oſ the ſubject, there is another ſtrong objection to their introduction here; ſince theſe theorĩes reſt upon no other foundation than conjecture, and ſome fallacious, and, I think, deluſive microſcopical obſervations. I ſhall, therefore, content myſelf with reſerring the reader to the natural hiſtory of the Count de Buffon, and for a direct contradiction of his theory to the Abbe Spalanzani. The former of theſe philoſophers has derived the principle of animal exiſtence ſrom the male, and the latter ſrom the female. The generation of fiſhes appears, indeed, greatly to favour the theory of Spalanæani, for in that inſtance at leaſt, the rudiments of the young animals appear to be contained in the egęgs or roe, which the female fifh firſt depoſits; and the milt which is aſterwards depoſited by the male appears only to excite them into action and growth. If we admit thus much of his theory, however, we muſt attend him a ſtep further, and ſuppoſe that every ſemale ovum in the ovarium of a femule muſt itſelf contain ovaria and ova, and by extending the ſame idea we muſt be led to conclude, that the rudiments of all the animals, which have exiſted, do exiſt, or ever will exiſt, were originally contained in the ovarium oſ the firſt female oſ the particular ſpecies to which they reſpectively belong. This has been therefore called the theory of involution, and has been ſuppoſed equally applicable to animals and vegetables. ll In the proceſs of generation, the firſt marks we ſee, after impregnation, oſ the ſuture progeny, is a minute being without limb or feature, connected by a cord to the internal ſurface of ithe uterus, and ſurrounded by very thin membranes. It ſcems formed, however, of two maſſes joined togetler, the larger of which is the head and the ſmaller the body. As the ſœtus advances in growth the body acquires a larger ſize with reſpect to the head, ſmall protuberances make their appearance on the body, which are the ſuture Iimbs, and the features begin to manifeſt themſelves. In this mauner the fœtus, gradually acquiring a more determinate ſtructure, and more evident marks oſ the ſpecies to which it belongs, Is at length diſengeged from the mother. In diſferent ſpecĩes there is great variety in the perſection of the animal at the time of birth; the young oſ the human ſpecies is, perhaps, the moſt backward of any in this reſpect; for a child, when ſix months old, is not ſo able to provide for ĩtſclf as a horſe or an aſs at the age of as many days. In many races of animals it ſhould be obſerved, particularly in birds, the growth of the ſœtus takes place out of the body of the mother. This is indeed the caſe with all animals which ſpring from eggs, and in which we have a very favourable opportunity of obſerving the progreſs of the fœtus from its ſirſt appeerance till it has acquired that ſtate of perfection at which it is hatched. During the whole period of its growth ĩt is ſupported by a limited quantity oſ nouriſment contained within the egg-ſhell, and which is that part of the e”ę called the yolk. The human fœtus is ſurrounded with three membranes; the external of theſe is vaſculur, and ĩis colled the ſpongy chorion; the middle coat, called the media or true chorion, and the internal one, called the amnion, are not ſo. Mr. Hunter has found the ſpongy chorion to conſiſt of two layers; that which lines the uterus he calls membrana caduca or desidua, becauſe it is caſt off after delivery; the portion which covers the ovum, decidua reflexa, becauſe it is reſlected from the uterus upon the ovum. The membrana decidua is, according to Mr. Hunter, perforated with three foramina, viz. tvo ſmall foramina, correſponding to the openings of the Fallopian tubes at the fundus uteri, and a larger one oppoſite its cervix. The decidua reflexa becomes more thick and vaſcular as it approaches the placenta, and conſtitutes ſts maternal part. The fœtus appears floating in a tranſparent fluid contained in the amnion, ſuſpended by the umbilicãl cord, and the head, being the largeſt part, and the inſertion of the umbilical cord being at a conſiderable diſtance from it, falls Ioweſt; a circumſtance very neceſſary to ſaſe and eaſy delivery. The fœtus, when it has nearly obtained its growth, is curled up in an oval form; its back is round, and turned towards one ſide of the mother, making that ſide more protuberant; its chin ĩs preſſed againſt its breaſt; with its arms it embraces its knees, and its heels are cloſe to its buttocks. A moſt curious but ſomewhat complicated branch of the animal œconomy, is the means which nature employs for carrying on the nouriſhment of the fœtus. I have already mentioned the umbilical cord, which connects the fœtus to the uterus. One end of this cord is connected to the ſubſtance called the placenta, and the other enters the navel of the fœtus. The placenta is a ſpongy ſubſtance as broad as the crown of a hat, and about two fingers in thickneſs, and is commonly attached to the upper part of the uterus. The outer ſurface of the placenta is ſoſt, tender, and ſpongy, and commonly bloody, on account of its ſeparation from the veſſels of the uterus. Its internal ſurface, where it js covered by the membranes, is firm, gloſſ, and 408 Situation and Growth [Book IX. beautifully marked with the ramifications of bloodveſſels. On the outũde the blood-veſſels can ſcarcely be obſerved, às they are there very minute. On the outſide of the placenta there is alſo an appearance like a diviſion into lobes. The umbilical cord is generally inſerted, not into the middle, but towards the edge of the placenta, which facilitates its ſeparation after delivery.. With the placenta, as has been ſuppoſed, the arteries of the uterus have a communication, by which, in the firſt periods of geſtation, the fœtus receives a ſerous fluid, and in the later periods a large quantity of blood. It has alſo been taken for granted, that the arteries oſ the umbilical cord communicate with the veins of the uterus, ænd that thus a circulation of ſluids is maintained between the fœtus and the mother. Mr. Hunter, however, aſter numerous experiments, has adopted a diſferent opinion. By a variety of trials by injection he finds, that ſiuids thrown into the veſſels of the umbilical cord never get into thoſe of the uterus; and on the contrary, thoſe thrown into the veſſels of the uterus find no admiſſion into thoſe of the umbilical cord; he theiefore concludes, that the human placerta, as vell as that of quadrupeds, is a compoſition of two parts intimately blended, viz. an umbilical or infantile portion, and an uterine portion.ĩ he former by maceration, is found to conſũſt of the ramifications of the veſſels oſ the umbilical cord, the other Mr. Hunter conſidered as an eſoreſcence of the internal ſurface of the uterus, which forms a membrane, ſending numerous proceſſes into the ſubſtance of the placenta; this latter is the membrana decidua, Mr, Hunter does not pretend to ſpecify the nature of the union between theſe two portions of the placenta. : The veins of the placenta unite into a ſingle trunk, which, leaving the placenta, enters the navel of the ſœ|tus. Two arteries, which are continued from the internal iliac arteries, paſs out at the ravel of the ſœ|tus and enter the placenta; and theſe, with the vein above mentioned, conſtitute the umbilical cord. By means of theſe arteries and veins, a communication is maintained between the fœtus and the placenta. The umbilical veſſels do not run in a direct courſe, but both the arteries and the vein are mutually twiſted about each other. The umbilical cord paſes from the ſœtus to the placenta, through the liquor amnii. The winding courſe of theſe veſſels, and the elaſticity of the ſubſtance which ſurrounds them, protect them in a great meaſure from the bad effects which would otherwiſe happen, from their being ſtretched or preſſed, which might put a ſtop to the circulation. Beſides theſe veſſels, however, there is another in brutes, called the urachus, which conveys the urine from the bladder to a veſſel called the allantoides. In the human Decic es, both the urachus and the allantoides are wanting. There is, inlecd, in the human fſœtus, ſomething like an urachus, which goes from the bladder of the fœtus to the navel, beteen the umbilical arteries, but it ſeems to be oſ no uſe, as it does not communicate with the bladder. The umbilical vein, after it has entered the body of the fœtus, divides into two branches, one of which enters the vera portarum to be diſtributed in the liver; the other, which is called the ductus venoſus, carries its contents to the left vena cava hepatis, which terminates in the great vena cava; and that part of the blood which paſſes through the liver alſo arrives at the vena cava. From the vena cava the blood paſſes into the t : A410-Circulation of ibe Blocã in the Fetus. Book IX. anterior auricle, hence there is a paſſage into the poſterior auricle, which is cloſed up aſter birth, but vhich now turns the greater part of the blood received by the anterior avricle, from the anterior to the poſterior cavities of the heart. A conſiderable quantity of blood, however, notwithſtanding this paſſage, does peſs into the anterior ventricle; but all the blood which is received by the anterior ventricle is not ſent 10 the lungs, which before birth are too much condenſed to tranſmit ſo largea quantity; part of ĩt is wrned aſide by a veſſel called the ductus arterioſus, vhich paſſes from the pulmonaty artery to the aorta. Thus, beſides the blood which eſcapes paſſing through the lungs by means of the paſſage from the anterior to the poſterior auricle, a ſecond portion eſcapes by the veſſel which leads from the pulmonary artery to the aorta, ſo that perhaps not more than a ſixth part of the blood which paſes threugh the reſt of the body paſſes through the lungs before birth , whereas, aſter theſe paſſages are cloſed, every drop which is circulated in the body muſt neceſſarily circulate alſo through the lungs.. Theſe paſſages, which are peculiar to the fœrus, from cauſes not aſcertained cloſe up very quickly aſter birth. The blood is returned from the fœtus by the arteriæ? òmbilicales which are the internal ĩliac arteries of the adult,. but which in' the fœtus paſs out at the navel, and are continued to the placenta, The fœtus, which in the early periods of geſtation was almoſt all head, is ſtill at the time i birth of very different proportions from thoſe of the adult body; the head is remarkably large, and the lower extremities remarkably ſmall. The growth of the fœtus in the uterus is by no means uniform. The v eight of children, when born at' the fuil time, varies I : ſ from ſomething more than ſour pounds to a little more than eleven. By far the greater number weigh from five to cięht pounds, avoirdupois:. At the end of the third month, the bulk of the ſœtus, with the membranes and placenta, is very inconſiderable, as is ſeen in abortions, which are moſt frequent at this period oſ geſtationn. During the courſe of the fourth month the uterus becomes too large to remain within the pelvis, and riſing into the abdomen, gives ſome ſlight degree of protuberance. The fœ|tus now in creaſes much faſter than before; but the principal part of its groth is performed during the three Iaſt months of geſtation, when the uterus at length riſcs as hioh as the ſtcmach, preſſing the inteſtines towards the backbone. The diſtended uterus is now ſtimulated to contraction, and the pains of child-birth are ſucceeded by the eſfuſions of maternal ſondneſs. It appears from a very accurate regiſter, kept by Dr. Clark, phyſician to the Lying- inn Hoſpital at Dublin, that the proportion of children is about nine males to eight females;children dying under ſixtcen days old, as one to about ſix and an half ;~children ſtill- born, as oææ to rwenty;women having twins, as cne to ſixty;women dying in child-bed, as one to about eighty-ſeven. There is, however, a greater mortality of male children, owing, as Dr. Clark ſuppoſes, to their greater ſize, and particularly to the ſize of the head, which becomes injured in parturition, and conſequently affects the health; and the proportion is reduced to quite equal before the age oſ puberty. If every mother in a great city was obliged to ſuckle her own child, the proportion would be cnæ good nurſe in fite; and in the country, not cœe bad nurſe in ren *. C u A P. XLIII. THE GROWTH AND DECLINE OF THE BODY. Increaſe of ihe Body before anã aftor irth.Diſpregor:ion of ite Parts decreaſes with Growith.What Parts fiſi cocst to increqſi in Sixe TouthManhocd Firſe Symptoms of DeclineAt vwhat Period old dge gencrally connencesSymptoms F Age.Cauſcs avhy the Human Fromne camot be of loag Duraiion. : ROM the time of conception tili birth, the growth 2 of the body proceeds in an accelerated or increaſing proportion, that is, the growth in the ſixth month, for inſtance, is greater in proportion than in the fifth; from birth till manhood it is gradually leſs and lIeũ, in othær words, the growth of the ſecord yeaer is leſs in proportion than that of the preceding, and ſo of all the ſucceeding years, The reaſlon commonly æſigned for the latrer of theſe facts is, that the fibre becoming leſs diſtenſible from an increaſe of ſolidity as we advance in age, our growth is conſequently leſs rapid. But if the rapidity of growth was propor tioned to the laxity oP bre, the fœtus ought to increaſe meſt rapidly immediately after conception, and more ſlonly as its texture becomes more ſirm. The contrary of this, however, is found to be the fact, ſince, in the early periods of geſtation the increaſe of the fœJtus is very ſlow, and its growth is continually accelerated till the birth. From this ſtatement ĩt muſt be concluded, that laxity of fibre is only one among other cauſes which favour the increaſe of the body. As the body advances in growth, its diſproportions are gradually loſt; the head increaſes more ſowly, and the lower extremities with more rapidity. The head indeed ceaſes to grow much ſooner than the other parts; for theſe, and particularly the thorax, ſeem to gain ſize and ſtrength for ſeveral years aſter the head has arrived at its utmoſ dimenſions. At the age of Aſteeq or ſixteen years, ſooner in females than in males, and ſooner in warm countries than cold, the ſigns of puberty begin to manifeſt themſelves, and ſeveral changes now take place in the body, which it would be improper to ſtate. When the body has attained its full growth and ſtrength, it does not immediately decline, but remains in a ſtate of nearly equal vigour till between forty and fifty years of age. At this time the body begins ſenſibly to loſe its agility, and the approaches towards old age, which had hitherto been inſenſibly going on, now egin to maniſeſt themſelves. But though the body has now Ioſt conſiderably of iis agility, yet in perſons of good conſtitutions, and who have not been remarkably intemperate, its ſtrength remains pretty entire. After the age of fiſty, however, the decline of body Eecomes much more apparent; there is no longer that ſpring and vigour of motion; and Iobour becomes more irkſome and painful. From the age of ſixty to that of ſeventy the health is frequently pretty good, but the ſtrength fails conſiderably. Threeſcore and ten years is the age of man; and though there may be ſome remarkable inſtances to the contrary, yet, in general, exiſtence protracted beyond this period is ſorrow and miſery. In the whole progreſs of life the body is continually becoming leſs vaſcular. The vivid bloom of youth, which is owing to the ramifications of minute arteries in the ſkin of the cheeks, ſubſides into the moderate hue of middle liſe, and this into the wrinkled and ſhrunk appearance of old age. Similar changes are taking place in other parts of the body, and the coats of the arteries gradually becoming thicker and ſtronger with reſpect to thoſe of the veins; theſe latter become more diſtended, and the livid hue of venous plethora ſucceeds to the vivid tint of the arterious. A diſpoſition to ſolidity invades the body in the progreſs of liſe, and that which in the child was pliant cartilage, becomes in the old man brittle bone. The quantity of earth in the compoſition of the different parts of the body is continually increaſing; the muſcles become inſenſible to the uſual ſtimuli; the vigour of the circulation is diminiſhed; and in the few, the very few, who eſcape the numerous pitſalls of diſeaſe and accident, this rigidity and inſenſibility increaſing, neceſſarily puts an end to exiſtence. That modern diſcoverſes, or the improvement of the medical art, ſiould be able to protract for any conſiderable period our mortal exiſtence, is a notion that will only be entertained by thoſe who are ignorant of the phyſiology of the animal frame, and indeed of every other branch of ſcience. It ĩs the natural conſequence of extenſive knowledge to abate our conſidence; while impudence, dogmatiſm, and vain and viſionary ſpeculation, are the genuine offspring of ignorance. Medical ſkill may indeed be ſucceſJfully æapplied in occaſionally arreſting the progreſs of thoſe diſeaſes, which might otherwiſe prematurely interrupt our mortal career; yet even in theſc inſtances, thoſe who have ſtudied moſt, and practiſed moſt, will be the moſt ſenſible of the impotence of human knowledge in this important art; but he who is at all acquainted with the delicate and fragile texture of the human- frame muſt be abundantly ſenſible, that it is a fabric which was not meant to endure for ever. In the gradual decline of life, to which all muſt ſubmit, let us earneſtly embrace that conſolation which religion affords us. That which ſweetened the cup ol deæ:h to Socrateĩ through life the cordial of the chriſtian; it is a conſideration that ill moderate proſperity, and will deprive adverſity oſ its moſt poignant ſorrows; it will cheer us in life, and at the hour of death it is the only circumſtance that can impart a ray of  4168] [Book X. B o o æ X. OF THE HUMAN MIND. CH a r. I OF THE STUDY OF THE HUMAN MIND. Our Knowledge of Mind limited Cecnfuſcd by Metaphyſiucs Plan of this Inquiry The Firſi Part rſpects the Inſtruments and Modes of Action of the Human Mind —The Second, the Springs or active Powers7le Third, the moſt important Quęſtions in Morali, &e.  57 NOW thyſelf,? is a ſaying of great antiquity; ſ and an author, vhoſe ſentiments are deſervedly converted into maxims, has aſſerted, that e the proper  ſtudy of mankind is man It is, however, a circumſtance ſufficient to mortify the pride of reaſon, that even on the ſubject moſt intereſting to us, we muſt be content with a limited portion of knowledge; we muſt not extend our expectations too far. Even with reſpect to our own minds, there are ſome points which appear to be removed beyond the reach of our reſearches, while others are, perhaps unneceſſarily, involved in doubt and diſputation. It is unfortunate, indeed, that in no branch of ſcience whatever the imagination has more wantonly ſported than in this; in no ſcience have men appeared ſo deſirous of deſerting the only ſure guide, experience; in no inſtance has ię been thought proper to reſort ſo little to proof and obſervation, or to attribute ſo much to conjecture and theory. Metaphy ſical ſubtleties, and hypotheſes carried to a viſionary extreme, have, therefore, greatly contributed to confuſe this branch of knowledge; though when extricated from theſe, I apprehend full as much is known in this ſcience as in any other, and perhaps. more than in moſt. On this account I ſhall carefully avoid all thoſe diſputed points concerning identity and diverſity, exiſtence, infinity, &c. that have divided the learned from time to time. I conſider them, in truth, as utterly foreign to my purpoſe, and as tending to æſtabliſh no one uſeful principle. It will be unneceſſary alſo to examine the origin of our ideas, or to enter into nice diſquiſitions concerning ſpace, duration, &c. &c. as ſuch inquiries are certainly more curious than uſeful. I ſhall further avoid all fanciful theories reſpecting the nature of our perceptions. Some of them, l confeſs, are plauſible, but I rather chuſe to lay the ground work of my reaſoning on actual experience; let thoſe who ſo incline, extend at their leiture their reſearches further. That ſcheme, which reduces the moral powers of man to the feweſt principles, if theſe can be demonſtrated adequate to every effect, is moſt ſaticfactory to the rational inquirer. The more of nature we diſcover, the more ſimple ſhe appears in her operations: it is unphiloſophical unneceſſarily to multiply cauſes. It is evident, for inſtance, that there exiſts in men a reliſh for beauty, as well as for moral excellence, and an antipathy to vice and deformity. But how are theſe aſfections generated? It ĩs an indolent method of philoſophizing to ſtop at whatever is not eaſily underſtood. Final cauſes and inherent inſtinct have ſaved the labour of many a painful inveſtigation. IVEE With reſpect to the actual exiſtence of innate ideas or principles, the reader will perceive that I am not anxious to renew the controverſy. Innate ideas, I believe, have been in general given up by philoſophers ſince the time of Mr. Locke. A moral principle has, indeed, been contended for by ſome writers of the higheſt reputation, as being innate in man. It may be conſidered either as a ſixth ſenſe, as ſomething inſeparable from the ſoul or mind of man, or as a general inſtinctive reſult of his mental organization. I muſt obſerve, however, that the exiſtence of ſuch a principle has never yet been ſatisfactorily proved, though on the contrary it is not eaſy to diſprove it; I ſnhall, therefore, as much as poſible, avoid the controverſy, and endeavour, as ſar as obſervation erables us, to account ſor the operations of our minds in the ſimpleſt and eaſieſt manner, and to have as little recourſe as poſſible to principles which are involved in doubt or obſcurity. The elementary part oſ this book will naturally divide into two branches. The ſirſt gart will extend to the end of the eighth chapter, in vhich I ſhall endeavour to explain the inſtruments and the modes of action oſ the human mind. The ſecond vil extend from the ninth chapter to the thirteenth, in which the ſprings or incentives that produce action in e mind and influence its movements, will be examined. The materals, upon which the human mind ĩs principally to act, are the traces or veſtiges leſt by external impreſſions on the five ſenſes. fiheſe a ſimple eſfect on any one ſenſe produces what is cæalled a ſimple idea, the word idea ſigniſying an image or repreſentation in the mind of an action, quality, or ſenſtion; thus white and ſueet are ſimple ideas. An idea, compounded of ſeveral ſimple ideãs, is called a complex idea, as man, horſe, tree, &c. which are evidently compounds of a number of ſimple ideas of figure, colour, ſolidity, &c. and ſometimes for diſtinctions ſake, when many complex ideas are compounded in one, the diſciples of Mr. Locke call it a deccrplex idea, as homicide. Impreſſions on the ſenſes are often ſo entwined or aſſociated together, that the idea of the one ſnall not be recollected without that of the other. This junction happens when two impreſſions are made on the ſenſes at the ſame time: thus the whiteneſs and roædneſs of a globe may be aſſociated; the form and the ſound of a muſical inſtrument; the name with the thing, ſo that on the ſight of the thing or object we immediately recollect the name. Ideas may aſſoclate ith impreſſions, if an impreſon ĩs made on any of the ſenſes, while an idea is predominant in the mind. Thus the ſight of a particular place vill often recal ſome intereſting train of thought, that mæy have been entertained theree When I ſpeak of ideas being aſſociated, connected, combined, & c. I would be underſtood of the ſame thing, viz. the implexion or junction of ideas thus explained. The retention of ideas in the mind ĩs called memory. The act of combining old ideas into new ones, invention, and frequently imagination or fancy. The act of examining and comparing them judgment. Under theſe heads I propoſe explaining the primary operations of the mind, and theſe will conſtitute the firſt part of the preſent inquiry. The ſecond part of this book will conſiſt of an inquiry into the common ſprings of action in the mind. Theſe I ſall endeavour to prove to be ultimately the ſenſes of pleaſure and pain. Love is the idea of pleaſure, combined with ſome other idea; hatred the idea of pain, combined in the ſame manner. Deſire and averſion are active love and hatred *. The third part, which extends ſfrom the thirteenth chapter to the concluſion of the work, will conſiſt of the application of theſe principles to the inveſtigation of ſome curious ſubjects, and to the theory of morals. This, as ĩt is the moſt extenſive part of the ſubject, is neceſſarily the moſt imperfect, and the chapters that conſtitute this part, are rather exhibited as confirmations of the preceding principles, than as a complete ſyſtem. æ The natural appetitess of man are, 1. The common call of nouriſhmnent for the body. 2d. The deſire of propagating the ſpecĩes. The natural pleaſures of man are, 1ſt. The ſatisfying of theſe appetites. 2d. The general pleaſure reſulting fror the mœderate and proper exerciſe of the organs B prop g C u ar. II. OF PE RCEP TION, Vhe Senſes the great Source of Information. Diſi cticn Letween Seuation and Perception. Senſes correũt each other.IVtether the ſame Olbjecis produce ſnilar Perceptions in difſerent Men.lId.as. HAT the mind is obliged to the ſenſes for the great maſs of its information, is now an eſtabliſhed principle. The prooſs of this doctrine I ſhall decline entering upon for reaſons already anligned. I would only obſerve, Firſt, That I do not ſee why we are furniſhed with ſenſes by the author of nature, if not, for this purpoſe. Secondly, The ſenſes ſeem entirely adequate to all the information we are poſeſed of. Thirdly, Perſons wanting any of the ſenſes appear entirely deſtitute oſ the ideas of that ſenſec A gentleman, blind from infancy, aſſured me, he never remembered to have experienced i in a dre am any thing like what the ſenſe of ſeeing is deſcribed to be. Nay, thoſe who have all the ſenſes complete, derive plainly their knowledge from the exerciſe of them. A child does not ſhrink from a candle till it has fælt the painful ſenſation of burning, or is warned againſt it in terms xpreſing pain, oſ which it forms a judgment from pain already experienced. A very proper diſtinction is made by Dr. Stuart, between ſenſation and perception. Senſation implies that change in the ſtate of the mind which ĩs produced by an impreſſion upon the organ of ſenſe; of which change we can ſuppoſe the mind to be conſtious without any knowledge of external objects. PercepE tion expreſſes that knowledge we obtain, by means of our ſenſations of the qualities of matter *. T Senſations may be communicated from without; 1ſt. by actual contact with the object itſelf; adly. by the intervention of ſome medium; and it amounts to the ſame, whether we perceive the qualities of bodies by a co: munication with the bodies themſelves, or by the effects which they uniformly produce on ſome medium which communicates with our ſenſes. Thus, when we ſee a body white, we do not ſay that the han: is perceived by our ſenſes, but the whiteneſs of he body, or that property in the body which ſo diſboſ the rays of light as to afford us the perception or idea of white . When, thereſore, we ſpeak of ſmells, taſtes, colours, ſounds, we mean that certain effects are uniſormly wrought upon our ſenſes in certain Qutlines of Mor. Phil. ꝑ.  29 + The different ſenſes by whoſe operation we diſcern the qualities of external objects, have been read; ſtated to be five in number. Touching, taſting, ſmelling, hearing, and ſight. They may perhaps all be reſolved into that of feeling; yet the diſtinction is correct, a: they are certæinly diferent inſtruments of feeling or perception. In thoſe of touching and taſte an actual contact with the body, which is the object of the ſenſe, is requiſite. In the others the ſenſetion is ected throngh the operation oſ ſome meciem. Thus ſight ĩs in reality the efect of the rays of light upon our optic nerve; ſonã is a vibration of the air, w hſch æſrects the organs of hearing; and ſmell depends upon the emanation of certain particles ſfrom a body, v hich act upon the organ of ſcent. J That ſome ſenſes are more acute in certaln animals than in others, is an obvious factt. The power of ſmelling in ſome of the canine ſpecies is beyond any thing that we are able to conceive. Cats and owls have undoubtedly a power of ſeeing with a much ſmaller portion of light than any human being. It is probable that in diſferent men ſome ſenfes may be more acute than others. 1 There is undoubtedly ſomething in objects which excites ſenſations , but the ſenſations themſelves cannol exiſ withouta ſubject rain circumſtances, and to the unknown cauſes we aſſign theſe names. The information of the ſenſes is the laũt reſort of human reaſon; I mean their joint information, for it appears they correct each other. It has bæen already ſtated, that the judgments we form of material things are not ſo much the efſect oſ an impreſſion on any one ſenſe as of thoſe of ſeeing and feeling combined*. Simple impreſſions or perceptions are not to be deſined, nor do they, from that agreement and analogy which exiſts between the ſenſes of all mankind, require definition. It is of no conſequence whether the ſenſes of different men perceive exactly alike, though iĩt is probable there is not much difference in this reſpect. It is of no conſequence, whether one man ſces objects larger than another, or whether the ſame compoſition aſfords to each preciſely the ſame taſte or ſmel. We communicate our ideas of ſenſations by the help of relation; ve call a thing ſmall when compared with another; we call the taſte of a certain viand ſweet, or a ſound grave or deep, and we have nothing further to do to be clearly underſtood, than to mark the proportionate dlifferences and relations. It is to be remarked, that all objects that preſent themſelves to our ſenſes do not make ſuch impreſſions as to leave ideas behind them, Many times the mind is too much engaged with one train of thoughts to admit another. An impreſſion or ſenſation being on vhich to act. The diſputes therefore of philoſophers, whether ſmels are in the noſe or in the perſon who ſmells them, &c. &c. are merely de laia caprina ; and there muſt be a union of cauſes to produce ſuch eſſect. Such diſputes may ſerve to exerciſe the human faculties, but they undoubtedly make no addition to our ſtock of real knowledge,. v Sce Book Q. c. 37. percelved by the mind, the trace or veſtige it leaves behind is called an idea. Whether the mode of conveying perceptions ſrom the ſenſes to the underſtanding, is by a vibratory motion of the nerves* or by any other means, is of no conſequence to the preſent inquiry. It is ſufficient to ſay, that the ſenſes are firſt aſfected by external objects, that theſe impreſſions leave behind them veſtiges which are called ideas, and from the natural or voluntary combination of two or more of theſe, a new idea may be formed. C H A P. III. : OF IDE AS Ideas of Senſation and ReſiexionSimple and complix. LModes onè Sul ſtances. D E AS being the images of impreſſions, want their ſorce and vivacity. 1ſt, Ideas of ſenſation are the mere repreſentations of eſfects wrought on the ſenſes. 2dly, We give names to the purticulas actions of our own minds, as perception, thinking, doubting, reaſoning, and theſe Mr. Locke calls ideas oſ reflection *. It is probable many of our firſt ideas are complex, that is, the reſult of ſeveral ſenſations combined or united together. A child will hardly diſtinguifh hetween the fioure and colour; as in a glaſ globe, it will have the idea of the globe itſelf, before it will diſtinguiſ between the roundneſs and the brihtneſ of which it is compounded; they are nevertheleſs as diſtinct ideas as ſweetneſs and hardneſs, which may exiſt in the ſame ſubſtance, and one of them not be perceived as united with the other. i Though the hand ſeels ſoftneſs and warmth in the ſame piece of wax, yet the ſimple ideas in the ſame ſubject are as perfectly diſtinct as thoſe that come in by diſtinct ſenſes.” Simple ideas will be recollected in objects differing in every reſpect but that one, from thoſe by which we originally received them. Though æ horſe, for inſtance, may poſſeſs no obvious quality x Locke, B. 2. c. æ. bu » in common with a book, but that of external colour, as blackneſs, yet that quality will be recollected to be the ſame in both; and thus ve learn that colour is ro: the neceſſary concomitant of figure, by finding the ame colour united with different figures; and in the ſim?e manner, probably, we learn to disjoin all thoſe ſimple ideas that enter by the ſame ſenſe, as ſolidity ænd warmth, &c. &c *. All our ideas of ſubſtance; are complex, and are cormpounded of the variuus ſimple ideas jointly impreſſed, when they preſented themſelves to our ſenſes. We define ſubſtances only by enumerating thoſe ſimple ideas; aænd ſuch definitions may ſometimes produce an ide⸗a tolerably clear of the ſubſtance, in the mind of one who never immediately perceived the ſubſtance itſelſ; provided he has ſeparately received by his ſenſes all the ſimpe ideas, which are in the compoſition of the complex one of the ſubſtance defined t. Words repreſenting complex ideas do not always preciſely excite the ſame idea in different perſons. Some of the ſimple ideas may have made a ſtronger impreſſion on ore man than another, and ſome may have totally eſcaped him. The word man vill, with a painter, call to mind ſeveral minute circumſtances in the external appearance; with an anatomiſt the ſkeleton, nerves, &c. will hardly eſcape animadverſion; %  The moſ enlarged underſtanding cannot frame one new Emple idea; nor by any force deſtroy thoſe that ære there. Locke. + The vord ſubſtance generally applied, meæns no more than ihæ ſuppoſed, but ennown ſupport of thoſe qualities, which are capable oſ producing ſimple ideas in us. The ideas of particular ſuhſtances, are compoſed from ſuch combinations of ſimple ideas a; are obſcerved 1o exiſt together, and ſuppoſed to flow from its particular internal conſtitutionn Locke, B. Z. c. 28. with a metaphyſician, the mind, or more properly the modes of acting, the powers and faculties will bæ recollected. In all complex ideas, however, which are the immediate objects of ſenſe, and which are not decomplex, or compoſed of ſueceſſive impreſſions, the more obvious qualities will ſerve to mark the idea, and identify it to every man; as the idea, horſe, tree, &c. can never be differently apprehended. It is otherwiſe with more abſtract and remote terms; the word virtue may be very widely conceived of by different perſons, as the cuſtoms of their countries, the courſe of their ſludies, or their turn of thinking, may determine; hence in all arguments, terms ſhould be minutely defined. All complex ideas are combinations of ſimple ideas aſſociated together, as will be explained in the chapter of aſſociation. Beſides this diviſion of ideas into ſimple and complex, logicians have adopted others, which it may be of ſome uſe briefly to explain*. A principal diviſion is into ſuſtances and modes, that is, modifications of matter or forms of exiſtence. Hence follows a diviſion of modes into ſimple and mixcd modes. Simple modes of duration, are whatever diſtinct ideas we have of any parts of it, as hours, days, &c. &. Simple modes of colour, are white, blue, &c. &c. Simple modes of ſpace are any particular lengths of it, as an inch, a fooſ, &c. Simple mudes of motion, are ſliding, walking, &c. It would be uſeleſs to enter into any more particulars of this kind, as theſe diſtinctions are pointed out rather with a view to the works of others than to the preſent treatiſec I would viſh to obſerve, that the general terms coleur, ſpace, æ Sce Locke, B. 2. &c. do not furniſh any diſintt idea; we can have no clear idea, but of a particular colour, &c. as will be explained when I come to ſpeak of words. Mixed modes are defined by Mr. Locke to be  ſuch combinations of ſimple ideas, as are not locked upon to be the cheracteriſtical marks of any real beings thet have a ſteady exiſtence; but ſcattered and indeperdent ideas, put together by the mind, are thereby diũtinguiſhed from the complex ideas of ſubſtances, ſuch are hypocriſy, druntenneſs, &c. The ideas of mixed modes are acquired firſt from experience; as by ſeeing tvo men wreſtle, ve acquire the idea of ęſtling. 2d, By putting together in the mind ſev eral ſucceſſive actio ons, as a lie. . C u A r. TV. OF ASSOCIATION. Synchrousus Aſſeciaticns. Succoſsee Aſciatious A great Part cf cur Kuwledge detendunt on the latierCcrinen Senst —Train cf IdeasIn avhat Manner ithe Trein of Ieos is carrieã cnReiations of Contiguity, &c.How theſe are formed in the Mind. Iow the Traiu of Idias is regulatod  Ifiunee of the llill. rqHE word aſſociation was, I believe, firſt uſed in this ſenſe by Mr. Locke; the doctrine is notvithſtanding very ancient. Plato and Ariſtotle in many of their writings, evidently allude to this connexion of ideas. Some of the Stoies remark its eſfects in ſpeaking of cuſtom, opinion, &c. and Antoninus is very clear upon the topic ?. obbes has a whole chapter upon the train of ideas , and makes conſiderable uſe of the doctrine through the whole of his work.  Oi æ» m”€;æxię òælabs; Tiæln ęo icœ: n daniæ. Ba”la: vap vꝶo ler Qæ/lacir n bvnAnton. I. 5. c. 16. + In a diſcourſe on our preſent civil war (ſays he) what gould ſeem more impertinent than to aſk, as one did, what was the value of a Roman penny? Yet to me the coherence was raniſeſt enough. For the thought of the war introduced the thought of the delivering up the King to his enemies; the thought of that, brought the thought of the delivering up of Chriſt; and that again the thought of the thirty pence, which was the price of that treaſon: and thence eaſily followed that malicious queſtion; and all this in a moment of time; for thought is auicl.Leviathan, pt. I. C. 3. I do not in fact find that any one diſcovery has been mede in the ſcience of mind ſince the time of ſobbes. Two Two ſenſations happening at the ſame time will become united, and the ideas will be united of courſe; thus the ideas of the figure and eolour of bodies, admitted by the eye, are united, and theſe may be united with another idea admitted by the touch. As the ideas of roundneſs and whiteneſs by the former, and ſolidity by the latter, are aſſociated together in the complex idea oſ a ſtone. If muſie is heard, while we behold the inſtrument, the ſound will be aſſociated with the viſible appearance, and the former will at any time recal the idea of the latter, when we do not ſce the inſtrument . Names become aſſociated with things, and things with actions . Aſſociations formed from impreſſions made at the ſame time, are called ſynchroThe names, ſmells, taſtes, and tangible qualities of natural bodies, ſuggeſt their viſible appearances to the rsancy, and vice verſaHartley on Man, c. i1. ſ. 1. proꝑ. s. + e It is remarkable, however, as being agreeable to the ſupeTicr vividneſs of viſible ad audible ideas, that the ſuggeſtion of the viſible appearance ſrom the name, ĩs tic moſt ready of any.—Ibid.  The tranſition from the words to the ideas, Is generælly much eaſier than from the ideas to the wordss. A perſon who is learning a ſtrange language, will be æble to underſtand a book in that Ianguage long before ie can writo er ſpeak It. Even in ones native tongue, one can reacily urderſtand what is written or ſpoken in the beſt and propereſt terms, though Ee corld not have uſed theſe terms for expreſing the ſame idcas. This proceeds from the inſluence of cutum, &e. The ideæs are more familiar to us than the words: they are oſten ræĩſed by their proper objects, or ſuggeſted by other words: and their ſamliarity màkes them be ſuggeſted readily. That this is the truc cauſe, is confirmed by obſerving that where it does not tuke place, ideas ære not ſuggeſted more readily than words are in ordinary caſes. When te ideas expreſſed are ſuch as ve have been little accuſtomed to attend to, a diſcourſe or compoſition ib underſtood by us with dificulty, as well as when ideas are expreſd by uauſual words,— Gerard on Gen. pt. 2. ſ. 2. nCte. nous. But ĩt is evident that impreſſions remain ſome moments on our ſenſes, and die gradually away æ; iſ another impreſſion thereſore is made v hile the former remains, they will be aſſociated, and the one ſhall recal the other to remembrance; the aſſociation being weaker or ſtronger in proportion to the ſtate o tho idea or impreſſon with reſpect to its vividneſs. An idea may in the ſame manner be aſociated vith⸗ an impreſſion or ſenſation, or twę ideas may be aſſociated together, and this kind of aſſociation ſrom contiguity of time may be termed ſucceſſive. Thoſe complex ideas which are formed from ſynchronous impreſſions, are more vivid and diſtinct then thoſe formed from ſucceſſive ones.  u Propoſitions founded upon ſynchronous impreſions, are little elſe than complex ideas of ſenſation; as in the propoſition  the dog barks, the idea oſf the thing is as much aſociated. with the action às with any of its qualities: and here is no room ſor diſient, unleſi we could find that our ſenſes had deceived us. Propoſitions founded on ſucceſſive impreſſions, are much more liable to error; yet of theſe conſiſtsby far the more valuable portion of our knowledge. It is remarkable, how in forming theſe propoſitions, frequent experience leads us to drop the intermediate ideas, and connect the twò extremes of the propoſition, calling it ſelf-evident, as if it was really the effect of ſynchronous impreſſions.  We may obſerve (ſays Mr. Locke 7.) that the ideas we receive from ſenſa: tion, areoſten in grown people altered by the judgment vithout our taking notice of it. Thus a globe of any uniſorm colour, as of gold or jet; being ſet beſore our eyes, the idea thereby mprinted, is of a ſlat cirele va- See Sir Iſaac Newions Optics, and b. ix. c. 41. ll B. 2. . 9. 3li / suicecsſive Aſciatlon Book X. riouſly ſhadowed. But being accuſtomed to perceive what kind of appearances convex bodies are wont to male in us; the judgment alters the appearances into their cauſes; and from that variety oſ ſhadow or colour, frames to itſelf the perception of a convex figure of one uniform colour A man vho rearls or hears with attentjon, takes little notice of the characters or ſounds, but of the ideas that are excited in him by them. Thus we find the intermediate, aſſocating ideas are dropped, and the more remote cauſes immediately connected with the eſſcẽ's. In the inſtance of the globe, the firſt complex idea preſented, is that of a circle aſſociated with certain ſhades of colour; on approaching and exan ining it by the touch, we find that this is really a convex figure and of a ſelf- colour, ve therefore aſſociate the ideas of the convexity and colour with the former idea of the circle ſo ſhadowed, and the one occurs not alone, but always accompanied with the other, and ſo immediately, that we feel it as if ũt had been from ſynchronous impreſſions. The aſſociation ſoon becomes ſo ſtrong that we are liable to be deceived by it, for when we ſce objects well painted on canvas we can ſcarcely conceive that they are repreſcnted by diſferent ſhades on a flat ſurface, and a child very naturally employs his feeling in order to ſatisfy himſelf. It is unneceſſary to multiply inſtances; it is obvious that the ſight of blood never ſails to alarm the mind inſtantaneouſly, though no more productive of fear or horror from its natural properties than any other fluidl.  Painters, ſtatuaries, anatomiſts, architects, ſee at once what is intended by a draught, picture, &?. Something like this occurs in moral propoſitions, as, intemperance is productive of ill j * Hariley on Man, prop. 23 health Here it is plain that common experience ſo frequently unites the conſequence to the cauſe, that omitting all the intermediate ſteps neceſſary to form the concluũon, the mind is ſatisfied with the aſertion, and calls it ſelf-evident. This is what ſome authors if I am not miſtaken) mean by common ſenſe; and indeed theſe concluſions are ſo generally right, that although it may be ſor the intereſts of virtue, occaſonally to examine them by the principles of reaſoning, men in moſt caſes have very little occaſion for any other appeal than to their common feelings, to determine on the juſtice or injuſtice of particular actions; ideas of juſtice being founded in the truth of things, and ſo confirmed by experience, that the concluſions are as ready at hand, and almoſt as clear as that  the ſun ſhines;  what is, is; or any other of thoſe maxims that are really ſelf-evident. On this principle of aſſociation depends the neceſſary ſucceſſion of ideas in a train, of which any one may ſatisfy himſelf by attending to the operations of his own mind. Ideas are introduced by an agreement in ſome of the parts of which comple ideas are compoſed. Shakeſpear, deſcribing a merchant's fears, ſays, s My wind, cooling my broth,  Would blow me to an ague, whea I thought  What harm a wind too great might do at ſe⸗. æ I ſiould not ſee the ſandy hour-glaſs run,  But I ſiould think of ſallows and of flats; s And ſeæ: my wealthy Arg?ſie dock d ia ſand.  Should I go to church, ? And ſee the holy edifice of ſtone,  And not bethink me ſtrait of dangerous rocks æ ? It is remarked, that the train of ideas almoſt alwayã depends upon the relations of contiguity in. time or  Moerchant of Venice, ſc, &. place, ca auſe and eſfcct, reſemblance or contrariety; all of which it is obvious, depend on the piinciples of aſſociation already explained. It has been fully proved, that ideas are aſociated by contiguity of time; the former impreſſion remaining vivid ſome moments after it was firſt made, and the other during that time occurring, they become united. That aſſociacion which ariſes from unity of place is no other than recollection, the place making a part of the complex idea of any action. Cauſe and effect are aſſociated by contiguity of time; for, as Mr. Locke obſerves,  we get theſe ideas from our obſcrvation of the viciſſitude of things, while we perceive ſome qualities or ſubſtances begin to exiſt, and that they receive their exiſtence from the due æpplication and operation of other beings ?. The relation of reſemblance is no other than recollection of that particular idea, in which the object preſent, a and the object remembered, agree. When two ideas are formed, agreeing in any quality or qualities, they are ſaid to be related; and the degrees of relation are as they agree in fewer or more qualities. Reſemblance in one ſimpl e and very common quality, as black, rourd, &c. will ſeldom recal an idea, unleſs very recently or very ſtrongly imprinted, the mind being confuſed with the multitude of objects poſſeſſing that quality. The æũcciation of ideas with their contraries ſeems to ariſe, 1ſt, When the idea ſo remembered is only à regative idea, and derives its exiſtence ſrom ĩts poſitive; thus cold is the want or decreaſe of heat; ſickneſs is the want of health; poverty of riches; &c. ad, When the ideas are connected in point of time*,  Locke, B. ii c. 26. 4  I ye- witneſſes generally relate in the order of time, vithout any ęxpreſ/ deſign of doing 10.Iartley on Man, as muſt be the caſe in a change from one ſtate to another, ſuch are the ideas danger and ſafetn. 3d, Perhaps two things, which are oppoſite, being perceived at once, the mind is more forcibly ſtruck by each of them, the ideas are conſ quęntly more vivid, and more liable to be recollected. The train of ideas is often regulated by ſome enà propoſcd to ourſelves; for where we have an object in view, ſuch idvas as are conrected with it will of courſe be ſuggcſted. By theſe means we are frequently impoſed on; a paſſion or an intereſt will Ilead on ã train of arguments favourable to them, while we imagine we are acting vith the urmoſt impartiality *.  The indirect influence of the will, ſays Dr. Stuart,  over the train of our thoughts, is very extenſive. It is exerted chieſly in two vays: 1Iſt, By an effort of attention we can checl the ſpontaneous courſe of our ideas, and give eſſicacy to thoſe aſſociating principles which prevail in a ſtudious and collected mind; 2d, By practice we can ſtrengthen a particular aſſociating principle to ſo great a degree, as to acquire a command over a particular claſ of our ideas. a f Should any one be ſurpriſed at this diſpoſition ĩn our nature to aſſociate any ideas together for the future, which once preſented themſclves jointly, conſidering what great evils, and how much corruption of affections is owing to ĩt, it may help to account for this part of our conſtitution, to conſider,  that all our language, and much of our memory, depends upon ĩt; ſo that, were there no ſuch aſſociations made, we muſt loſe the uſe of words, and a great part of our power of recalling paſt everts, beſide many other valuable powers and arts which depend upon them.” Hutchinſen on the Paſſions, ſ &. ꝑ. II. C u A P.V. M E M O R YIdeas of MexoryDiſtinguiſbed from Ideas of Imoginationudgment concerniung Diſtance of Facis Menmoryi in young and old PersonsReccllection. Certainty. V T appears, that ideas of memory are diſtinI guiſhed from ideas of imagination; iſt, By being more vivid; 2dly, By the aſſociated ideas of time, place, and other circumſtances that accompany them. As ideas, by being often repeated, become more vivid, it is a common remark, that perſons inclined to habits of falſlhocd, by often repeating the ſame ſtory, are themſelves at laſt impoſed on by the vivacity of the idea, ſo as to miſtake it for an idea of memory. Madmen are almoſt always deceived in this way. In dreams, the vividneſs of the new ſcene, and no aſſociated ideas appearing by which to mark theſe ideas derived from memory, cauſe us to miſtake them for a ſeries of real impreſſions. It ſeems probable, that we judge of the diſtance of ſacts recorded by the memory, iſt, From the idea growing fainter, yet retaining the principal aſſociated circumſtances; 2dly, From enumerating ideas of facts, which we know, by the order of ideas, to have ſueceſſively happened ſince that point of time in which the idea firſt occurredl.  The death of a friend, or any intereſting event, oſten related, appears to have hap-  Memory is that faculty by which traces of ſenſations and ideas recur, or are recalled, in the ſame order and proportion, accurately or nearly, as they were once actually preſented,Hartley on Man, Introduc. pened but yeſterday, as we term it, on account of the vividneſs of the idea correſponding to the nature of a recent event*. Miſtakes are here prevented in perſons, who retain their ſenſes, by the ſecond means of judging, viz. by enumerating facts that have ſince occurred, &c. Memory is weak in children; 1ſt, Probably, becauſe the organs are flaccid and weak; adly, For want of a number of ideas, which experience furniſhes, and which afterwards ſtrengthen the powers of aſſociation. Memory is ſlow and defective in old perſons; Iſt, Becauſe, probably, a rigidity of fibre may render the organs of thought leſs active; 2dly, ecauſe the paſſions are weaker, there is in reality leſs life, of courſe a ſluggiſhneſs of mind will generally accompany that ſtate. Impreſſions are eaſily made on the ſenſes of children, but do not remain. On the contrary, it is difficult to make ſuch impreſſions on older perſons as to produce ideas, but when made they are laſting. Hence the neceſſity of inuring the mind to action and ſtudy through every ſtage oſ life, ſuch perſons frequently retaining their mental agility and powers longer than others. Ideas are more eaſily recollected, 1ſt, By being vividly and diſtinctly impreſſed; a2dly, By being ſtrongly aſſociatedl. Theſe two cauſes will generally concur, for the more vivid an impreſſion is, the longer ĩit remains on the ſenſe, and of courſe the more ideas it will be aſſociated with. A ſentiment when quoted from a book or a poem by another author, as appoſite to his ſubject, often makes a more diſtinct and vivid impreſſion than in the original writer. The impreſſion iĩs more vivid, becauſe we are apt to ſancy that ſome peculiar excellence induced another author to quote it; it is more vivid too, becauſe ĩt is more diſtinct; it is * Iartley on Man, prop. 42. better remembered, Hoth for this reaſon, and becãuſe (iixe ali diſtinct ideas) ſt becomes aſſociated with time, place, and other circumſtances, as well as with the ideas of him who quotes it*. The following are the modes of memory pointed out by Mr. Locke, which may be of ſome uſe as definitions. When an idea recurs without the preſence of the object, it is called remembrance; when ſought after by the mind, and brought again in view, it is recllecticu; when held there long Under attentive conſideration, it is conte: nplation; when ideas float in the mird, without regard or reflexion, it is called reVcrie; when the de eas are talen notice of, and, as it were, regiſtered in the memory, it ĩs attention; when the mind fines its viev on any one idea, and conſiders it on all ſid es, sſtudy 3. Thet ideas are commonly recollectcd in a train has been already noticed. It has, indeed, been diſputed, whe:her we have any ſurther power in recollection, than, iſt, Exciting a certain degree of activity in the mind, and awakening it to the difſerent aſſociations ſ We remember that beſt, which we underſland moſ perfectly. WVWhat we underſtand, ſtrikes us with its whole force: of what we underſtand imperfectly, it is only the part underſtood that makes æny impreſion on us; of the reſt we have no perception; even that part makes but a faint impreſſion. It would acquire acditional force from its connexion with the other parts, if the whole were underſtood Ger. ęn Gen. part il. ſ. -. 1 Locke, B. ii. c. 19. I The mention ofa perſon oſten makes us recollect, that there is ſome purpoſe for which we want to ſee him; but ſometimes, when we carnot call to mind what it particularly ĩs, the ſight of that perſon brings ĩt quickly into our thoughts. In conſequence of the ſupcrior force of ſenſations, which enables them t0 tugge coneeꝶtions by means of much weaker relations than ideas can, it oſtn happens, that an object occuiring to the ſerſes gives a very quick and ſeemingly unaccountable turn to the courſæ of the rhorghts. CGerrard cn Gen. part ĩi. ſ.3. and, 2dly, When two trains of ideas occur, directing the attention to one in preference to the other. The order of time, placs, &c. have great influence in re-⸗ collection. In recollecting a compiny, ve are re obliged to have reſpect to the order of place, to the courſe. of.converſation, or ſome other of the common relations. Recollection in order of time happens ſrom ſſme part of two ideas becoming entangled with each other, æs the mind, vhen waking, is ſeldom without ſome idea, ſo no one is perſectly gone before the introduction of another. Recollection from place happens by the tranſition which the mind makes from the ſirſt idea to the place, and from the place to the ſecond idea; it is the ſame in recollection from reſemblance. Recollection from cauſe and eſfect ĩs the ſame æ⸗ recollection in order of time; only it is to be remarked, that we look upon every thing as being hoth a cauſe and eſfect of ſome other thing, hough of what, or in what manner, we may be ignorant, ; and this is the reſul: of experience. An idea ſrequently recollected becomes aſſociated vith a number of other ideas in the different repetitions of it; it wiil thereſore be more predominant, and more apt to be recalled on future occaſions; and this conſtitutes the power of habit over our turn of thinking, which may be acquired from reading frequently the ſame book, or converſing much with the ſame pe: ſon. Diſtinct memory thus depending on aſſociation, the ſimple ideas are often found to remain, while the circumſtances firſt connected with them are utterly Iſt. Theſe the mind forming into new combinutions, we call invention. As memory is ſo much dependant on aſſociation, it is evident, that what influences the latter wili have much effect in determining the peculiar excellence of any man's memory. Some are found to have a memory adapted to the remembrance of hiſtorical facts, ſome to poetry, &c. Ideas formerly received are ſo many hooks (if I may be allowed the expreſſion) that faſten on thoſe ideas which aſſimilate with them The diſtinctneſs, livelineſs, and connected circumſtances of ideas, leave almoſt no room for miſtakes in judgment, as far as depends on the memory. Ideas of memory, by frequent repetition, may be retained equally perfect and vivid as when ſirſt imprinted; it follows, thereſore, that when, from the clearneſs and vividneſs of the ideas, we feel that they have remained unconfuſed in the mind, our reaſoning, as far as reſpects them, will fall nothing ſhort of abſolute certainty. How far the memory is dependant on the corporeal organs, has been often diſputed. Some ſtriking inſtnces, to prove a very cloſe dependance, have been furniſhed by diſferent authors. An Italian poet is related to have fallen dungerouſly ill, and when he recovered, to have forgotten the very letters of the alphabet. Pliny ſpeaks oſ a perſon, who, by a dangerous fall, forgot his mother and friendss. Meſſala Corvinus, by r diſeaſe, forgot his own name. Valerius Maximus relates, that a citizen of Athens, by a blow of a ſtone on the head, ſorgot all he knew of polite literature, though in other reſpects he retained his memory *. In the Memoirs of the Royal Academy, 1711, there is ãan account of a young man, who, in a fever, forgot every thing he knew; but afterwards learned very quickly; ſo, retaining his faculties, he loſt his former ideas }.  Plin. Nat. Hiſt. l. vii. c. 24. 4+ See inſtances of extraordinary memory, Plin. Nat Hiſt. I. vii. c. 24, We muſt, however, be cautious of giving too implicit credit to theſe relations. Authors, as well as all other men, are too fond oſ the marvellous. It is certain, that the ſoul or mind of man cannot act, unleſs the inſtruments with which iĩt is to act are in a proper ſtate:. The mind is, therefore, affected by the inſirmities of the bodily frame; yet, in lunacy, and other mental complaints, medicine is found to have but a feeble eſfect. That a perſon, from a mere corporeal injury, can have any one ſubject eradicated from his mæmory, while he retains others, is not to be believed. Extraordinary and minute powers of memory are ſeldom conſiſtent with imagination. The mind, in that caſe, ſeems to he too much occupied with old ideas to be diſpoſed to form newones. I have heard a gentleman, of a remarkably ſtrong memory, complain, that vhen he ſat down to compoſ he experienced great difſieulty, from being incumbered with the thoughts, Cu A P. VI. OF INVENTION. Incention; hat,Ideas of Memory and InaginationInvention and Judgment. VH E mind mæy be equally employed in making true as falſe combinations of ideas; in forming a ſyſtem, and connecting ideas by their natural relations, as in depicting Centaurs, and making witty alluſions; in either of which caſes it is ſaid. to invent. In the former there ſeems to be a greater mixture of judgment, and this kind of invention. is ſubſervient to real ſcience. On the contrary, when the invention conſiſts in drawing ſtrong and lively pictures or repreſcrtations, either ſalſe in themſelves, or heightening by rhetoric real facts, it is called imagination; when it conſiſts in wild and unexpected combinations, it ĩs called ſancy*. From the two laſt chapters it appears, that invention is altogether dependant on the principle of aſſociation. When a perſon is poſſeſſed of a mind ſuficiently active 10 be eaſily affected with the relations pointed out in the preceding chapters, we ſay of him, that he has an inventive genius: a quick diſcernment of thoſe relations between complex ideas, will lead him to combine them into new ones, or to new arrange the order of his thoughts, which will amount to neaerly the ſare. In an active mind, the ideas will be more vivid, and ſuch a mind vill take notice of many relations that would æ  Whnhen ideas, and trains of ideas, occur, or are called up in a vivid manner, and without regard to the order of former actual impreſſions and perceptions, this is ſaid to be done by the power of iragination or fancy.uHeart. Introd. eſcape ordinary perſons. When a mind is mere converſant, and more aſfected with the relation of cauſe and eſſect, ſuch will conſtitute a genius for the ſciences. A genius for the arts is more ſoribly ſtruck with the relation of reſemblance, Hence, firſt, it follows, that the memory muſt be ſtrong to ſupply a genius for either arts or ſciences vith materiais for new improvements; and, _-_ The mind muſt be active, and eaſily affected by the ſeveral relations. The diſtinction between ideas of memory and ideas of imagination has been already mentioned. Ideas of memory muſt neceſſarily be more lively than ideas of imagination commonly arc at firſt. Ideas of imagination are only formed from the ideas of memory, ſo that at moſt the figure is but at ſecond- hand, and muſt allo be leſ/ perſect than what nature has actually preſented to our ſenſes. Yet, if we remember what was ſaid reſpecting the ſrequent repetition of an idea, it will be found, that ideas of imagination may, by this means, become fully as vivid as ideas of memory, which is the caſe with perſons addicted to falſhood, as has been already remarked. But I will even go beyond this, and aſſert, that a number of vivid ideas, being combined into one complex one, and each having its dependant train of ideas, the complex, or rather ecomplex idea, by frequent repetition, will produce a ſtronger ſenſation than any one of its conſtituent parts. Hence it is a ſelf-evident ſact, that the intellectual pleaſures and pains, though deducible from the ſenſible ones, are in reality ſtronger and more vivid, as æny perſon may ſatisfy himſelf who conſiders a little the nature of avarice, ambition, or love. It hos been cuſtomary to eſtabliſn a radical diſtinction between invention and judgment, as if they were diſtinct powers of the mind, and not the ſame power differently employed; but the only two great diſtinctions that I perceive in the human mind are, memory and genius, which, it ĩs certain, do not always meet in the ſame perſon. Perhaps the reaſon they are ſeldom found to exiſt together*, in any conſiderable extent, may be a certain inertneſs in minds of the formur caſt, which enables them to retain ideas in the groſs, but which diſables them from ſeparating, analizing, or making new combinations. A very vivid mind is not only ſtruck with an object as a whole, but every conſtituent part is obſerved, and makes, if I may ſo expreſs it, a ſeparate impreſſion; theſe parts are, therefore, liable to become ſeparately aſſociated with parts oſ other complex images, and the ſame vividneſs and activity of mind will produce naturally theſe frequent aſſociations.  J would not be underſtood to repreſent memory, and even very ſlrong powers of memory, a5 inconſiſtent with ęenius; on the contrary I am vell aſſured, that a good memory iĩs one of its eſential conſtituents. I would be underſtood to ſpealk of thoſe uncomnion memories which retain not only the ideas, but the language of authors, and which will recollect with little trouble not only the CH A P. VII. OF JUDGMENT. yudgment ; avhat.. AſſiutProbability. HEN the mind examines and compares obVV jects or ideas, recalling in a ſeries, and turning them over, ſo as to diſtinguiſh their natures, quaIlities, or relations, it is ſaid to judge. ſo the act itſelf, or the power oſ performing It, we give the name judgment, and oſten the concluſion or inference is called a judgment. Ideas are objects of the judgment; ſirſt, in diſtinguiſhing one idea from another: this act of the mind has given riſe to the technical terms uſed by logicians, identity and diverſitt. Mr. Locke calls this the firſt act of the mind, which, he obſerves,  it does without any pains or deduction, by its natural power of perception and diſtinction adly, Ideas are objects of the judgment, in perceiving the relation which one bears to another, or the particulars in which they agree one with another. Thus, by the firſt, we obſerve; that blue is not purple; and yet, by the ſecond, we perceive, that purple approaches nearer the colour blue than yellow does. Or, to give a plainer inſtance We perceive by the firſt act of judgment, that two is a different number from four; and, by the ſecond, that they have this property in common, that they are both even numbers. Mr. Locke obſerves, that truth and falſehood belong properly to propoſitions . Truth is, firſt, a * B. ii. c. 32. j conformity of the idea with the name; in other words, that in the minds of diſferent perſons the ſame name ſhall ſuggeſt the ſame idea. 2ndly, A conformity of the idea with ſome real exiſtence. 3dly, A conformity of one idea with arother. The cauſe that a perſon affirms the truth of the propoſiſion, twice two is four, is the entire coincidence of the viſible and tangible idea of twice to with that of four, as impreſſed upon the mind by diſferent objects. We ſee every where that twice tuo and four are only different names for the ſame impreſion. Wherę the numbers are ſo large, that we are not able to form any diſtinct viſible ideas of them, as when we ſay, twelve times twelve Is equal to one hundred and fortyfour, a coincidence of the words ariſing from ſome method of reckoning, and reſembling the coincidence of words, which attends the colncidence of ideas in the ſimpler numerical propoſitions, is the foundation of our rational aſſent; for we oſten do, and might always verify the ſimpleſt numerical propoſitions by reckoning up the numbers *. Thoſe judgments, vhich relate to determining the probebility oſ future events, appear to be little more than aceure tely remembering, and ſelecting ſuch principles as relate to the matter in conemplaion. Ve can gueſs at the future only ſrom the pat. As when certain appearances happen, we remember, that the Tame apppearances were formerly attended with certain conſequences; ; the whole event is thereſore preſented to our minds, though not yet completed. The great difficulty is, to recollec: accurately in what particular circumſtances the preſent matter agrees with the paſt, and the degree of probability will be in an exact proportion to the circumſtances in whieh they gres. lll . Hartley on vinn Proꝑ. 38. Thus we ſee memory furniſhes the materials for the judgment; the concluſions drawn partake much of the nature of invention. In this the two faculties in a manner meet; and for this reaſon I conclude they are radically the ſame, only differently exertedl. Reaſoning is a chain of judgments founced one upon ænother. It C u APrP. VIII. OF WORDS. Alstraſt and general Terms.Uſes and Abuſes of Words hinking in Language. ORDS were adopted as the ſigns oſ ideas, which are images of things; they are a ſort of coin current among men to transfer their thoughts to one another*. Words ſerve likewiſe to repreſent collections of ideas, as is the caſe in general terms. On examining the principles of language, it appears, that the firſt words of every language relate immediately to things, their properties or actions. Men in a very rude ſtate of ſociety, have little uſe for abſtract or general reaſoning. All our adverbs, conjunctions, and prepoſitions, were originally verbs or t ſubſtantives. To number would be extremely difſicult without words: they ſerve to diſtinguiſn numbers, of which ve could have no diſtinct viſible or tangible ideas. The niceſt obſerver cannot have a diſtinct idea of Words, in all men's mouths (that ſpeak with any meaning) ſtand for the ideas which thoſe that uſe them have, and which they would expreſs by them. Thus a child that takes notice of nothing more in the metal he hears called gold, than the yeilow colour, calls the ſame colour in a peacock’s tail gold; another, that has better obſerved, adds to ſiuing yellow, great weight; and then the ſound gold ſtands, when he uſes it, for a complex idea of a ſilning yellow, and very weighty ſubſtance.Locke, b. iii. c. æ. 1 See Mr. Horne Tookes Epea Pteroenta; unqueſtionably the firſt vork on this ſubject in our own or any other language. ninety-nine, and 4nother oſ an hundred; but by the words. When we obſerve any quality, or ſet of qualities, that are connected with ſeveral diſferent objects, we conſtitute thence an abſtract word, ſuch are rounineſs, hiteneſs, buman nature, &c. General terms are formed, by obſerving that there are ſome qualities in which certain things agręe, though difſering i in others; we rank, therefore, all the objects ſo agreeing under a general head, or c'aſę them. Theſe general terms do not excite any idea unleſs a particular one. Thus, if by the word man any idea is excited, it muſt be that of a particular man. The vord animal is ſtill more general, yet if any diſtinct idea accompanies it, it is only that of a particular animal. In this caſe, however, there is no danger of conſuſion, if the general term is well underſtood, that is, if the particular qualities to which ĩt is meant to refer are defined, and diſtinctly pointed out, then any man or any animal will ſcrve completely to repreſent the whole claſs in thoſe agreeing qualities, which the general term ſerves to expreſs ?. It is manifeſt this is a refinement of human invention, to prevent the inconvenience of conſtantly referring to proper names, which would be almoſt as laborious as the contrivance of Swiſt's philoſophers, to converſe without words, by bringing the thing ſpoken of within ſight of the parties. The _- terms repre ſenting mixed modes, ſuch as parrician, virtue, &c. have only to be defined in the ſame manner, by pointing out the actions or qualities * In the whole buſineſs of genera and ſpecies, the genus, or more comprehenſive, is but a partial conception of what is in the ſpecies, and the ſpecĩes of what ĩs to be found in each individual. See Locke, b. iii. c. 6. they are deſigned to repreſent, and there will be no danger of confuſion or mi*take. WVords repreſenting complex ideas, which are objects of our ſenſes, are defined by enumerating the ſimple ideas of which they are compounded. Words repreſenting ſimple ideas cannot properly be defined, for it is impoſſible to analyze the idea white, ſweet, &c. It is unneceſary to ſay any thing of the nature and uſe of thoſe words called particles. Such a diſquiſition would be better adapted to a grammatical treatiſe, than to the preſent work. Words may pervert our reaſoning, either through aſſion or ignorance. As words, by being connected with objects, become in ſome meaſure capable of exciting pleaſure and pain, ſo they may contribute to prejudice us for or againſt an object, when frequently united vith ĩt, as is evident in the uſe of the epithets g0od, fine, elegant, frightful, bad, &c *. Vhatever diſputes or miſconceptions ariſe from ignorance of words, they generally happen in the names of mixed modes, or abſtract general terms; for in the uſe of thoſe words, which only repreſent complex æ  It onght to be remarked, that the words and phraſes of the parents, governors, ſuperiors, and attendants, have ſo great an infiuence over children, when they firſt come to the uſe of language, as inſtantly to generate an implicũt belief, a ſtrong deſire, or high degree of pleaſure. They have no ſuſpicions, jealouſies, memories, or expectations of being decelved or diſappointed; and therefore a ſet of words expreſſing pleaſures of any kind, which they have experienced, put together in almoſt any form, will raiſe up in them a pleaſurable ſtate, and oppoſite words a painful one. Whence it is eaſy to ſee, that the fine language expreſſing praiſe, and the harſ one expreſing diſpraiſe, muſt inſtantly put them into a ſtate of hope and joy, ſear and ſorrow reſpectivelyHartley, Pro;. 47. ideas of ſenſation, there can ſcarcely be any miſtake. The miſtakes alluded to uſually happen, 1ſt. From an idea being omitted, which ought to have been comprehended in that deſinition of a general term, which every man makes in his ovn mind. As in chancemedley, man-ſlaughter, murder, the principal idea ĩs the ſame, yet the reſpective words ſuggeſt an idea materially different. 2ndly. From ideas being admitted, which ought not to be comprehended in the general term 2dly, From an obſcure or conſuſed view of the meaning. 4thly, Diſputes often ariſe, becauſe a man may have a part of the ideas, which are comprehended under the general word, more ſtrongly aſſociated with his other ideas than the reſt; of courſe he will have a partial view, and his reaſoning will be biaſſed by a kind of prejudice. The firſt end of language is to make known our thoughts to others, in which we fail, 1ſt, When we uſe words without clear and diſtinct meanings; 2dly, When we apply received names to ideas, to which the common uſe of language does not apply them; 3dly, When we apply them unſteadily. The ſecond end of language is to make known our thoughts with as much eaſe and quickneſs as poſſible, and this men fail in when they want either names for complex ideas, or abſtract and general terms. The third end of language is to convey the knowledge of things, and this cannot be done, but when the ideas agree with the reality of things*. Other abuſes of language, not noted above, are, 1ſt, Affected obſcurity; 2nd, Taking words for things, as abhorrence of a vacuum, ſubſtantial forms, &c. to which I may add, taking memory, judgment, imagination, 4 See Locke, b. iĩii. c. 9. G g ⸗ for for diſtinct powers, and almoſt for diſtinct beings, inſtead of what they really are, only different modes of the mind's acting; 3dly, Figurative language. The frequent uſe of abſtract and general terms makes us think in language more than we otherwiſe ſould do; yet it is ſeldom that a chain of thought is carried on in a regular chain of words, as if we were explaining our thoughts to another, unleſs indeed when we con over a ſpeech or any tranſaction where language is C H A P. IX#%, i OF PLEASURE AND PAIN. Pleaſure in conſequence of Action. By AſfociationZBy Paſſion Utility—SurpriueVarietyjRegularity Imagination. c O excite us to the actions of thinking and motion ſays Mr. Locke) the author of nature has joined to ſeveral thoughts and ſenſations a perception of delight; without this we ſhould have no reaſon to prefer one thought or action to another, motion to reſt; in which ſtate man, however furniſhed with the faculties of underſtanding, &c. would be a very idle inactive creature, and paſs his time only in a lethargic dream. Pain has the ſame effect (continues he) to ſet us on work that pleaſure has; ſince we are as ready to avoſd that as to purſue this.” It is evident that pain and pleaſure are relative terms, expreſſive of an alteration in the ſtate oſ the perſon, bodily or mental. 1ſt. Some degree of pleaſure or pain attends almoſt every impreſſion on the five ſenſes. 2dly. Relief from an uneaſy ſituation is pleaſure, ; thus, the wants conſequent on our natural appetites are painſul, and to ſatisſy them pleaſant . 3dly. The recollection of the ideas of thoſe things which are hurtful  At this chapter the fecond part of this book commoences, or that which treats of the active powers of man. + The appetites, which are the ſprings of the paſſions, are, hunger, thirſt, and the deſire of procreation. The bodily affections productive of pain and pleaſure, and which are connected with the ſenſe oſ feeling, are, ſickneſs and wearineſs, and to theſe we may oppoſe the feeling of health and vigour, and the ſenſation of liſe, or the pleaſure attending the moderate action of our ſenſes. to the body, or ideas aſſociated with them, is productive of trouble to the mind, and the contrary *, as vill be amply proved in the progreſs of this volume. So far is evident from experience. To aſcertain the nature and cauſe of painful and pleaſurable ſenſations is an inquiry of ſome difficulty. A natomiſts and phyſiologiſts are, I apprehend, very generally agreed in one point; it will thereſore be ſefſicient to ſubjoin the opinion of one of the moſt eminent, eſpecially as the ſubject has been in part inveſtigated on a former occaſion t.- All I ſall aſlume (ſeys Dr. Monro) is what is founded on experiments, that ſenſation and motion do depend upon the nerves; that ſenſations are pleaſant as long as the nerves are only gently affected, without any iclence offered to them; but as ſoon as any force goes beyond this, and threatens. a ſolution of union, it creates that uneaſy ſenſation, pain ĩIf we examine the courſe of human life, we ſhall find almoſt the whole of poſitive pleaſure to conſiſt in action of ſome kind. Sleep will hardly come: under the denomination of poſitive pleaſure. It is deſired, Becauſe it produces a relief from wearineſs, and is a ſtate to which our bodies naturally tend when fatigued; otherwiſe it is a ſtate of inſenſibility, and it would be an abuſe of language to call it pleaſure. Some impreſſions ure primarily grateſul and others diſagreeablee. That the painful and diſagreeable are ſuch by an intenſe degree of agitation, Which ſtrains and prejudices the organs of ſenſe, is probable. It ĩs alſo probable, that the agreeable follow the general law of our nature, and are pleaſing on account of the gentle yet lively action æ The expreſſion of pain in the courtenance is much the ſame whether bodily or mental, only differing in the degree. + See book ix. c. 36. 1 Sce alſo Cheſeldens Anatomy, chap. Nerves. or agitation excited in us. There will remain little doubt of the truth of this doctrine, if we conſider that light and heat in a moderate degree are productive of pleaſure, and in greater quantities hurt by their intenſeneſs; that many acids, &c. which, when diluted, are agreeable to the taſte, are highly painſul when applied pure and unmixed *. In fine, abſolute reſt is the death of ſenſTee. Motion is the very characteriſtic of animal life: and moſt of our intellectual as well as ſenſible pleaſures ſeem to depend on a moderate increaſe of action. Recalling an old idea, which is connected with a train of other ideas, is manifeſtly pleaſing; and this appears to reſult ſfrom the gentle agitation imparted to the organs of thought. The muſic was like the memory of joys that are paſt, mournful, but pleaſant, to the ſoul The pleaſures of the imitative arts, of figurative language, oſ the ſublime, the beautiful, and ſtill more, the pleaſures of variety, will meet an eaſy ſolution on this principle }. Of pains, ſome are poſitive, as really affecting the body ĩ, others only affecting the mind by being connected æ There Is no one, of ever ſo little underſtanding in what belongs to a human conſtitution, who knows not, that, without action, motion, or employment, the body languiſhes; and is oppreſſed, &c. æ In the ſame manner the ſenſible and living part, tbe ſoul or mind, wanting its proper and natural exerciſe, is burthened and diſeaſed, &c. Shaſictbury Enq. Con. Virtue, b. ĩi. p. i. ſ. I. + This is to be underſtood, hovever, as nothing more than an attempt to account for the nature of pleaſure and pain; and, I own, it appears to me the moſt rational Ihave ſeen. The eſtabliſiment or rejection of this doctrine will not affect the truth of my general principles; and I can ſtart fairly with this ſelf-evident maxim, that pleaſure and pain are the eſffects of certain impreſſions on all our ſenſes, and that the cravings of the appetites are painful, and the gratification of them adminiſters pleaſure. I Since the pains of feeling are far more numerous and violent than thoſe of all our other ſenſes put together, the greateſt nected with painſul ideas; and further, pain is gererally conſequent on the abſence, or deprivation of pleaſure; that ĩs, our expectations are diſappointed, and we are robbed of the pleaſure of hope, for we are ever in purſuit of pleaſure; but the pain is alWays greater in proportion as the expectation was prubable. Thus, there are many ſounds, which, though very diſſonant, ſcarcely give us pain; yet to a good ear the ſmalleſt ciſſonance in muſic is offenſive. The ſame may be obſerved in painting, architeſture, &ec. Our ideas flowing naturally in aæ train, whatever is introduced forcibly, and bearing not an immediate connection, pains the mind, becauſe it diſtracts it with the variety of ideas, which are crouded together by the collateral circumſtances introduced by it, as well as thoſe depending on the former train of thought. An impreſſion, which was painful, will leave a trace or idea of pain behind it, and a pleaſurable impreſſion an agreeable idea; theſe, it is plain, may be excited by any of the aſſociated circumſtances. But the ſſrongeſt relation is that of cauſationn. What we conceive to be the cauſe of painful or pleaſurable ſenſations will be intimately combined with thoſe ideas; ard hence we always love or hate moſt vehemently what we conceive to produce pleaſure or pain. But as the principle of aſſociation is not confined to the relation of cauſe and effect alone, an7 other circumſtance aſſociated by contiguity of time or plece, or even by reſemblance, will partake of the paſion. It ĩs weli known that the very word phyſic conveys a diſagreeable idea to children, vho have been compelled to take nauſeous draughts, and they can ſcarcely endure the perſon of the apothecary. The mention of partipart of our intellectuœl ;aæins are deducible fom tEemVoriley on Man, Prog. 13. culàr medicines will ſometimes excite vomiting in very delicate and irritable habits. Some medicines, palatable in themſclves, from the idea of their painful eſfects, we nauſeate. The ſenſible pleaſures are greater in number than the ſenſible pains. Of this, waving any abſtract reaſoning, ſuch as the love oſ life, and the pleaſures oſ habit, any man may be convinced, who vill be at the trouble of enumerating them. Now our intellectual pleaſures and pains are combinations of the ſenſible, and of courſe our pleaſures will be more numerous than our pains. Ideas ſeem to have an effect on the mind ſimilar to what ſome applications are ſaid to have on the body, which are ſedatives when applied in large quantities, and ſtimulants in ſmall.  The ſight of tortures chills the whole ſoul, and produces almoſt a total ſtagnation of thought *; but relations of tortures have never any ſuch eſfect, and men ſeem to find them agreeable, by the avidity with which they liſten to them. The truth is, a very violent mental agitation is required to produce pain, and every moderate agitation will produce pleaſure: a proof that the intellectual pleaſures muſt be very numerous, and the intellectual pains very few. A deſcription of a ſtorm or battle, which is really compoſed of painful or diſagreeable ideas, will excite in very few a degree of agitation which ariſes to pain, and moſt people experience an actual pleaſure from theſe deſcriptions. The very deformities of nature, a rugged and frightful hill, or a ſtorm of lightning, give us pleaſure, when exactly copied; and we read vith pleaſure even of ill actions: and ſee the cruelties of tyrants repreſented on the the2 Gerard on Genius, part iL ſ. 4. atre, with akind of ſolemn delight. This can only reſult, 1ſt, From the mental agitation, which theſe trains of thought produce. 2dly, From ſome agreeable ideas, which may be connected with the train of thought; for the mind is ever ready to turn and embrace pleaſing aſſociations, and ſeldom fond of purſuing a diſagreeable train. ”dly, Variety is generally connected with rude nature, and imperfect characters. he pleaſure reſulting from narratives of apparitions, enchantments, &c. may be accounted for on the ſame rincipes, and from the pleaſure attendant on them reſults the eaſy belief which men afford to ſuch fancies. The pleaſure of utility reſutts from the ideas of pleaſure that are aſſiociated with the ends of any work or ncertaking. Hence theſe pleaſurable ideas becom aſſfociated with the employment itſel. Though in ſome inſtances this eſect may be counteracted 7, the general principle holds nevertheleſs true. . Pleaſure  At the ſubſiding of grieſ there is a certain melancholy pleaſure. A diſtant view of the misfortunes of others aftords a ſimilar ſenſation: but they produce paæin if they touch us rearly; and ſome hearts are ſo ſuſceptible, that they are moved much eaſier than others. On the imagination being excited to action, we feel a moſt agreeable ſenſation; and it is a common maxim among authors, to Ieave ſomething to the imagination. +  A priſon ĩs certainly more uſeſul to the public than a pelace; and the perſon who founds the one is generally directed by a much julter ſpirit of patriotiſm than he who builds the other. But the immediate efſects of a priſon, the confinement of the wretches ſnut up in it, are diſagreeable, and the imagination either does not talze time to trace out the remote ones, or ſees them at too great a diſtance to be much aſfected by them. —Sæiths Theor. Mor. Sent. part i. ſ. 3. c. 3.  On the contrary, we may add, the pleaſure, the gaiety, the greatneſs of thoſe who inhabii the pęlace, naturally affect the mind with pleaſing ſentiments. i Pleaſure may reſult from ſurpriſe on ſeveral accounts. The agitation which a moderate ſurpriſe occaſions is agreeable; but the ſurpriſe which is united with the ſatisfaction of finding ourſelves ſafe, aſter fancying we were in danger, is ſtill more exquiſite; and, perhaps, the moſt exquiſite of all is, vhen we find occaſion for ſelf- commendation, as in ſolving a problem, &ec. The pleaſure of variety ſcems to be the effect chieny of the moderate, and yet lively agitation, which ſeveral trains of thought induce. Though it⸗ appears from all that has been ſaid, that gentle agitation is in general productive of pleaſure, yet the mind has likewiſe a natural Iove of eaſe, and vill not bear much fatigue; a little exertion ſoon tires t; for this reaſon, regularity is pleaſing, and the contrary. We readily embrace a regular figure; the train oſ thoughts flow naturally to the different parts; we comprehend it; our mind ĩs ſatisſied with it. We purſue, with a kind of eaſy emotion, a regular ſeries; and hence it is, that men have been ſo fond of reaſoning from univerſal axioms. The irregular pleaſes in  Trophies of the inſtruments of muſic or of agriculture, imiated in painting or ſtucco, make a common and an agreeable orament of our halls and dining-rooms. Atrophy of the ſame kind, gcompoſed of the inſtruments of ſurgery, of diſſecting and amputation knives, &c. would be abſurd and ſiocking. Inſtruments of ſurgery, however, are alvays morę ſinely. poliſhed, and generally more adapted to the purpoſes for which they are intended, than traments of agriculturee The remote eſfects of them too, the Eealth of the patient, ĩIs agrecable; yet as the immediate eſfect of them is pain and ſuſering, the ſight of them always diſpleaſes. Ib.  Inſtruments of war are agreeable, though their immediate effect may ſeem to be, in the ſame manner, pain and ſuffering; but then it is the pain and ſuffering of our enemies, &c. With regard to us, they are immediately connected with the agreeable ideas of courage, victory, and honour,ZIb. the works of nature from cuſtom, and the ideas connected with them. Nevertheleſs, where the end is pleaſure, we may lay it down as an univerſal rule, that an object ought to poſſeſs ſome degree of variety without entirely departing from that uniſormity we love. The pleaſures of the imagination I have aſſerted to be much more numerous than the pleaſures of ſenſe; and theſe reſult, firſt, from whatever of the beautiſful is poſſeſſed naturally by the objects deſcribed. 2dly, From the aſſociations of pleaſure originally deduced from the Cn a r. X. OF LOVE AND EATRED. Beſnition of LoveOrigin of the Social PaſſionDiſlite and HatredDeſire and Averſion. OVE is the idea of pleaſure aſſociated with another idea. Some of the firſt impreſſions ol pleaſure an infant receives are by the gratification of ĩts appetites. Its firſt emotions of love are, therefore, towards the heing that ſupplies it with food, &c.; and it is obſervable, inſants never fail in this love. The idea of pleaſure is in reality firſt united with the food itſelf, and of courſe transſerred to it, and thence to the object by whom it is ſuppliedl. All our wants are ſatisſied (particularly in our tender years) by means of our own ſpecies; hence the moſt agreeable ideas are united with them, and ſo often repeated, that in time the Iove of mankind becomes, in a manner, a neceſſary part of ourſelves; and from this ſource may proceed the ſocial aſſections. Diſlike and hatred are the oppoſites to love, and reſult from the idea of pain combined with another idea, A child ſhall have no diſlike to a certain medicine, till aſter it has produced nauſea, or ſome painful ſenſation, and thenceforward he will ſcarcely hear it named without expreſſing his averſion *. The paſſions have been analyzed, and thus reduced to love and hatred by ſome of the oldeſt writers on the  The idea of pleaſure bæing annexed to a thing, conſtitutes it, as we ſay, good. The idea of pain (either immediate or related) evil.  Theſe (as Mr. Locke obſerves) are the hinges on which the paſſions turn See J.ocke, b. ĩi. c. 2o. ſubject now extant. It ĩs evident, that deſire and averſion are the ſame paſions made active. Inanimate things may be the objects of love or diſlike  The houſe which we have long lived in, the tree whoſe verdure and ſhade we have long enjoyed, are looked upon ith a ſort of reſpect ? The Dryads and Lares, a ſort oſ genii of trees and houſes, were probably firſt ſuggeſted by this kind of aſfection. Deſire or the ſenſation of want, may be either ſenſual or imaginary; it may be fixed on the pleaſure of gratiſying an appetite, or on the delight accruing to the eyes or ears from the perception of beauty. When inſtruction, education, or prejudice of any kind, raiſe a deſire or averſion towards an object, it muſt be founded on an opinion of ſome quality, for the perception of which we have the proper ſenſes. Thus, if heauty is dcſired by one, who has not the ſenſe of ſight, the deſire muſt be raiſed by ſome apprehended regularity oſ figure, ſweetneſs of voice, ſmoothneſs, or ſoſneſs, or ſome other quality perceptible by the other ſenſes (without relating to the ideas of colour t) or from the commendation of others.  Smitis Theory Mor. Sent. part ii. ſ. 3. c. I, C u A r. XiI. OF BEAUTY. ilii Beauty in general. Original From n Aſficiation. DVature and Art. E may ſay in general of beauty, that it is ſome quality in objects capable of exciting unmixed ideas of pleaſure, independent of the gratification of àny of the animal appetites. This definition does not diſfer much ſrom that oſ Plato,  To à oſes nœI œxoumg næ, Perhaps we give this pre-eminence to the pleaſures not depending on appetite, as they are the moſt innocent, and leat liable to diſguſt and ſatiety t. The principal dittinetion between the pleaſure o forded by ſublime objects, and that by thoſe which ve term beautiſul, ſeems to be, that the latter is pure unmixed pleaſure from the gentle agitation, whereas the formergorders upon pain (ariſing from ſome compound of the paſſion of fear) and is often not unmixed with actual pain, and always requires a greater exertion, and produces a more violent agitation of the organs oſ ſenſe. a æ  The pleaſant to ſenſes of ſight and hearing.”pPlato, Hippias major. t Ib. Beauty ĩs never properly applied to the ſenſe of taſting, as it ſeems too coarſe an enjoyment to be reckoned among the rational ones. The pleaſure aſforded by riſible objects * is not that tranquil pleaſure which ariſes from the contemplation oſ beauty, neither iĩs it pure or unmixed pleaſure. Contempt, or ſome painful paſſion, is gereraiiy in ſome degree compounded with the riſible idea. The primary conſtituents of beauty ſeem all of them to be ſuch as promote gentle agitation, and thus increaſe our ſenſe of life. Such are, 1ſt, Lively colours, where they are not ſo ſtrong, or the application ſo continued, as to produce pãnt. The 70ung man couched by Cheſelden thought ſcarlet the moſt beautiful colour, and of others the gayeſt gave him moſt pleaſure. The firſt time he ſaw black it gave him great uneaſineſs ſ. adly, Variety and contraſts of colours, where the tranſition is lively, without being too abrupt. 'Females oſ taſte make much uſe of this principle in the choice of their ornaments of dreſs. dly, Certain ſounds and combinations of them, analogous to thoſe æ Riſibility is often productive of pleaſure, as are ſome cther affections which Eave no relation to what is called beautiful. Beauty feems moſt properly applicd to a pleaſing idea excited by ſome external object; but meſ frequently our ideas of beauty ariſe ſrom aſociations, as the ſenſe of propriety, eaſe, &c. &c. + ⸗ It is evident that gay colours, of àall kinds, are a principl ſource of pleaſure to young children; and they ſeem to ſtrike them more particularly, when mixed together in various vays.Hartley on Man, Prop. 2z. æIn adults the pleaſure; of colours are very Ienguid in com. pariſon of thelr preſent aggregates of pleaſure formed by aiociation.Ibid. Green, the middle colour of the ſeven primary ones, is moſt grateful. 1 Cheſelden’s Anatomy, p. 31. The boy couched by Cheſelden was moſt pleaſed with reæ, perhaps, becauſe it was the completeſt exertion of his newly acquired faculty. IIe dreaded blact, probably, becauſe it reſtored him to his former ſtate, æand was in fact a partial negation of ſenſc. of colour juſt mentioned. 41hly, Flowing eaſy motion, without that violence which gives a double ſenſation of pain, viz. beſides the harfn effect to our ſenſes, an aſſociated pain, by putting ourſelves in the place of the object. 5thly, The agitation which a water-fall, a varied proſpect, or an high aſcent, produces, may be a ſource of that ind of pleaſure we aſcribe to beauty, even independent of the aſſociated ideas. Hence it follows, that figures, which poſſeſs variety without any thing harſh or abrupt, the waving line, running water, and many of thoſe conſtituents of beauty remarked by painters, are naturally and primarily ſuch. Th]ſc when ſo diſpoſcd as not to contradict any attachment eſtabliſhed by cuſtom, and ſtill more when they coincide with it, as when nature is imitated in a fire landſcape, or deſcribed in a poem, never fail to give pleaſure; and hence it appears, that authors have miſtaken who have deſcribed that which is moſt fit and regular as the moſt beauriful. Admitting, in the inſtance adduced by Plato , that the wooden ſpoon might be moſt uſeful and proper; yet if even the value is ſet aſide, I apprehend the golden one would be allowed to poſſeſs the moſt intrinſic beauty. The aſſociations that ariſe originally from the pleaſures of ſenſe may become ſo diſtant, that ve loſe ſight of their origin; and to an object in this caſe conveying pleaſure, men univerſally aſign the epithet beautiful. Though it is probable, that moſt frequently ſome of the primary conſtituents of beauty will be compounded with it, and of this mixed nature are moſt of the objects we denominate beautiſul, as a ſine houſe, a landſcape, a running horſe, &c. On this account it is worth obſerving, we often find a whole to poſſeſ́ 4 Hippias Maj. beauty, which by no means reſides in the conſtituent parts ?. The ſimple conſtituents of beauty have but little inſluence when put in competition with the deſire of gratifying the appetites, or the fear of pain; to illuſtrate this, Iſall only mention a univerſal and common prejudice. There is nothing really deformed in ſerpents; on the contrary, many of the acknowledged conſtituents of beauty, ſuch as lively colours, variety, &c. are fourd in them; yet from a knowledge of their noxious properties we cannot by any means bring ourſelves to view them with that pleaſure which beautiful objects ought to inſpire. An object which is beautiſul vill impart a virtue to every thing connected with it. Things prepoſterous and deſormed in themſelves are reconciled to us when worn by a beautiſul perſon; and hence faſhion derives ĩts extenſive influence. On the contrary, what is worn by ruſtics is leſſened in our eſtimation by the awkwardneſs of the vearer. Men admire the very deſects of their miſtreſſes, and oſter judge of beauty by their peculiarities.  Amatorem quod amicæ æs Turpia decipiunt cœcum vitia aut etiam ipſa hæc s Delectant; veluti Balbinum polypus Hagnæ +. i Hence we may in a great meaſure account for both the uniſormity and diverſity of taſte prevalent among mankind. There are ſome objects and qualities, which intereſt and are pleaſing to every man; others, with men differently circumſtanced, receive a colour from other ideas, with which they muy be connected.. The human form is the moſt pleaſing of all forms to every æ Hippias Maj. ad. fin. + TEe robe of magiſtracy, even when ſeen on the ſtage, iæ accounted clegant and reſpectable, and ſuggeſs correſpondent ideas. man, becauſe ſrom ſociety he has derived all his choiceſt pleaſures; but whether white or black is to be preferred, whether an aquiline or a flat noſe, will, perhaps, depend on early aſſociations to determine. The infiuence of aſſociation over our ſenſe of beauty is further obvious in this, that ſcarcelv any man exiſts, who does not annex to particular ſets of features good and bad moral ideas; and theſe will probably be drawn from particular perſons. I knew a celebrated painter, whoſe beſt hiſtorical figures all bore ſome reſemblance to himſelf; and others have been known, who conſtantly copied their own wives as the perſection of beauty. Rural beauties are ſo compounded of the primary conſtituents of beauty, united with ſo many things that gratify our appetites and ſenſes, together with many complex pleaſures, ſuch as ſports and paſtimes, the amorous pleaſures, &c. that it is no wonder theſe, vith the encomiums of others, which have always an influence on imitative animals, ſould make them the almoſt unceaſing theme of poets. Oſ the beauties of art I ſhall treat in another chapter. C u A P. XII.  F C U ST O LM. Iain frem Cq lorn2EFlisirtaduirator. WO cbſervations naturally cccur, when we contemplate the ſorc o cuſtom: iſt, That vhen ve heve been long uſed to ſee tvo things together, we do not with perfect pleaſore endure to behold then ſeparate. This is, in trut, a ſpecies of diſ.ppoinrment. The idea appears incomplete; there is 2 want, and a painful ſenſe of want. Thus a cow with but one horn, or a dog with one ear, is a diſagrecable object, though, do: ubtleſ if they had been created with but one, two vould have been accounted a deſormity. adly, It is commmonly remarked, that cuſtom vill male us love almoſt any thing, ard vill reconcile us to almoſt any condition. The force of cuſtom here ſeems to depend entirely on the Principle of æſſociation. We haeve already ſeen that pleaſures are more abundant than pains. There ĩs, therefore, ſcarcely any ſtate in life, which will not be productive of many agreeable ideas; theſe ideas become connected vith the objects and actions which have occurred, while they have remæained impreſtd upon the mind; the idea, therefore, that imparted the pleaſure, and the other ideæ, will become Blended together; nay, the ſenſe of pleaſure will be trarsferred from the ſormer to the latter, ſo that it may recur united with a ſenſe of pleaſure, even when the object that originally imp ted the Pleaſure ĩs forgotten. Thus it &s nota ,mmon to hear perſons ſpeak in rapturous terms of their paſt ſtuation, when it is impoſſible ſor them to recount the eaſons why it was ſo agreeable; or, if they were to attempt to recount them, they would probably not aſũgn the true cauſes. Actions and things in themſelves indiferent thus borrow pleaſures from others, and by this means attach us to them, as we have ſeen that faſhions, without any one original principle of beauty, nay, even deformed in themſelves, obtain reſpect and admiration from the beauty of the wearer. It is thus that card- playing, and ſome other habitual vices, not in themſelves pleaſant, acquire an empire over us. The deſire of imitating others has, we will ſuppoſe, been our firſt motive for engaging in them; they have been united in the courſe of our purſuing them with the pleaſures oſ ſociety, the occaſional grat. fication of avarice, the pleaſure of ſurpriſe, &c. and thus afterwards appear pleaſant themſelves from their borrowed luſtre. Vhether the love of life itſelf is an innate principle has been diſputed; for though infants fear pain, yet they have no apprehenſion oſ death, till reaſon has ſo far made a progreſ, as to inform them that it is connected vith pain, and liſe with happineſs. The love of life is generated from the ſenſe of pleaſure reſulting from the goods we poſſeſs in it; and this affords no inconſiderable prooſ that the good in the world overbalances the evil. So ſtrongly, indecd, are the ideas of life and happineſs aſſociated, that moſt men would rather live miſerable, than not Ilive at all: thus again we ſee that an aſſociated affection may overcome and counteract the natural æffections, and even thoſe that gave it birth. It will be unneceſſary to add any more in this place ęn this ſubject, òr to endeavour to prove more at large the influence oſ cuſtom To an attèntive reader; many facts throughout the remainder of this work will occur to confirm it, and almoſt all that has been ſaid of æ ſenſe of beauty derived from aſſociation will apply likewiſe to moral beauty*. It is- obſervable, that every nation and every age has a faſhion in thinking as well as in dreſs; and the whole caſt of thinking vill be more uniform than men uſually ſuppoſe. The ſports of nations partake of the nature of their government, and theĩr political prejudices and intereſts. Gladiators and mock battles were the favourite amuſements of the warlike Romans. Men love what is uncommon at firſt, becauſe what produces mental agitation produces pleaſure; and there is no paſſion produces ſo much mental agitation within the limits of pleaſure as admiration; they aſterwards expect a renovation of that pleaſure, which was only the effect of ſurpriſe; and often the very recollection of that pleaſure will keep alive the paſſion.  æ In the reign of Charles II. a degree of licentiouſneſs was deemed the characteriſtic of a liberal education. It was connected, according to the notĩons of thoſe times, with generoſity, ſincerity, magnanimity, loyalty, and proved that the perſon who acted in this manner, vas a gentleman, and not a puritan,3Smith's Th. M. S, pt. 6. ſ. æ. In the ſame manner as you ære induced to love and imitate whatever is ccrnected with a pleaſcrable or beautiful object, you will endeavour to avold what is connected with pain or deformity. Hence men often act in extremes. Lord Belingbroke aſerted, that what firſt gave him a diſtaſte to religion, was the puritanical C u a rP. XIII. THE PASSIONS. OF the Paſſions in generalParticular PęſſionsAſiciated Pasfions, Paternal Love. Symputhy AvariceAmbition Love. T may prove of the higheſt importance in morals to analyze the ſeveral affections and paſſions. The general. cauſe has been already traced to the ſimple ſenſe of pleaſure and pain; we have ſeen further what it is that is called a ſenſe of beauty *; and now, from the ſeveral modifications and combinations of theſe, we ſhall, perhaps, be able to form at leaſt a conjecture how other more complex paſſions come to be formed. Love having been proved to proceed from an idea of pleaſure combined with another idea, and diſlite, or hatred, from an idea of pain combined in the ſame manner; deſire and averſion have been ſhewn to be no other than theſe paſions more actively exerted. Love in the extreme, without deſire, is admiration. Deſire, when applied to the gratifying oſ certain natural wants of our bodies, is called appetite. Foy is the poſſeſſion of a thing loved, a lively ſenſe of preſent good. Grief is a ſenſe of diſappointment, or good loſt. Fear is the ſenſe of pain, or averſion, united with grief. Auger % EHartley denominates the paſſions,  aggregates of the ideas, or traces oſ the ſenſible pleaſures and pains How they become united into the moſt common aſfections ĩt is our buſineſs to expiaim is an extreme of averſion, united with a deſire of removing the object. Revenge is a continuance of anger. Erv is anger excited through the deſire of poſſeſſing what another man is poſſeſſed of. Hatred is the continuance of envy or reſentment. Hope is a mixture of deſire and joy. Pride is ſelfſatisfaction, and is to ambition what joy is to deſire. Contempt is a low degree of hatred or averſion, without any mixture of anger or of envy. Curioſity is deſire excited by the natural Iove of action, often ſtimulated by appetite, or quickencd by the love of beauty. Shame is fear ariſing from the ſocial affections; that is, a fear of having done ſomething that may leſſen us in the eſteem of others; it is the oppoſite of Vanity. Deſpair is nothing but an exceſs of griefl. Perhaps the annexed ſcheme may contribute to elucidate the progreſs of the paſſions. n ti æ El u Averſion to æn irrational object—atred to a rational objectrielFea7Deſ;air. - N N . , x 2 ce, ui 5 æ N 7 y u - ãi RE-LOVE to an irraiionael objectDPeſ re—I.ove to Iational objectsJoy—IIopeſ:x . D. trid õ., . Amby; de c onc.. &&, vcũ croſ; c. 3. There is ſcarcely any ſuch thing as a ſimple paſſion; even thoſe which I have here ſpecified are generally compounded with each other. Whatever ideas are predominant will determine the bent of the paſſion, much depending on the peculiar tone of the organs at different times. Some paſſions more eaſily mix than others. Paſſions naturally terminate, when their end is accompliſhed. This, however, does not happen in all cales. It was remarked, that an impreſſion, as ĩt ĩs more vivid, remains proportionably longer on the organ of ſenſe; all the component ſimple parts of it are more ſtrongly impreſſcd, ard it is aſcciated vith a greater number of ideas. Impreſſions accompanied with pain or pleaſure are more vivid in proportion to the degrees of pain or pleaſure, and ſuch we muſt remember are all paſſions. Theſe impreſſions and ideas are of courſe more vivid than any others, of courſe aſſociated with a greater number of ideas, all of vhich vill ſerve to recall them, and thus a paſſion becomes the cauſe of its on continuance, àand by this means influences our train of thinking. From what has been ſtated it appears, that paſſions are transferable from one object o another. An idea being oſten repeated with an idea which we love, and vhich of courſe gives us pleaſure, we come at laſt to love the ideæa which was at firſt indifferentt. What ĩs more common than to love the children of thoſe whom ve eſteem, and that for no merit or beauty in the children themſelves? In parental love, the paſſion ĩs in part transferred ſfrom ſelf to the offspring The mother, during her pregnancy, connects the idea of the infant in her womb with a number of agreeable ideas, with pleaſure and with hope; hence maternal love is ſtronger at firſi than p terna. The idea of duty, and the example of others, tend to increaſe the paſſion; afterwards cuſtom, and the little cares about them. It is obſervable, that the love of parents is weal at firſt; but love ruſhes in by little aſſociations 25 from a thouſand ſources. On this principle depend ſome of the ſtrongeſt aſfections that ſway the human race Every deſire, for inſtance, ĩs atterded with a degrce of yneaſineſs; to remove it, therefore, is pleaſure. Now, when men once pereeive certain agreeable conſequences from obtaining an obect, a deſire of cbtaining iĩt enſues; this deſire will bæ liable to be renewed, and will be renewed ſimply as æ deſire, without any retroſæct to the firſt motives. This is evidently the caſe in avarice, where, dropping the immediate ſteps between money and happineſs, men form a connection, which does by no means naturally and immediately exiſt, and love the treaſure for its own ſake. The ſame might be obſerved concerning the deſire of knowledge, the delight oſ reading, plenting, &c. Theſe were ſirſt entered on vith a view to ſome ſarther end, but at length become habitual amuſements; the idea of pleaſure is aſſociated with them, when the ſirſt reaſon is quite vaniſhed out of our minds; nay, we ſind this power of aſſociation ſo great, as not only to tranſport our paſſions and affections beyond their juſt bounds, both as to intenſeneſę and duration, but alſo to transfer them to improper objects, and ſuch as are of a quite diſferent nature from thoſe to which our reaſon had at firſt directed them*. I ſhall cloſe this ſketch of the paſions by a ſhort account of ſympathy or ſocial aſfection, and aſterwards,  Preliminary Diſſertation to Laws Tranſlation of King's Origin of Evil. by the hiſtory of thoſe moſt powerſul incentives to action, avarice, ambition, and the paſſion of love between the different ſexes. The pleaſures of ſympathy are generated, iſt, by that Iove to our fellow-creatures, which is the effect of early obligation ®. adly, Becauſe the ſight of any enjoyment excites in us the pleaſurable ideas of that enjoyment, and unleſs envy interferes, theſe will ever have their due effect. Theſe feelings are increaſed by the praiſe that is beſtowed on benevolence, &c. and the hope of reward in another life. Sympathy in the misfortunes oſ others has a double effect; when beheld at a diſtance, as in theatrical repreſentations, I believe moſt men find ſomething rather pleaſing than otherwiſe in them, and this ariſes from the pleaſure that attends moderate emotion, even though derived from a painſul ſource. In perſons of very delicate ſenſations, this aſfection often degenerates into actual pain; and on beholding real woe, it is ſuch to all who retain the common Ccharacter ſtics of humanity. Compaſſion, or the deſire of relieving diſtreſę, is no other than a wiſ© of removing pain. The ſight of a wound excites immediately ideas of pain in our minds, and we feel a ſenſution of the ſame nature (though eaker) according to our memory of ſimilar pains, or, as ve by deſcription judge of them, from the pains that we really have felt. To relieve diſtreſs, thereſore, ĩs actually taking oſ pain from ourſelves; ; to the act of relieving we give the name generoſity. The idea of the pleaſure is aſterwards excited by hearing of an act of generoſity, nay, is aſſo* The ſocĩal pleaſures and afſections may, as Dr. Hartley obſerves, be much indebted for their increaſe to the pleaſures of the palate. Since it has been cuſtomary in alllages to ſatisſy our aprpetites in the company of our neareſt connections, the iden of pleaſure will become combined with them c;ated u ſth the very word itſclf, the mention of which, I believe, in moſt people, excites a grateſul ſenſation. By theſe meæns, the virtue of ſympathy may be conſtantly maintained, and every amiable paſſion cheriſhed. It has been ælready intimated whence the paſſion oſ avorice derives its origin. The natural wauts of man, it ĩs true, are very ſew; yct in the preſent ſtate of ſoety, theſe wants are not to be ſupplied without ſome exertions on our own parts. The firſt deſign, then, of human beings, is, to acquire ſuch a competence as will ſatisfy the calls oſ naturee. But obſerve what habit does. By a continued purſũtit, we grow eager in the chace; the ſirſt object is Ioſt ſight of; we annex the idea of pleaſure to the means or the inſtruments, and fancy riches to have ſomething in themſelves deſirable. A paſſion different from the firſt is now generated; one rnan's example imparts freſh vigour to another, and te end of life is forgotten in the ardour of an imaginary purſuit ?, When the idea of pleaſure is once transferred thus to the inſtrument, we ſee a child preſer a piece of money to many actual gratifications that might Le enjoyed immediaccly. I knew a covetous man, who hired a very uncomfortable Iarge houſe, a third part of which he did not inhabit, becauſe he thought ĩt a good ergain to procure an houſe of that ſize at the ſame rate as a ſmaller. The ſame man leſt a pleaſant ſarm and a good eſtate, and bought a commiſſion in the army, purely becauſe he could procure it at a cheap rate. e Avarice is checked, Iſt, By the ſtrong deſires of young perſons, and others, aſter particular gratifications. 2cly, By conſidering the inſigniſicance of riches in varding off death and diſeaſes, alſo ſiame and conr e Jt propter vitam, vivendi perdere cauſas,]Juv. tempt in many caſes; and in obtaining the pleaſures of friendſhip, religion, &c. 3diy, By the eager purſuit of any particular end, as learning. fame, & xn Ve may obſerve, that avaricæ is only the paſſion of little minds, and vill be chieſly predominant in uncultivated perſous, whoſe attention cannot be drawn from it by nobler purſuits; and in old people, whoſe ſenſual paſſions are decayed. Ambition ſeems to be founded, i1ſt, On the hatred or averſion to poverty, and all its concomitant diſadvantages and inconveniencies. 2dly, On the experience that we are indebted to our fellow-creatures for many conveniencies of lie; and from the hubit generated even in children, of endeavouring to pleaſe them, in order to obtain many objects of pleaſure to our ſenſes. 3dly, Many of the conſtituents of natural and artificial beauty are poſſeſſed by thoſe in high ſtations, we therefore annex pleaſurable ideas to thoſe ſtations, and love them on that account. 4thly, Cuſtom, and the words uſual in commendation, being applied to ſuch perſons, increaſe the paſſion. Ambition will take a different courſe, according to the diſpoſition or caſt of thinking in different per FomThus if a man is habitually ſenſual his ambition will ſtill have an inclination towards what may gratiſy his appetites. One man, perhaps, from education or ex ample, has acquired a habit of admiring fine loaths; H another, from natural timidity, avoids ſiame and poverty. Commonwealths promote ambition of a diſferent kind from that which is prevalent in monarchy. Ambition takes a diſferent courſe, according to the time of life. It is to be remarked, that the primary conſtituents of this paũion ſas indeed in all others) will be obſcured ſometimes by the aſſociated affections.  Hertley, prop. 48. The praiſe beſtowed on the heads of certain ſect⸗ of philoſophers, led many men t deſpiſe the natural objects of ambition, riches and pomp; ahd the natural diſſike to porerty and dirt was ſubdued and ſorgotten. The paſion of love (and eſpecially between refined perſons) is of a very complex nature; and far removed ſrom the ſenſual appetite, with which It is ſometimes even very ſlightly connected. It is a well known fact, that an accompliſhed woman of fortune and family eloped ſome years ago with an Italian eunuch, vhom ſhe married for love. The truth is, that beſides the appetite, rhe ſocial paſſion, ras beſore explained; and this, heightened by the protection a weaker perſon ſeems to claim from us; the ſenſe of beauty; admiration of particular accompliſhments; the reſpect due to high birth or fortune; the commendation of others, and habit, in many reſpects concur nore or leſs to form the paſſion. Men of the world are all of them ſenſible what ſucceſs may be derived from a pleaſurable ſtate of mind, in which the object, vhom they wiſh to pleaſe, may happen to be. On this account they ſtudiouſly mingle in all the pleaſures and amuſements, of whatever kind, in which thet perſon is found to delight. It is a maxim of Lord Cheſterfield,  Make a perſon in Iove with themſelves, and they are certain to love you in return ?. The pleaſure of receiving iſts is directly connected vith the object that beſtows them; where preſents cannot be made, praiſe and commendation are the ordinary means, and if their ſincerity ĩs * One of our comic writers preſcribes, that æ man muſt firũt make a woman a friend before he ventures to appear as à lover. not doubted, ſeldom fail of ſucceſs. I queſtion not, but it might almoſt ſecure the ſuit of a lover to be the meſſenger of ſome very agreeable piece of intelligence to his miſtreſs. Pleaſurable ideas, we knov, are naturally connected with perſonal beauty, riches, high birth, great qualities, or fame. Some impoſtors, under the maſk of being perſons of rank, have inſinuated themſelves into the good graces of females; nor could the diſagreeable ideas naturally annexed to falſhood and deception, afterwards vanquiſh the attachment. In fine, if by any means a man can become the aſſociate oſ agreeable ideas, on the principles every where proved, I think, throughout this book, he may ſoon hope to obtain a part in the affections of his miſtreſs; and this may ſerve to account, in ſome meaſure, for the many whimſical connections we are every day vitneſſes of.  When Miſs delights in her ſpinret,  A fidler may a fortune get; c A blockhead with melodious voice,  In boarding ſchools may have his choice;  And oft the dancing maiters art  Climbs from the toe to touch the heart;  In learning let à nymph delight,  The pedant gets a miſtreſs by't æ L ſal EJ L There is no greater miſtake, than that the world ĩs governed by motives of intereſt. Cool ſelf-intereſt acts in very ſew inſtances. Where mankind are not ſfwayed by the natural affections, that is, by thoſe ideas with which pleaſure is naturally connected, they are generally determined by ſome prejudice, that is, an idea with which pleaſure or pain is fantaſtically combined. e Cadenus and Vaneſſa. There Is, perhaps, no pàſſion ſo improvable by aſſociation as love; it is connected with many ideas that tend to refine, ſoſten, and- elevate the ſoul, and to increaſe the paſſion under. the appearance of increaſing preſent pleaſuree. We are not to wonder, thereſore, that it has proved ſo copidus a meãns oſf playing with our feelings in poetical and drarnatic compoſitions. To feel and ſympathize with ambition we- muſt be particularly circumſtanced, and then our thoughts are generally too ſtrongly bent on the purſuit to attend to imagination. Ambition i is an active, love a ſedentary ppiten. Some concluſions in favour of the practicability of virtue will enſve ſrom the preceding principles. In the firſt place, much of the government of the paſſions will hence appear to be in our own power, by avoiding pernicious aſſociations, and by eerly care; hence we may learn how to reſtrain the enthuſiaſm of avarice and ambition, by tracing them to their ſource. In our choice of ſriends and books alſo, we may learn to be cautious to avoĩd thoſe ſfrom which ill habits or prejudices may be derived; we may be inſtructed further to be aware of the effects of cuſtom in acquiring a fondneſs for triſes, and eſpecially for gaming, and other unnatural propenſities; we may learn to direct our affections to proper ohjects, to aſſociate the pleaſing with the uſeful, or, by force of reaſon and reſolution, to diſentangle thoſe improper combinations which we may have formed. This, indeed, ſeems to be the great uſe of reaſon and ſcience, viz. to enable us to purſoe and unravel the chain of aſſociations, which our affections may have extended, and to diſcern plainly the littlenqſs of the CH A P. XIV. OF REASONING. Common Senſe  what Defective ReaſoningAnalogical Reaſin. ingWrong Data.Pleaſures of Reaſning. EASONING may be defined a chain of judęgments, ſollowing and depending upon one another, by which ſome general concluſion is attempted, The deſign of this chapter will principally be to exhibit ſome detached obſervations, ſuch as may ſupply us with a few cautions againſt the moſt common defects in reaſoning, which will be found in general to depend upon a falſe or unnatural aſſociation of ideas. Thus, repeated obſervation of the proper and uſual relations of things produces a preſumption in the mind, that thoſe which are accidental may be equally ell founded; and this appears to be the undoubted coust of what is called pręjudice. When the train of ideas flows in ĩts natural courſe, that is, according to the true relations of things, then .* Vith this chapter the third diviſion, or the miſcellaneous part of this book, commences. + Senſe and memory are but knowledge of nẽ, vhich is æ thing pa©t and irrevocable; ſcience is the knowledge cſ conſequences, and the dependence of one fact upon anothe⸗, Ly which, out of what we can preſently do, ve kndw how to do ſomething elſe when we will, or the like another time.—EHobbes Leviath. pt. I. c. s. the opinions and concluſions ſormed vill be juſt. Wſen it is warped out of ĩts natural courſe by an accidentalaſſociation, then ſuch opinion, and every action founded upon it, will be falſlee Thus, while men annex the idea of honour to patriotiſm, and that diſintereſted bene volence which prompts a generous ſpirit to ciſregard its own advantage in contending for the ſafety and velfare of others, they reaſon according to the common order of nature; but iſ they by any means narrow the ſentiment, and can perſuade themſelves that it is lawſul to deſtroy or injure ſome for the ſake of others, that falſe notion of honour is generated, which produces war, devaſtation, and conqueſt; if to this they annex the idea of inſult, as heightening the honour, and add the idea of cruelty to inſult, which the varmth of paſſion may readily lead them to do, or if it ſhould ſeem a mark of courage to taſte the blood oſ their enemies, they will think it honourable and right to torture, and perhaps to devour them *?. That the univerſe muſt have a firſt cauſe, that a firſt cauſe muſt be ſelf-exiſtent, that a ſelſ-exiſtent being muſt be eternal, that an eternal and ſelf-exiſtent being muſt be without imperſection, is a chain of Feaſoning hat leads directly to a knowledge of the wiſdom and goodneſ⸗ of our Creator, and ought to inſpire us with a deſire æ  The beginnings of this corruption mæy be noted in many occurrences, as when an ambitious man, by the fame of his high attempts, a conqueror or a pirate by his boaſted enterprizes, raiſes in another perſon an eſteem and admiration of that immoral and inbuman character, which deſerves abhorrence; tis then that the hearer becomes corrupt, when he ſecretly approves the ill he hears; but en the other ſide, the man who loves and eſteems arnother, as believing him to have that virtue which he has not, but only coumerſeiis, is not on this æccount eĩther vicious or corrupt.” Shaſtſoury s Enc quiry con. Vi irtu], b. 1. . . ſ, 3. oſ imitating his perfections; but if, from perſoniſying the deity *, men ſhall once give room to conceive of him as having parts and paſſions, fancy will ſoon be ſportive on the occaſion, and the amours of Jove, and the contentions of the Gods, will become a part of the popular religionn. What eſfect ſuch an error muſt have on morals is obvious. While ſurroundæd with the bounties and mercies of God, we can never altogether loſe the idea of his goodneſs; if, therefore, to the admiration of the deity, the idea of vice or paſſion ſnould be annexed, theſe will loſe their deformity, and, however contrary to men's better judgments, ſuch vices may even be held in eſteem. Some reſpectable writers have endeavoured to make a diſtinction between reaſon and what they call common-ſenſe. But, perhaps, all that can be fairly aſſerted is, that ſome propoſitions are more nearly connected with ſenſible impreſſions than others, and therefore the train of reaſoning is leſs liable to be diverted into a wrong concluſion, than in abſtruſe ſpeculations, or thoſe which are far removed from being objects of the ſenſes, where the variety of aſſociations affords a greater ſcope for error. Thus,  that things equal to one and the ſame thing are equal to one another;  that nothing material exiſts without a cauſe;  that therefore, this world has a firſt cauſe, and ſuch like, # Becauſe we can have no diſtinct ideas, but thoſe combinations which we ſorm of ſenſible impreſſions, mankind have in all ages been inclined to perſonify the inviſiole firſt cauſe of the univerſe, for the ſake of having a diſtinct idea of him; and as the human form is the moſt familiar to them, as well as the moſt honourable, they have generally adopted that. This deception of our nature perſevered in, has led them to aſign him appetites, paſions, &c. the ſame with the evil principle, and hence the origin of all ſuperſtition.See Eſays Hiſtorical and Moral. are propoſitions immediately connected with experience, and thereſore admitted without heſitation. That the angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles, is a truth no leſs certain, but cannot be demonſtrated vithout a conſiderable train of reaſoning. This remark will apply to many diſputes in morals, theology, &c. Thoſe facts which lie neareſt the teſtimony of our ſenſes will meet the eaſieſt reception. I have called reaſoning the arithmetic of words, in which falſe concluſions may be drawn, either from vrong data, or from an error in the operation. It will follow, that the concluſions of our reaſon, and our immediate feelings, may be ſometimes at varſance. It is common to ſay,  I fecl confuted, but not convinced; that is, on ſome former occaſions, by common experience, you have united certain conſequences with certain things or actions; and another perſon, by a certain chain of reaſoning, ſome one ſtep of which may be falſe, but to which you have not attended cloſely enough to detect the error, now exhibits a different concluſion. Paſſion itſelſ will often plaj the part of the ſophiſt, and determine men to act in contradiction to a concluſion founded on common experience *: e Video meliora, proboque, deteriora ſequor.” Errors moſt frequently happen in what is called reaſoning by analogy. Analogical reaſoning is grounded on the reſembling parts of complex ideas, and as long  As boZily pain ĩs an unuſual ſate, and can never be entirely forgotten, however engaged the perſon may be, but will of courſe avakea the attention frequently to ſuch objects and ideas as are connected with it; ſo a paſiion, being an unuſual ſtate of mind, ſomething analogous to the ſuffering of the body, will frequently awake it ſrom other purſuits, and turn it to thoſe ideas which are connctæd with it. as we are careſul to note the proportions of thoſe reſembling parts, and how far in each of the compared ideas they may be connected with, and influerced by others, it will generally prove a ſafe method oſ reaſoning; but as the aſſociations are not near ſo ſtrong in this relation, as in that of cauſe and effect, as the reiation is more complex and more removed from common experience, this mode of reaſoning will more frequently deceive us. Thus,  if we argue from the uſe and action of the ſtomach in one animal to thoſe in another, ſuppoſed to be unknown, there will be a probable hazard of being miſtaken, proportional in general to the known difference of the two animals, as vell as a probable evidence for the truth of part, at leaſt, of what is advanced, proportional to the general reſemblance of the two animals; but if, on examination, the ſtomach, way of feeding, &c. of the ſecond animal ſnhould be found, to ſenſe, the ſame as in the firſt, the analogy might be conſidered as an induction, properly ſo called, at leaſt as approaching to it*,.” Reaſoning may likewiſe be defective and ſalſe, from accepting an axiom or concluſion dravn from a former judgment as an intuitive principle, or from an imperfect or partial view of the ſubject, and from what has been ſaid of cuſtom, it is evident that it may have a great inſluence over our reaſoning. Since ideas by res æ It is oſten in our power to obtain an analogy where we carnot have an induction, in which caſe reaſoning ſrom analogy ought to be admitted; however, with all that uncertainty which properly belongs to it.EHartley on Man, Prop. 39.  The analogous natures of all the things about us are a great aſiſtance in decyphering their properties, powers, laws, &e. inaſmuch as what is minute or obſcure in one may be explained and illuſtrated by the analogous particular in another, where it is large and clear; and thus all things become comments on each other in an endleſs reciprocation.Hartley, Prop. 39. petition become more vivid, and acquire more force iſ aſſociated with pleaſurable ſenſations, it follows that it will require much force to overcome this ſlavery, which the mind ſabricates for itſelf, and that no leſ than demonſtration from an actual appeal to the ſenſes, or from acknowledged principles, will be able to undo ith. Tne pleaſures of ſucceſfol reaſoning reſult, it, From the action it gives to the mind; 2dly, From the pleaſure connected vith the end we propoſe to ourſelves from the inveſtigation. In fact there is a pleaſure attendant on the accompliiment of every end or deſign; for as all the firſt actions of men have a tendency to the gratification of their appetites, and the fulfilling of this deſign has ever been attended with agreeable ſenſations, we expect the ſame on the accompliſiment of every intention or action whatever. 4 The mnlloving may be taken as a general abſtract of the moſt common fallacies which occur in reaſoning. 1t. Taking an accĩdental conjunction of things for a neceſſary connection; as when from an accident we irfer a property; when from an example we inſer a rule; when from a ſingle act we infer a habit. 2d, Taking that abſolutely, which ought to be taken comparatively, or with certain limitations. The conſtruction of language often leads into this ſallacy; ſor in all languages it is common to uſe abſelute or general terms, to ſignify things which carry in theri ſome ſecret compariſon; or to uſe unlimited terms to ſignify vhat, from its nature, muſt be limited. 3d, Taking for the cauſe an ocaſion or concomitant. 41h, Begging the queſtion i. e. aſſuming the thing to be proved from the premiſes. 5th, Miſtaking the queſtlon. When the concluſion of the ſyliogiſm i is not the thing that ought to be proved, but ſomething elſe that is miſtaken for it. 6th, When the conſequence is miſtaken; as if, becauſe all Africęns are black, it was taken for granted that all blacks were Africans. 7th, Propoſitions that are complex, often imply two æſfirmations, whe reof one may be true and the. other falſe; as when it is æſirmed, rbat fuch a man has leſt off playing ihe fcolif granted it implies that he has played the ſ fool ; iIf denied, ſeems to imply, C nuar.- XvV. OF THE F IN ARTS. Myt. CPaiuſing. pPccti lit. HE chief ſources of pleaſure in works of art are, 1ſt, As far as they contain of the primary conſtituents oſ beauty. 2d, Reſemblance to things which have pleaſed in our former life. 3d, Utiliry. 4th, A ſenſe of the ingenuity required. 5th, Faſhion, and a deference to the opinion of others. Muſic is agreeable, I might almoſt ſay entirely, from the combinations of notes naturally agreeable, or from the proper contraſt of theſe notes; from the variety of emotions produced by theſe combinations, and from theſe emotions being Judiciouſy contraſted; and I ſuppoſe good compoſers, whether aæquainted or not with this general theory, have recourſe to theſe principles?. Very litile of the pleaſure of muſic has any relation to the gratification of appetite, or ĩs at all aſockted pleaſure. Indeed, the mbt⸗ of certain ſoundt. which may have been combined with other ideas of actions or paſſions, may, by recollection, be productive of aſſociated pleaſure, as well as of various emotions t. æ It is worth conſideration, whether the agreenble ſounds are not the moſt frequent, and the diſſonant the moſt uncommon, &c. Thoſe ſounds and combinations of ſounds which reſemble the human voice may, perhaps, by aſſociation, give siſe to the agreeable of muſic. + See Drydens Ode to St. Cecilia. Painting derives its chief power of pleaſing from the happy imitation of objects that have the power of reneving agreeable ſenſations; yet here much depends on a judicious uſe and diſpoſition of the primary elements of beauty: lively colours, proper cortraſts, the waving line, are always attended to by excellent painters. Poetry depends little on the primary ingredients of beauty or pleaſure, except in what reſpects the meaſure of the verſe; and one reaſon for the pleaſure of verſe I apprehend to be, the agitation occaſioned by renewing ideas and ſenſations, ſuch being the return of ſounds, and this eſpecially when properly enlivened vith new ones. Perhaps in deſcriptive poetry the beauties of contraſt may be proper to be attended to; thus it ſteals ſome of the beauties of both muſic and painting; but its chief power over the mind is derived from the aſſociated or factitious ſenſe of pleaſure, and from a repreſentation of thoſe objects which, by intereſting the paſſions, produce mental emotion. It is remarked, that imperfect characters are moſt agreeable in poetry; the reaſons I ſuſpect to be theſe. iſt, Becauſe we find in them a picture of ourſelves, and often a ſort of excuſe for our own frailties. 2dly, Becauſe there is more of the ſublime in occaſional ſallies of vice or paſon, than in uniform goodneſs. 3dly, Becauſe of the contraſt between the good and bad parts of the character, the letter really ſetting off and making more conſpicuous the former. I have already mentioned the pleaſure of figurative language, reſulting from the variety of thought and emotion introduced by the two trains ofideas*; and it is remarkable that,  when figurative *  Theugh the metaptor began in poverty (of langrage) it rative words have recurred ſo often as to excite the ſecondary idea inſtantaneouſly, they loſe their peculiar beauty and force ? It is a miſtake, when critics tell us that florid language is not the language of paſſion; experience amply convinces us of the contrary. The truth is, that ſorrow, reſentment, or any violent paſſion (provided the reaſon is not injured) renders the mind more active, and though it never wanders very far ſrom the ſubject, yet it ndulges itſelf in many excurſions, ſtill recurring to its origin. The ſame qualities, but diſfering in the degree, are required to form both the poet and the orator; in the latter more ſolidity is wantedl. An oration, if compoſed like a poem, would be too florid and deſultory. Quinctilian points out the firſt qualification of an orator to be a good man: this, 2bove every other circumſtance, prediſpoſes the hearers in his favour; beſides, it ſuppoſes him more intimately acquainted with the nature of virtue, and abler to ſpeak in its favour with force and energy. Wit is the calling together two or more differing ideas by ſome nice and unexpected connection, relation, or correſpondence. The pleaſure of wit conſiſts, iſt, In ſurpriſe 2dly, In the agitation produced by variety, and the different trains of thought. 2dly, did not end theree. When the analogy was jut (and this often happened) there was ſomething peculiarly pleaſing in what was both new and yet familiar, ſo that the metaphor was then cultivated, not out of neceſſity, but for ornament.Tis thus that cloaths were firſt aſumed to defend us againſt the cold, but came afterwards to be worn for diſtinction and dęcoration.EHarriss Philological Enquiries.  Hartley, prop. 46. Cu A ?P. XVI. O F MORALS. Uũ of ihe Doctrine of Alaciation in Moreli7avo Theories of Moralsoa/d Moral Sen”cThe Arguments agaiuſl a Morul Senſe. Jtrong Argument for Divine Revelation. H E principal uſe oſ the doctrine of aſſuciation, when applied to morals, will be, to induce us to refiect how little of our happineſę depends immediately on ſenſual enjoyments, and how we may enlarge and improve our lot of pleaſure, by cultivating tho intellectual delights, which neither injure our health nor reputation, and yet are replete with the moſt exquiſite delight. Another point w lich this doẽtrine tends to eſtablim, may, I think, be made of advantage to mankind, viz. that what is naturally good or iĩll in a temper depends n a few principles, which may be in a great meaſure counteracted by other ideas and aſſociations ſuſficiently grounded and ènforcedc Hence it follows, that we may be in a conſiderable degree the framers of our own diſpoſtions; and inaſmuch as reaſon muſt be our guide in morals, civilization is eminently of uſe æ Diſpoſtion is a general term, implying the bent or general direcdlon of the mind. Thus we ſay, an angry diſpoſition, &c. or, tæſtnęſà is a diſpoſition to be angry. to ſociety, the great advantage of which ſeems to conſiſt in the increaſe of intellectual pleaſure æ. Among moral writers, two theories, materially different, have long exiſted, reſpecting the nature of our ſentiments oſ virtue and vicee Our love oſ ihe former, and deteſtation of the latter, is by the one party aſſerted to be an inſtinctive principle, independent of knowledge, or of former ideas admitted by the five ſenſes; and by the other, to be nothing more than the reſult oſ experience or information. For the firſt of theſe hypotheſes, the arguments are many and forciblee. 1ſt, There are, it is obſerved, in all lunguages, words equivalent to duty and inereſt, which men have conſtantly diſtinguiſhed in their ſignification. 2d, The emotions which are produced by the contemplation of what is right and wrong in conduct, are different from thoſe which are produced by a calm regard to our own happineſs; ſo much ſo, that we judge extremely differently of the conduct of other men, and of ourſelves in the ſame circumſtances. 3d, The ſentiment of approbation or diſguſt which is excited by any action is inſtantaneous, and not the effect  æ It is of the utmoſt conſequence to morality and religion, that the æffections and paſions ſhould be analyzed into their ſimple compounding parts, by tracing the ſteps of the aſociations which concur to form them; ſor thus ve may learn how to cherith and improve good one:, check and roct out ſuch a5 are miſchievous and immoral, and how to ſuit our mãanrer of life, in ſome tolerable meaſure, to our ĩntellectual and religious wants c.  The vorld is, indeed, ſuſĩclently ſiocked with general precepts for this purpoſe; and whoæver will follow theſe faithfully, may expect good ſucceſs. However, the doctrine of aſſociation, when traced up to the firſt rudiments of underſianding and affection, unfolds ſuch a ſcene as cannot fail both to inſtruct æand alarm all ſuch as have any degree of intereſted concern for themſelves, or of a benevclent one for othersHartley. of reaſoning or deduction; theſe ſentiments are alſo excited even in children, long before they have learned to make uſe of their reaſon, or to form in their own minds any regular judgment concerning the good or evil conſequences of action. 4thly, The general agreement of all nations (only making ſome allowances ſor local circumſtances) with reſpect to moral excellence or moral turpitude, is alſo cited as a prooſ that theſe ſentiments muſt proceed from ſome general and inſtinctive principle. sthly, It is aſked, what is meant by the term conſcience, and that uneaſy ſenſation which accompanies guilt, if there is nothing contitutionally in man to direct him in the purſuit of good and the abhorrence of evil? In oppoſition to this doctrine it is urged, with ſome plauſibility, 1ſt, That the moral ſenſe improves * with years and knowledge. What moral ideas, it is ſaid, had the ſavage girl caught in the woods of Champaine? What had the young man of Chartres, who recovered his hearing at the age of twenty-four ? Uninformed perſons of every nation have not an exquiſite moral : ſenſe,  This argument ĩs, however, not deciſive, ſince any one of our ſenſes, and even our bodily powers, may be improved by practice and inſtruction. + A young man of the town of Chartres, between the age of twenty-three and twenty- four, the ſon of a tradeſman, and deaf and dumb from his birth, began to ſpeal of a ſudden, to the aſtoninient of the whole town. He gave them to underſtand, that, about three or four months before, he had heard the ſound of the bells, and was greatly ſurpriſed at this new and urkiown ſenſation. Aſter ſome time a kind of water iſſuæd from lis leſt e⸗r, and he then heard perſetQily well with them both. During theſe three months he was ſedulouſly employed in liſtenin⸗, without ſaying a word, and accuſtoming himſelf to ſpeak ſoſily, ſo as not to be heard, the words pronounced by others. IIb luboured haid ſenſe, and infants very little of it. àdly, We feel, and reſent as ftrongly, any thing which contradicts the religion or cuſtoms of our country as thoſe vices which are enerally diſallowed, and this can by no means be ſuſpected to be innate. 3dly, What is called virtue is generally profitable. Nor does it at all derogate from the honour of virtue, that it is founded on the i immutable principles of truth: a much more honourable extraction than blind inſtin&t 4thly, The neceſſity which all religious perſons admit of a divine revelation to teach us our duty, and the great imperfection of all the ſyitems of morals that have proceeded from the Heathen ſages*, ſeem greatly to militate againſt the hypotheſis of an innate moral principlealſo in perſecting himſelf i in the pronunciation, and in the ideas attached to every ſcund. At length having ſuppoſed himſelf qualified to break ſilence, he declared that he could now ſpeak, though as yet but imperfecily. Soon aſter, ſome able divines queſtioned him concerning his ideas of his paſt ſtate; and principally with reſpect to God, his ſoul, the moral beauty of virtue, and deformity of vice. The young man, however, had not driven his ſolitary ſpeculations into that channel. He had gone to maſs, indeed, vith his parents; had learned to ſign himſelf with the croſi, to Eneel down, and to aſſume all the grimaces of a man in the act of devoiion.. But he did all this without any manner of knowledge of the intention or the cauſe; he ſaw others do the like, and that was enough for him. He knew no: hing of death, nor did àt even ever enter his mind. He led a life of pure animal inſtinẽt; and though entirely taken up with ſenſible objects, and ſuch as were preſent, he did not ſeem to have made ſuch reſlections even on theſe as might have been expected; though he did not want underſtanding.Mem. Acad. Batonsæ 1703, p. 18, cited by Buſron. -See Eſãys Hiſtorical and Moral. Eſſay, Principles of Morali. There are ſome points, ĩt is added, in which all men agree; becauſc there are ſome deductions, which all men endued with ſenſes nearly alike, cannot fail to drav. There are ſome ideas which will be aſſociated in every mind that reſlects. Of this nature are the common opinions of virtue and vice. Every being ſenſible oſ pleaſure and pain muſt alſo be ſenſible of love and hatred. Very lirtle experience vill convince any man that particular actions are attended with ill effects, and others in like manner with good ones. No matter whether to ourſelves or others, we have the idea good ærd bad annexed to the actions, before we have the idea of the perſons to whom they relate; we have them ſrom our own experience, or ſomething adequate: we love the one and hate the other, ve love whatever promotes the one, and the contrary. We very early come to have a ſenſe of injuſtice, ſince whatever diſoppoints the æppetites, or is productive of preſent nain, generates reſentment in æn infant. Theſe ideas are regulated by reaſoning and educaætion, and men in time learn to diſtinguiſh between a misfortune merited, or which they have brought upon themſelves, and one which is brought upon them by others; they learn too to diſtinguiſh between chance and deſign, and hence our hatred to injuſtice, &c. The quick ſenſe of honour and ſhame, it is further alledged, can be no argument in favour of inſtinctive morality, for we are much more aſhamed of natural defects; there are few men that would not rather be called knaves than fools. The reaſon men are aſhamed of ſenſual enjoyments, is the Ioathing and diſguſt that follow exceſs in them; there is no exceſs, no diſguſt, no ſatiety in the pleaſures of imagination, we can thereſore bear to reſlect upon them. Should we reject on theſe grounds the doctrine of an inſtinctive moral ſenſe, the argument will, in my opinion, be extremely cogent in favour of the neceſſity of a divine revelation to confirm men in the right path of reaſon, and counteract thoſe crrors which falſe aſſociations Cu a r. XVII. OF GENIUS. General Obſervations on what couſtitutes Genius.OF the Varieties ia GeniusCGenius oppoſed to Dulnesſ;Difſerent Caſt of Genius. OOME men, it is well known, feel more acutely impreſſions on their ſenſes than others, and theſe impreſſions probably remain longer vivid on ſome than on others. It ſeems not unlikely, therefore, that this faculty of feeling more acutely, and the impreſſions on the ſenſes dwelling longer vivid in ſome men than in others, enables them to form more extenſive combinations, and connecting together more effectually their ideas, may conſtitute what is called genius, in oppoſition to ſtupidity or dulneſs ?. Such a faculty will enable men to acquire knowledge more eaſily, by more readily admitting perceptions; to retain it better by the frequent repetitions, which ſo many aſſociated ideas muſt produce; and to expreſs it more readily from the connexion oſ ideas, which will recal each other in a more complete and regular ſeries. Men of this deq Genius on theſe principles ſeems to be an active power of quickly combining ſimple ideas, or of diſcovering their combinations. Dulneſs to be no more than a ſluggiſineſs of mind, which is incapable of following the combinations of notes in a fine piece of muſic, or of the colours in a good landſcape, though the ſimple ideas may be obvious enough. ſcription will have more objects of pleaſure and of beauty than ordinary minds. Relations which would have eſcaped the majority of mankind, will be impreſſed on their ſenſes, and combinations will be formed of which others could have no conception. Their minds branched out, in a manner, to more objects, will in fact have more ſources of pain and pleaſure; only that as the portion of pleaſure is greater than that of pain in the world, their pleaſures will be proportionably more numerous. But there are other differences ſubſiſting among men of apparently equal genius, which ſeem diſficult to be accounted foro. One man ſhall excel in an art for which another poſſeſſes no qualification, who yet is at the ſummit of excellence in ſome other. That the paſions muſt have an effect in forming our diſpoſition * and caſt of thinking, cannot well be diſputed; and the paſſions being no more than modifications of the appetites, on them muſt in ſome meaſure ultimately depend the turn of mind in particular perſons. I can eaſily conceive that one ſenſe. may be ſo perfectly and delicately organized, as to be more ſuſceptible, to diſtinguiſh more nicely, and to preſent the ideas of that ſenſe more perſect than the other ſenſes; and this is probably the caſe with thoſe who poſſeſs a very fine muſical ear without any acuteneſs of under* IIow far the natural frame of the body or the viclence of appetite may influence the mind, is not eaſy to deſine. A delicate habit, unable to bear the extremes of cold and heat, or any other inconvenience, may diſpoſe the perſon to be cautious, ſuſpicicus, fretful. The ſame may in the end render him avaricious. Oa the other hand, there are paſions which almoũt entirely depend on corly acociations of ideas. ſtanding. ſtanding. But in general this delicacy is extended to all the mental organs, or, to ſpeak more properly, perhaps, to the mind itſell. Hence a genius for all the fine arts commonly exiſts inthe ſame perſon, and if they have applied only to one, we may reaſonably conclude an early bent to have determined the preference. It is allowed that a quick perception, a proper degree of retention, and a facility in recalling its ideas, are as eſſential to a ſound judgment, as to a fine imagination *; the great difference ſeems to be, that the one ſelects and dwells upon ſuch ideas as are neceſſary to its immediate purpoſe in diſcovering truth; the other ſelects only ſuch as give pleaſure, and does not dwell long upon any. It is probable, therefore, that this is chiefly a difference in temper and diſpoſition. Acuteneſs of feeling is certainly ever connected with fine parts, being in fact noother than quick perception; but it is certain, that among men of equally acute feelings, ſome are leſs violent and ſanguine than others.  The philoſophic genius, according to Dr. Gerard, differs from a genius for the arts, in this, that the former ĩs chieſly em?loyed upon the relations of effects and cauſes, and the latter is attracted by the relation of reſemblance, conſequently the one dwells on a few principles, the other purſues every light and fanciful aſſociation.  The philoſopher deſcribes minutely all the appearancesof his object; his deſign requires it; every one of them involves ſome truth; inattention to any, one of them may prevent the diſcovery of truth, or occaſion error; thoſe of them which ſeem leaſt ſtriking, often lead moſt directly to truth, or lead to the moſt i important truths. A poet, on the contrary, would overlook by far the greateſt part of theſe appearances; they are unfit to pleaſe, and for that reaſon attract no ſhare of attention: he fixes on a few that are moſt ſtriking, and Iabours to ſet theſe in a ſtriking light. Ger. æn Gen. pt. 3. ſ. 1. I can by no means conſent to reſer this diſſerence altogether to education, for perſons who have had every poſſible care taken of their temper in early youth, will oſten, when ſet at liberty, break out, and become of very unruly diſpoſitions in maturer age; and perſons will reſemble their parents in temper, who have never ſeen them: ' s Naturam expllæs fureò, tamen uſque recurrit.n This fact we can refer to no one principle in human nature but the paſions. Thoſe whoſe animal appetites are ſtronger than thoſe of others, will be more ſanguine in all their deſires, of courſe vill ſmart more for a diſappointment, and, in a word, muſt be more ſubject to paſſion. The old maxim,  Poeta naſcitur, has been accounted a vulgar error, and it is certain much depends upon early habit, and this habit is commonly acquired from the circumſtances of youth. But this does not entirely account for the difference of mens purſuits, whoſe mental powers ſeem equal, and whoſe ſituations are ſimilar. If once it is agreed, however, that a degree of coldneſs is neceſſary to certain ſtudies, and that others are more connected with paſſion, we ſhall not long be at a loſs to account for this ſeeming paradox in the human mind, upon the principles already eſtabliſhed. There are other cauſes of diverſity in natural genius, ſuch as difference in the degree, &. One man is poſcſied of a more retentive memory than another; another man may have a more lively perception, and a little difference in principle will produce a great one in the effects. Theſe perſons may ſcem men of equal talents, and yet the bent of the genius vill be fro en: in each, ãnd their qualifications different. After all, it is diffieult to ſay what may be the eſfects of cultivation. Many excellent practical muſicians are certainly not nen of genius, nor even poſſeſæq, e as I have been informed, of a natural genius for their own artt. What moſt commonly influences the purſuits and diſpoſitiuns of men is, I am perſuaded, cuſtom #, early aſſociations, and a predilection for certain occupations generated by ſome agreeable but fortuitous circumſtance. Thus, in relating the life of the poet Cowley, Dr. Johnſon informs us, that,  In the window of his mother's apartment, lay Spencers Fairy Queen; in which he very early took delight to read, till by feeling the charms of verſe, he became, as he relates, irrecoverably a poet. Such (adds this great moraliſt) are the accidents, which ſometimes remembered, and perhaps ſometimes forgotten, produce that particular deſignation of mind, and propenſity for ſome certain ſcience, which is commonly  Much of the difference between the ſcientiſic genius, and the genius for the arts, will depend on early habit. Perſons (ſays Dr. Hartley) who give themſelves much to mirth, wit, and humour, muſt thereby greatly diſqualify their underitandings for the ſearch after truth; inaſmuch as by the perpetual hunting aſter apparent and partial agreements and diſagr.- ments, as in words, and indire}t, accidental circumſtances; whil the true natures of the things themſelves afſord real agieements and diſagreements, that are very different or quite oppoſite. a man muſt by degrees pervert all his notions of things the mſelves, and become unable to ſee them as they really are, and as they appear to conſiderate, ſober minded inquirers. He muſt loſe all his aſſociations of the viſible ideas of things, their names, iymbel:, &c. with their uſual practical relations and properties: and get in their ſtead accidental, indirect, and unnatural corjunctions of circumſtances, that are really foreign to each other, or uppoiitions of thoſe that are united.EHartley, p. 46. genius. True genius is s, accidentally determir on. The great painter ſt fondneſs for his art ex rdſon's treatiſe *, C u A P. XVIII. OF TASTE. Or Agrecment and Diſogreement in Taſte—QF a Standard Taſie. ISAGREEMENT Of taſte, if we but attend to D the principles explained in the former part of this book*, will be found to ariſe from particular aſſociations ; and agreement in taſte from the natural affections common to all mankind. The moſt perfect agreement will be between thoſe whoſe genius, ſtudies, and other circumſtances moſt perfectly accord. National taſte is influenced by the ſame cauſes, which influence that of individuals J;, and a ſlight aſſociation vill frequently produce the moſt fantaſtical cuſtoms. The tyranny exerciſed over the female ſex, the jealouſy of the Aſiatic nations; and the neglect of their vomen, ſnewn by ſome northern barbarians, does not proceed from a coldneſs in the natural temper of the latter, nor from the more lively paſſions of the former; the truth is, in the rude ſtate of thoſe northern people, their * See ch. xi. + From aſſociation, if glaring colours, or any other thing ſhould be regarded by the country as a ſign of levity or any other ill quality in the wearer; or if any colour or faſhion is uſed by ruſtics, or men of a diſagrecable proſeſſion or temper, thęfe ideas recur with the fahion or colour. 1 Almoſt every perception will introduce a different train oſ ideas in every different perſon, according to the different circumſtances with which it may have been moſ© frequently aſſociated in each perſons mind, and conſequently oſten according to their parrcular occnpation or profeſſion. other wants are ſo many, that they cannot attend to the pleaſures of luxury. But the ſouthern nations, by the aid of a fine climate and a fertile ſoil, are more advanced in civilization than thoſe of the north, though not arrived at that point when the mind is enabled, by reaſon and philoſophy, to reſiſt or correct falſe aſſociations. The one party have little notion of pleaſure, the others have miſtaken notions of it. A ſingle movement in the intellectual world influences a train of ideas, and, if wrong, produces a ſeries of miſconduct. It is certainly a conſtituent of female beauty, to have limbs ſmaller and more delicate than thoſe of men; but mankind are ever deſirous of pleaſure and beauty to exceſs; the Chineſe, therefore, endeavour to produce a degree of beauty beyond what nature has eſtabliſied as perfection, and cramp the feet of their women even to deformity: the ſame motive vill ſerve to explain many fantaſtical faſhions which occur to our own obſervation. What induced ſome of the Indians to colour the teeth black, was ſuppoſing it eſſential to men to differ from the brutes in every reſpect, and therefore it was neceſſary not even to have teeth of the ſame colour. Deviations from nature happen chiety ; in a ſtate a few removes from barbariſm. True refinement brings men round to the primitive ſimplicity from which they have been diverging. Whether the theory of a moral ſenſe is admitted or not, ĩt is ſtill highly pi cbable, that there is in all things a certain perfection of which mankind is naturally emulous. The ideal characters, and the golden age of poets, exhibit the original traces of the conſciouſneſs of this perfection, written in the breaſt of every man. It ĩs on this ſtandard of excellence in human nature, that a ſtandard of taſte probably depends. As men approacſi more or leſs this point of perfection, they are called polite or ruſtic, civilized or barbarous; and though the point itſelf has never, perhaps, been attained, nor ever will be attained by any, yet men there will be in every age who approach nearer to it than the great maſs of mankind, and in ſome ages they will abound more than in others; from the number oſ theſe we are to form our judgment of the taſte of any given period; theſe, in fact, it is who lead the faſhion in thinking; and although there are degrees in this intellectual excellence, yet all men vill be admirers and judges of perfection in arts or in morals, in an exact proportion as they approach perfection themſelves, provided only they have made themſelves perfectly acquainted with the principles of C u A Pr. XIX. OF O P INION. Poradix of the SiciesExplanationThe ſenſible Pleaſures more umerous than thi senſible PainsThe ſame vith ibe intellectual Pleoſures and Pains. uT was a dogma of the ſtoics, that good and evil I depend upon opinionTake away the opinion (fay they) and the evil is removed ?. This paradox is, perhaps, not wholly incapable of explanation. Certain ĩt ĩs, that if we except the ſenſible pleaſures and pains, much of our temporal happineſs and miſery does de pend upon opinion; that is, upon an imaginary eſtimation or fear acquired from aſſociations of ideas. What renders a particular walk or apartment agreeable aſter being for ſome time habituated to it? but that the idea ofthe place bccomes entwined and connected with the pleaſures enjoyed in it. What gives value to the lovers eep- ſake or the miſer's gold ? not that either are of any uſe to them, but the one is aſſociated with the pleaſure of ſympathy, the other with that of convenience . The moraliſts, therefore, who aſſert that ve æ See M. Anton. Med. Arrian Paſim. + Darkneſs ard obſcurity are the only means by which the evæ ean be materia'ly deceived in judgirg of bodiesThe fancies, therefore, of apparitions, whenever they aroſe, moſt probæbly took theſr riſe from ſome miſcoaception of this kind; and, indeed, the little probubility there is that men could be deceived in the open av, made obſcurity bæ always choſen as the proper ſcene for terrors of tris kind. Nay, the fear and cæution which people muſt have in the dark on account cf the danger there is of falling or injuring themſelves; the opportunity it afords for ambuſcades, æ we may be, in a great meaſure, the faſhioners of our own happineſs, are. perhaps, not materially miſtaken. The ſenſible ple: ures are more numerous than the ſenſible pains; but rhe greater part of our happineſs is intellectual, or fo red by the imagination. If, therefore, we can become ſuch mæſters in reaſoning, as to analyze and decompoſę thoſe paſſions which the imagination forms, the ſairy fabric is diſſolved, and our uneaſineſs is removed. Nor need ve be prevented from uniting together agreeable aggregates of ideas, in which work nature vill aſiſt, and for the reaſon above intimated, viz. becauſe the ſenſible pleaſures are more numerous then the ſenſible pains, and becauſe the mind is only active in purſuit ef pleaſure. and being the common time for committing outrages and murders, mt increaſe this apprehenſion. Beſides it deprives us in ſome eaſure of ſociety, and cuts off many pleaſing trains of ideas which bjects ; in the light introduce. Aſter all, probably ſo much of onr happineſs depends on the action of our ſenſes, that the deprivation of any one of them is attended with proportionable uneaſineſi. Much uſe has been made of this principle] in the gloomy conſtruction of religious buildings, &e. ſuperſtition being the common offspring Cua r. XXX. OF THE FREE AGENCY OF M AN. Prediſtination, o fatal Neeeſity, not connected avith ithe Doctrine of the Aociaticn of Ideas Incenſiſienty of the Fatalisis —Motive and A&ien in Morals totally different from Cauſe and Effect in Phyſucs — The Onus Probandi in this Queſtion lies on the Fataliſis. Quiſtion concerning the Influence of iMctivesArgument of the Fataliſis Arom the Divine Preſcienceabſurd and hrrible Conſequences reAualting ſrom ihe Doctrine of Fatality -Modeſty and Humility recommended in philoſophical StudiesThoſe Sciences to be preferred hich are moſt conneled with practical Utility. H AT the doctrine of the aſſociation oſ ideas ſhould, in the mind of any viſionary writer, have ever been connected with the fatal neceſſity of human actions, is, I confeſs, to me a matter of ſurpriſe. Miſerable, indeed, muſt be the ſtate of man, if he was endued with no power of regulating or directing the train of his ideas; if they muſt flow for ever in one neceſſary, unbroken channel, or if external objects alone were to dictate to us what to think. It is obvious, that if this was the caſe, there could be no variety, and ſcarcely any change in the purſuits. of men: the thoughts muſt flow from each other in one uninterrupted ſeries, and man could not be an accountable, and ſcarcely a rational creature. It is, however, plain, that we have a power of interrupting the train of thought, of dwelling more intenſely upon particular ideas, and even of occaſionally diverting our reflections and contemplations into new channels; and this power alone is ſuſficient, in my opinion, to conſtitute man a free agent*. In leed thoſe authors, vho contend moſt for the doctrine of a ſatal neceſſity, are among the firſt to recommend an application to ſtudy, and the cultivation of the mind; whereas, iſ the mind is endued with no ſpontaneous energy whatever, no ſeif directing agency, ſurely ſuch a recommendation is inconſiſtent and abſurd t. On any queſtion of ſerious importance, analogical reãſoning ſrould be admitted with the utmoſt caution; and yet a ſenſeleſs and puerile analogy has been called in to the aid of an argumænt, which cannot be ſupported by poſitive proofl. Motive and action in morals, have been compared to cauſe and effect in * It ĩs impoſſible to obſerve, without a ſmile, men boaſting of being the diſciples of Mr. Locke, vho have apparently never read a page of his writings, or, if they have looked into them, have evidently miſunderſtood them. With how much juſtice this ræal philoſopher is repreſented as a favourer of the abſurdities of the fataliſts, will appear from the following paſſage:  This at leaſt (ſays Mr. Locke) I think evident, that we find in ourſelves a pover to begin or forbear, continue or end ſeveral actions of our minds, and motions of our bodies, barely by a thought or preference of the mind ordering, o, as it were, commanding the doing or not doing ſuch or ſuch a particular action. This power which the mind has thus to order the conſideration of any idea, or the forbearing to conſider it, or t0 prefer the motion of any part oſthe body to its reſt, and vice verſa, in any particular inſtance, is what we call the willLockes Eſſay, B. ii. c. 2i. + IF there is no deg ee of frecdom or ſpontancity in human actions, what is meant by the words deliberation, prudence, and judgment? If the opinion of the fataliſts is true, our interference in any matter or action is ſuperfluous; and yet who is there that does not perceive, that the courſe of a dangerous diſeaſe may be impeded by the calling in of a phyſician? a matter which was entirely within the choice of the patient himſelf. phyſics. That ſome motive in the mind precedes every human action is certain, and thus far the analogy is juſt; but the motive may as weli be in the vill itſelf, as the mere reſult of any external cauſe. If, indeed, the analogy was true in all its parts, a human being would be altogether as ſubjæct to the laws of inert matter as a block oſ marble or of wood. Whatever is ſubject to an abſolute neceſſity, can never be the incipient cauſe, or the beginner of motion or action of any kind; it muſt be altogether under the command and direction of external objects; it muſt be altogether inert or paſſive, having no principle of action in itſelf. On this account, as I before intimated, there would be much more uniformity in the actions of men, if they were ſubject to a fatal influence, then there appears to be; there would be no dificulty in deciding what muſt be their conduct in any given circumſtances. A freedom of deliberating, chuſing, and determining upon things, is what every man feels in himſelf 1. It æ The arguments by which the atheiſts have attempted to prove this analogy, are the moſt abſurd and puerile that can well be imagined. æ Every effect,” ſay they,  muſt proceed from ſome cauſe, ænd this cauſe muſt be dependent on another.” The direct concluſion from this is  that there is no where any origin or beginring of motion, but every thing ĩs neceſſarily produced by an eternal chain of cauſes and effects, without any independent origin? Such reaſoning as this exactly reſembles that of the Indian, who ſuppoſes the earth to reſt on a crocodile, the erocodile on an elephant—but what does the elephant reſt on? In fact, to compare the operations of the mind to any of the qualities of matter, is to compare, as Dr. Clarke obſerves, a ſquare to the colour of blue, or a triangle to a ſound. It ĩs like the blind man, who being aſed what idea he had of ſarlt, ſaid, he fancied it muſt be ſomething like the ſound of a drum. + As it ĩs in the motions of the body, ſo ĩt ĩs in the thoughts of our minds; where any one ĩs ſuch, that we have power to taks is the dictate of nature and common ſenſe; one of the firſt perceptions we have of the operations of our own minds. It does not lie with us, therefore, to prove, that the human mind is free; but it lies with the opponents of liberty to prove, that it is not free; and this ought to be done upon direct, poſitive, experimental evidence, and not upon fanciful analogies or conjecture. The only argument which the fataliſts have ever been able to adduce, which at all bears upon the point, is this—that men act from motives, and theſe motives are dependent upon ſituation and external circumſtances. This, then, is really the point at iſſue betveen the fataliſts, and the advocates for the free agency oſ man. The former ſuppoſe the influence of motives from external cauſes to be abſolute and unlimited; the latter allow the inſluence of the motives to a certain extent, but they deny that it is abſolute and unſimited. 5 In the preſent ſtate of human knowledge, it is, indeed, a ſpecies of dogmatiſm not to be endured, to pretend preciſely to aſcertain how far the influence oſ external motives extends over the mind of man. That external cauſes ſhould have a certain weight and influence with us, is certainly conſiſtent with the wiſdom of Divine Providence, and conſiſtent with that order and regularity which he has every wherc eſtabliſhed. If men were to act entirely inde pendent of all influence from external cauſes and circumitances, the world would be an entire ſcene of confuſion and diſorder; if, on the contrary, they were endued with no power of choice or deliberation, the whole would be æn inanimate uniform maſs, ſubject to certain and deſinite laws, as much as it up, or lay it by, according to the preference of the mind, there vę are at liberty.Lockes Eſay, B. ĩi. c. 21. inert matter. In this, therefore, the ſame happy medium appears to be eſtabliſhed as in other inſtances. Man, from his natural relation to external things; from that wonderful connection which exiſts between the body and the mind, is ſubject to a certain influence from ſituation and circumſtances; but there is ſtill in his own mind a power of reflecting, deliberating, and deciding upon his motives and conduct. Another argument in favour of fatality is deduced from the preſcience of the Deity.  If God foreknows all things (it is alleged) then every event muſt be predetermined But this argumrent reſts upon the ſame preſumptuous foundation as the preceding, which would poſitively determine the preciſe degree of inſuence that external cauſes muſt have upon the mind of man. Dogmatiſm certainly never was the road to truth, and is utterly inconſiſtent with that modeſty and humility, which is the very characteriſtic of a real philoſopher. The preſcience of the Deity Who vill dare to ſay that he is able to define it? Who will dare to allege that he underſtands every particular circumſtance and attribute of the Divine exiſtence? To ſay that God camor exerciſe his ovn powers in that way which is moſt agreeable to the ends that infinite wiſdom propoſes, and infinite goodneſs would dictate, is, to define and limit omnipotence and to affirm that God cannot conſtitute man a free agent, cænnct in this inſtance diſpenſe with his own preſcience, is to ſay, that God is not omnipotent. This was long my own òpinion; and I'was happy to find it confirmed by the excellent and judicious Dr. Henry More, whoſe ſentiments on this ſubject were pointed out to me by a friend.  It is true (ſays he) we cannot otherwiſe think of God's foreknowledge, but as being every way clear and perfect, and without poſibility of error, as to thoſe cbjects about which he judges or pronounces. And ſurely he does always judge and determine of things according as they are; that is to ſay, oſ a contingent thing, as it is contingent; and of a neceſſary thing as it is neceſſary. Whence it comes to paſs, that thoſe things which are contingent and proceed from a free principle of acting, are allowed to be ſeen by Gods conſent.  But, not to confine God's omniſcience within narrower, nor aſcribe to it wider bounds than we do to his omnipotence, which all ſuppoſe to be an ability to do whatever implies not a contradiction; let us diſpatch the difficulty in a few words, by ſaying, that the foreknowledge of contingent effects, which proceed from a free principle of afting, does eĩther imply a contradiction, or it does not. If it does imply a contradiction, then ſuch eſfects are not the object of Gods omniſcience, nor determined by it, nor rightly ſuppoſed to be determined at all. But if it does not imply a contradiction, then we actually conſeſs, that divine preſcience, and buman freevill, are not inconſiſtent, but that they may ſtand together. The moſt deciſive argument, however, againſt the fataliſts, is, the extravagant concluſions to which this gloomy and comfortleſs doctrire leads, and the horrible conſequences which are attached to it. IF man is a neceſſary agent, he cannot poſibly be an accountable being; for how prepoſterous is the thought, how inconſiſtent would it be with every principle of juſtice, to puniſh any being whatever, or in any degree, for what he could not have avoided? In a theological view, therefore, this doctrine appears to conduct directly to atheiſm; for we cannot conceive of the Deity in ſuch a manner as to ſuppoſe him wantonly cruel or unjuſt. To ſay that ſuture puniſhments are not to be (as the orthodox party conceive) eternal in their duration, does not removę the diſũculty; to puni*h a all for involuntary offences, is cruelty and injuſtice. The ſyſtem oſ free agency, on the contrary, is conſiſtent vith all the attributes of God, and is highly conſolatory and inſtructive to man. This ſyſem reſts upon the cleareſt baſis oſ juſtice. Man is created free; he has good and evil placed before him, with the ſtrongeſt and moſt concĩtating motives int he Chriſtian diſpenſation to purſuẽ the cne, and to avoid the other. It he perverſely takes the wrong courſe, and proves incorrigibly vicked, every principle of reaſon and equity, ſanctions the juſtice of his puniſhment. Into the nature of that puniſhment, ĩt is not our preſent buſineſ to inquire. It'will donhi leſs be ſuch as to ſatisfy infinite juſtice, yet tempered 'by the ſweet and ſalutary exerciſe of infinite mercy. If the divine laws are thus outraged /by the prepoſtcrous hypotheſis of a fatal neceſſity; human laws, I fear, will not ſtand upon a much firmer foundation. To puniſh any criminal for an error which he could rot avoid, is certainly not only cruel, but wicked in the extreme; and yet ſuch muſt be the caſe, if the doctrine of the fataliſts is true æ. ; In the courſe of a very few years, ĩt will ſcarcely be credited, that a book has been Iately publified on this very principle, and the argument of the author is brieſiy this. Man is a neceſſary agent, he ĩs therefore rot an accountable being; his actions are all determined by his ſituation and circumſtances, taking in amongſt theſe his education and the degree of knovledge he has been enabled to acquire. What are called crimes thereſore are only. miſtates, perſectly involuntary on his part, and he therefore (vhether he is a thieſ, a murderer, or a parricide) cught not 1o be puniſbed, but inſiructed and reaſcned with. As no criminal cught to be puriſhed, all Iaws or regulations muſt be perfectly nugatory in ſociety, and even pernicious; marriage is law, and thereſore it ĩs pernicious, and ought to be aboliſhe ed.It ] is happy. for the cauſe of truth, vhen ſuch bocks are publiſed; for if the ſarcaſtic genius of a Swiſt could have more effectually burleſqued the doctrine of ne ne ceſſity, I am no judge of irony. o : n On the whole, it is the part of true philoſophy to avoid equally the dangerous extremes of an arrogant dogmatiſm, which proſeſes, like the ignorant opponents oſf Socrates, to know every thing, and of that perplexing ſkepticiſm which would deprive the human underſtanding of capacity and intelligence: As finite beings, many facts are neceſſarily placed beyond the reach of our reſearches. They are neither ſuited to our feculties,; nor our ſituation in this life; and where we have no baſis of fact on which to reaſon, error will generally be the conſequence of our indulging i in viſionary ſpeculations. To conſole us for this deficiency, e may n remark, with ſatisfaction and gratitude, that if much is concealed, much alſo is known. There is an immenſe fund of practical kuowledge perſectly within the graſp of our faculties. There is ſcarcely any human ſcience; which, to know it well, is not ſufficient to employ the moſt protracted exiſtence of man. It will be more conſiſtent with happineſs, as well as with modeſty, to acquaint ourſelves with theſe, before we launch into the unfathomable abyſs of metaphyſical ſpeculation; nor indeed can any thing be more diſguſting, than to hear a loquacious diſoutmnt, vho is unacquainted with the plaineſt and moſt uſeful branches of knowledge, preſuming to arraign the appointments of omniſcience, to e re-judge his Juſtice; to annihilate the intellectual, and to confuſe and diſturb the moral world. Much greater ĩs his merit, much ſounder is his judgment, Who fabricates the ſimpleſt machine, or plans or executes the plaineſt undertaking that may be prattically uſeful to mankind. Yẽt we may innocently amuſe our curioſity; we may innccently gratiſy our hirſt of knowledge; we may innocently exerciſe our faculties. But let us, in the name of reaſon, exerciſe them on their proper objects; Iet us ſeek for knowledge where it is really to be found; let our curioſity employ itſelf where fact, experiment, and obſervation, may lead to ſome certain concluſion. The book of nature is open to us; the material world is diſplayed for our inſpection, and for our improvement; the intellectual world is covered with an almoſt impenetrable veil. What God has choſen to reveal of himſelf in the holy ſcriptures, may be eaſily comprehended; what he has choſen for the preſent to keep in reſerve, no mortal efforts will ever be able to develope. The ſimpleſt and moſt unlearned perſon who ſtudies with a pure heart, and an undepraved mind, the ſacred volume, is practically wiſe; the brighteſt underſtanding, the moſt exalted genius, who attempts to go beyond A. A3sorrrion, IIL. 310. Acids, II. 10. animal, III. 78.  vegetable, IIL. 41. Adams, Mr. I. 54. Agate, II. 93. Agriculture, III. 32. Air, I. 362.  Bialloons, I. 509. Air, alkaline, &c. I. 403. Air, atmoſpheric, I. 404. 416. Air, fixed, I. 385. Air gun, I. 431. Air, hepatic, I. 402. Air, inflammable, I. 391. Air, nitrous, I. 397. Air, phlogiſticated, I. 382. Air, properties of, I. 416. Air pump, I. 423. Air, vital, I. 371. Alabaſter, II. 56. Alkalies, II. 5. Alum, II. 72. Amber, II. 2775. Ambition, III. 477. Amethyſt, II. 86. Ainimals, ſtructure of, III. 86. Antimony, II. 143. Argil, IL. 71. Arſenic, II. 120. Arteries, III. 240, 241. Arts, III. 487. Aſbeſtos, IL. 6. Aſphaltum, II. 2795. Aſſociation, lII. 429. Vou. IIl. Attraction, I. 16. of coheſion, I. 16. capillary, I. 17. of combination, I. 18. Avarice, III 496. Aurora Borealis, I. 355. Azotic gas, I. 382. B. Balloons, air, I. 505. Balſams, III. 51. Barbadoes tar, II. 275. Barometer, I. 421. Barytes, II. 49. 69. 70. Baſaltes, II. 106. Battery, electrical, I. 333. Beauty, III. 463. Bell, I. 441. Biſmuth, IL 139: Black, Dr. his great diſcoveries, I. 99, ꝗl. Black lead, II. 262. Bleaching, II. i4. Blood, III. 81.  circulation of, III. 302. Body, human, its growth and decline, III. 412. Boerhaave, I. 5. Boiling, I. 123. Bolognian ſtone, I. 167. 183. Bones, III. 93. Borax, II. 44. Boyle, I. 2. 87. 98. 164 Brain, III. 266. Braſs, II. 154. Mm Bread, III. 57. Breezes, land and ſea, I. 453. C.Calcareous earth, II. 48. 52. Caloric, I. 93. Camera obſcura, I. 259. Camphor, III. 51. Capſtan, I. 75. Carbonaceous principle, IL. 259. 264. Carbonic acid gas, I. 385. Carnelion, II. 92. Catoptrics, I. 216. Cellular ſubſtance, Charcoal, II. 259. II. 199. Chimnies, I. 144. Clay, II. 71. Clockwork, I. 70. Coals, II. 264. Cobalt, II. 134. Coheſion, I. 16. oldq, artificial, II. æ3. Cold, I. 99. i154. Colours, I. 214Colouring matter of vegetables, IIL. 58. Combuſtion, I. 140. Common ſenſe, III. 483. Conductors of heat, I. 102, 103.  celectrical, I. 313. 35I. Congelation, I. 122. Copper, II. 192. Coſmetics, II. 140. Crawford, Dr. I. 92. Cryſal, II. 90. Cryſtallization, I. 2I. Cryſtals, Iceland, II. 53. Cuſtom, III. 468. Delaval, I. 170. Deluge, proof- of, II. 272. Dev, II. 489. Diamond, il. 85. 282. Dianẽs tree, II. 223. Digeſtion, IiI. 312. Diopt Ies, I. 2275. Diviſibility, I. 1I. Draining land, II. 492. Dying, art of, IIL. 59. E. Earths, II. 47. adamantine, II. 1co. argillaccous, II. 71. calcareous, II. 52.  — compound, II. 1oI.  jargenice, II. 99. megneſian, 1I. 64. ponderous, II. 65.  ſilicious, II. 835.  ſtronthian, II. 99. Earth, ſructure of, lI. 287. Earthquakes, IT. 362. Echo, I. 447. Elaſticity of air, I. 416. Electricity, I. 307. - animal, lII. 353. Electrical machines, I. 316. Electrometer, I. 336. Electrophorus, I. 336. Llements, I. 6. Emerald, II. 103. Tvaration, I. 106. 124. II. 481. Eudioneter, I. 401. Excretion, III. 308. Expanſion, I. 108. Lxtenſion, I. 1IO. Eye, III. 384. F. Farina, lII. 54. Fat, III. 8o. VFecula, II. 53. Fermentation, III. 61. Fire, I. 93. Fires, common, I. 144. engine, Il. 457Fixed air, I. 585. Flame, I. 142. Flint, II. 50. 90. Fhid, I. T6. Fluids, elaſtic, I. 123. 129. Fluidity, I. 116. Fogs, II. 488. Fountains, artificial, II. 441. Franklin, Dr. I. 305. Free agency of man, III. 508. Freeæing, I. 117.1II. 396. French chalk, lI. 65. Fulminating ſilver, 1I. 221. PD  gold, II. 234. G. Galileo, I. 161. 418. Garnet, II. 89. Gas, azotic, I. 582.  carbonic acid, I. 385. hepatic, I. 40⸗. - inſlammable, or hydrogen, I. 391. nitrous, I. 397.  oxygen, I. 371. Gems, II. 85. Generation, III. 405. Genius, III. 497. Geſtation, III, 406. Glands, III. 92. Glaſs, II. 94. Glaubers ſalt, II. 29. Glue, III. 79. God (prooſs of a) I. 381. 427. lIII. 72. 482. Gold, II. 2æ7. Gravity, gravitation, I. 24.  ſpecific, I. 26.-II. 423. Gregory, I. 167. Grottoes, ſparry, II. 59. Gum, III. 41. Gun- metal, II. 200. Gun powder, I. 145. Gypſum, II. 56. H. Hail, II. 487. Hair, II. 219.1III. 204. Halley, I. 170.II. 495. Halo, I. 254. Harmattan, I. 462. Hartſhorn, II. 8. Hatred, III. 461. Head, III. 97.  Hearing, III. 375. Heart, III. 237. Heat, I. 86. 148. ſcale of, I. 151. Hepatic gas, I. 402. Hoor froſt, II. 489. Horns, III. 205. Hurricanes, I. 459. Hyacinth, II. 88. Hydraulics, iI. 427. Hydrogen gas, I. 39I. —phoſphorated, II. 255Hydrometer, lI. 421. Hydrophanous ſtone, II. 91. Hydroſtatics, II. 401I. Hygrometer, I. 41æ. M m 2 I. Jack, I. 76. James's Powders. II. 149. Jaſper, II. 93. Ice, II. 396. Iceas, ſimple and complex, III. 425 Jelly, III. 79. Ignis fatuus, I. 494 Ignition, I. 140. Inflammable air, I. 291. ſubſtances, II. 245. Inſlection of light, I. 293. Ink, II. 169. ſympathetic, II. 136. Inteſtines, III. 211. Invention, III. 442. Iris, I. 2775. Tron, II. 159. Judgment, III. 445. L. Lamp, Argands, I. 143. Lamp black, II. 26. Laerynx, III. 229. Latent heat, I. 116. Lava, II. 1o4. Lavoiſier, I. 368. 369. Lead, II. 181.  black, II. 26æ. Lens, I. 157. 210. Lenſes, I. 210. 236. Lever, I. 56. Leyden phial, I. 329. Liberty, III. 508. Light, I. 172. 185. Lightning, I. 345. Lime, II, 48. 52. Lime, pheromenon in ſlaking, I. IO . Liverſtone, II. 7o. Love, III. 461. 498. Lunar cauſtic, II. 220. Lungs, III. 235. 330. Lymphatics, III. 262. M. Magic lanthorn, I. 258. Magneſia, II. 49. 64. Magneſian earths, II. 64. Magnetiſm, I. 35. Magnets, artificial, I. 45. Manganeſe, II. 128. Manna, III. 47. Manures, IIL. 32. Mariners compaſ, I. 40. Marle, II. 54Marrov, III. 94. Matter, I. I. Mechanics, I. 55. Memory, III. 436. Menachanite, II. 157. Mercury, II. 204. Meſentery, III. 207. Metals, II. 109. Meteors, I. 484. II. 255. Mica, II. 65, Ticroſcopes, I. 253. Mind, human, III. 416. Mineral tallow, II. 281. wuaters, II. 509. Mirrors, I. 190. concave, I. 194. conical, I. 198. convex, I. 193.  cylindrical, I. 197. plane, I. 19l. Moiſture, I. 410. Molybdena, II. 124. Monſoons, I. 453: Montgolfier balloon, I, 510, Moonſtone, II. 92. Morals, III. 491. Motion, I. 31. Mountains, II. 313. Muriatic ſalts, II. 33. Muſcles, III. 139. Muſcovy glaſs, II. 66. Muſcular motion, III. 346. Muſic, III. 487. N. Naphta, II. 274. Needle, magnetic, I. 42. Nerves, III. 279. Newton, Sir Iſaac, I. 164. Nickel, II. 131. Nitre, II. 26. 7 cubic, II. 30. Nitrous ammoniac, II. 31.  gas, I. 397. O. Ocean, II. 473. Oils, eſſential, III. 49. fat, III. 47. Omentum, III. 207. Onyx, II. 92. Opacity, I. 156. Opal, II. 87. Opinion, III. 506. Optics, I. 185. Optical definitions, I. I55. Orang Outang, III. 91. Ores of metals, II. 114.  aſlaying, &c. II. 116. Oxyds, vegetable, III. 37. Oxygen gas, I. 371. P. Pain, III. 453Painting, III. 488. Parhe lia, I. 288. Paſchal, I. 419. Paſſions, III. 471. Perception, III. 421. Peritoneum, III. 206. Petrifactions, II. 58. Petroleum, II. 274. Pewter, II. 179. Phoſphorated hydrogen gas, IL. 255. Phoſphorus, I. 183.II. 248. Phyſiognomy, III. 147. Plane, inclined, I. 77. Plants, III. æ.  nouriſhment, &c. III. 16. 31. Platina, II. 238. Plating, art of, II. 225. Pleaſure, III. 453. Plumbago, II, æ26æ. Poetry, III. 488. Poles of the magnet, I. 39 Porcelain, II. 81. Pottery, II. 79. Pulley, I. 60. Pulſes of the air, I. 445. Pumice ſtone, II. 106. Pump, common, II. 450. torcing, II. 449. 455-  raiſing, II. 447. Pupil of the eye, III. 387. Putrefaction, III. 70, Pyrometer, I. 153. Pyrophorus, I. 147. Q Quartz, II. 89, : R. Rain, II. 484. Rainbow, I. 277. Reaumur, I. 11I. Vapours, veſicular, &c. II. 482. Vegetables, III. 1. Veins, III. 240. 255. Velocity of light, I. 178. Vermilion, II. 212. Viſion, I. 159. 241. Vitriolic ſalts, I1I. 2æ. Voice of man, III. 230. Volcanic products, II. 104. Volcanoes, II. 319. U. Uranite, II. 157. v. Water, II. 379. Waters, mireral, II. 509. Vater-ſpouts, I. 356. Waves, motion of, II. 466. Wax, vegetable, III. 48. Weather, I. 497. Wedge, I. 79. Vedgewood, Mr. I. 115. Wells, digging, II. 491. Wheel and axle, I. 74. Wheels, I. 68. vater, II. 463. Whiſpering gallery, I. 449. Vindlaſs, I. 74. Windpipe, IIL. 231. Winds, I. 464. wit, III. 485. Wood, III. 4. Words, III. 448. Z. Los Angeles This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 