, ut Yat t & qx Rù 1 g& VUCEU 1 1 . - b . hi b e H . νli / - - - - . bl , OF SCHANICS: THE USE OF STUDENTS UNIVERSITY: UMES WOOD, B. D. IJOHNS COLLEGE, CAMBR E THIRD EDITION. Raò-  oBæσ: XX l CAMBRIDGE: THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, BY R. WATTS; IGHTON, AND J. NICHOLSON, CAMBE LUNN, OXFORD STREET, LONDON. 1803. Page O Matter and Motioo- &8 On the Laws of Motion- --19 On the Composition and Resolution of Votũon 31353 On the Mechanical Ponverss 4òO On the Center of Gravityyj  s5 On the Collision of Bodies -  tIis On accelerated and returded Motionrm 181 On the Oscillutions of Bodies - l156 On Prqjectiles  LISg OF MECHMANICS. HE term Mechanics has at different times, and by different writers, been applied to branches ol ſcience eſſentially diſtinct from each other. It was originally confined to the doctrine of equilibrium, or the inveſtigation of the proportion of powers when they balance each other. Later writers, adapting the term to their diſcoveries, have uſed it to denote that ſcience which treats of the nature, production, and alteration of motion; giving to the former branch, by way of contradiſtinction, the name of Statics. Others, giving the term a ſtill more comprehenſive meaning, have applied it to both theſe ſciences. None of theſe definitions will exactly ſuit our preſent purpoſe; the firſt being too contracted; and the others much too extenſive, for a treatiſe which is ntended to be an introduction only, to the higher VOL. III. A branches CONTRENT S. Page OV Matter and Motioo - 838 On the Laws of Motioo - - I1I1IO On the Composition and Resolution of Motion 38 On the Mechanical Powerss 449 On the Center of Graviy -  - F95 On the Collision of Bodies tliis On acceleruted und retarded Motion  lI1814 On the Oscillutions of Bodies -  l1ò66 DO n Projectiles  tiiss OF MECHMANICS. HE term Mechanics has at different times, and by different writers, been applied to branches oſ ſcience eſſentially diſtinct from each other. It was originally confined to the doctrine of equilibrium, or the inveſtigation of the proportion of powers when they balance each other. Later writers, adapting the term to their diſcoveries, have uſed it to denote that ſcience which treats of the nature, production, and alteration of motion; giving to the former branch, by way of contradiſtinction, the name of Statics. Others, giving the term a ſtill more comprehenſive meaning, have applied it to both theſe ſciences. None of theſe definitions will exactly ſuit our preſent purpoſe; the firſt being too contracted; and the others much too extenſive, for a treatiſe which is intended to be an introduction only, to the higher VOL. III. A branches branches of philoſophy. Our ſyſtem of mechanics will compriſe the doctrine of equilibrium, and ſo much of the ſcience of motion as is neceſſary to explain the effects of impact and gravity. SECTION ON MATTER AND MOTION. DEFINITIONS. ART. I. ATTER is a ſubſtance, the object of our ſenſes, in which are always united the following properties; extenſion, figure, ſolidity, mobility, diviſibility, gravity, and inactivity. 2. Extenſion may be conſidered in three points of view: I1ſt. As ſimply denoting the part of ſpace which lies betveen two points, in which caſe it is called diſtance. 2d. As implying both length and breadth, when it is denominated ſurface or area. 3d. As compriſing three dimenſions, length, breadth, and thickneſs; in which caſe it may be called bulk, capacity, or content. It is uſed in the laſt of theſe ſenſes when it is ſaid to be a property of matter. 3. Figure is the boundary of extenſion. The portions of matter, from which we receive our ideas of this ſubſtance, are bounded; that is, they have figure. 4. Solidity is that property of matter by which il fills ſpace; or, by which any portion of matter exA 2 clude: l cludes every other portion from that part of ſpace which it occupies; and thus it is capable of reſiſtance and protruſion.  There is no idea which we receive more conſtantly from ſenſation than ſoliditrs. Whether we move or reſt, in what poſture ſoever we are, we always feel ſomething under us that ſupports us, and hinders our farther ſinking downwards; and the bodies which we daily handle make us perceive that, whilſt they remain between them, they do by an inſurmountable force hinder the approach of the parts of our hands that preſs them *. 5. Mubility, or a capacity of being transferred from one place to another, is a quality found to belong to all bodies upon which we can make ſuitable experiments; and hence we conclude that it belongs to all matter. 6. Diviſibility ſignifies a capacity of being ſeparated into parts. That matter is thus diviſible, our daily experience aſſures us. Hom far the diviſion can actually be carried, is not ſo eaſily ſeen. We know that many bodies may be reduced to a very fine powder by trituration; by chemical ſolution, the parts of a body may be ſo far divided as not to be ſenſible to the ſight; and by the help of the microſcope we diſcover myriads of organiZed bodies, totally unknown before ſuch inſtruments were invented. Theſe and ſimilar conſiderations, lead us to conclude, that the diviſion of matter is carried to a degree of minuteneſs far exceeding the bounds of our faculties; and it ſeems not unreaſonable to ſuppoſe, that this capacity of diviſion is without limit; eſpecially, as we can prove, * Loccpꝶ's Eſſay. B. II. Ch. IV. ove, theoretically, that any portion of ext vifible into parts leſs and leſs without end *. From the extremities of the line AB, di D, parallel to each other, and in oppoſite di AC take any number of points E, F, G, n D E, DF, DG, &c. theſe lines will ct ferent points; and ſince, in the indefinite unlimited number of points may be ta mber of parts into which AB is diviſible, ite. This property of extenſion may alſo be ſurdo. If poſſible, let AB be the leaſt po Porro corporum partes diviſas et ſibi mutuò c ricem ſeparari poſſe ex phænominis novimus, et par partes minores ratione diſtingui poſſe ex mathem: circular arc; take C the center, join AC, CB, and with the center C, and any radius Ca, leſs than C4, deſcribe a circle cutting CA and CB in the points a and b; then becauſe AB and a b are ſimilar arcs, they are as their radii; therefore a b is leſs than AB; or a portion of extenſion leſs than the leaſt poſſible has been found, which is abſurd. Hence, any portion of extenſion is diviſible into parts leſs and leſs, without ever coming to a limit. It has been ſuppoſed by ſome writers that there are certain indiviſible particles of matter, of the ſame figure and dimenſions, by the different modifications of which different bodies are formed. As no arguments are adduced in favour of this hypotheſis, and as experiment ſeems to lead us to a contrary concluſion, we cannot allow it a place amongſt the principles upon which our theory is to reſt. 7. Gravity is the tendency which all bodies have to the center of the earth. We are convinced of the exiſtence of this tendency by obſerving that, whenever a body is ſuſtained, it's preſſure is exerted in a direction perpendicular to the horizon; and that, when every impediment is removed, it always deſcends in that direction. The weight of a body is it's tendency to the earth, compared with the like tendency of ſome other body, which is conſidered as a ſtandard. Thus, if a body with a certain degree of gravity be called one pound, any other body which has the ſame degree of gravity, or eſt. Utrum verò partes illæ diſtinctæ et nondum diviſææ per vires naturæ dividi et ab invicem ſeparari poſſint, incertum eſt NEWT. Princip. L. III. Reg. 3. or which by it's gravity will produce the ſame effect, under the ſame circumſtances, is alſo called a pound; and theſe two together, two pounds, &c. Gravity is not an accidental property of matter ariſing from the figure or diſpoſition of the parts of a body; for then, by changing it's ſhape, or altering the arrangement of the particles which compoſe it, the gravitation of the maſs would be altered. But we find that no ſeparation of the particles, no change of the ſtructure, which human power can effect, produces any alteration in the weight. As gravity is a property belonging to every particle of a body, independent of it's ſituation with reſpect to other particles, the gravity of the whole is the aggregate of the gravities of all it's parts. Thus, though the weight of the whole is not altered by any diviſion, or new arrangement of the particles, yet every increaſe or diminution of their number produces a correſponding increaſe or diminution of the weight. Our preſent ſubject does not lead us to conſider gravitation in any other point of view than ſimply as a tendency in bodies to the center of the earth, or to attend to its effects at any conſiderable diſtance from the ſurface; it may not, however, be improper to obſerve that the operation of this principle is much more extenſive. Every portion of matter gravitates towards every other portion, in that part of the ſyſtem of nature which falls under our obſervation. The gravitation indeed of ſmall particles towards each other is not perceived, on account of the ſuperior action of the earth æ; yet it has been found, by the . accurate æ This attraction is not ſuſficient to explain the common experi: cnent accurate obſervations of Dr. MASKELYNE, in Scotland, that the attraction of a mountain is ſufficient to draw the plumb-line ſenſibly from the perpendicular. . Sir I. NEWTON has diſcovered that the moon is retained in her orbit by the agency of a cauſe ſimilar to that by which a body falls to the ground, differing from it only in degree, and this in conſequence of the greater diſtance of the moon from the earth's center. The ſame author has demonſtrated that the planets are retained in their reſpective orbits by a principle of the ſame kind; and later writers have ſhewn, that the minuteſt irregularities in their motions may be ſatisfactorily deduced from the known laus of it's operation. 8. lnactivity may be conſidered in two lights: 1ſt. As an inability in matter to change it's ſtate of reſt or uniform rectilinear motion: 2d. As that quality by which it reſiſts any ſuch changet. In this latter ſenſe it is uſually called the force of inactivity, the inertia, or the vis inerti. The inactivity of matter, according to the former explanation; is laid down as a law of motion; the truth of which we ſhall endeavour to eſtabliſh in the next ſection. That ment of two particles of the ſame kind, as quickſilver, &c. when placed upon a ſinooth horiontal plane, running together. If the eſfect were not produced by ſome power diſferent from gravitation, a drop of oil would run in the ſame manner towards a drop of water, which is not found to be the caſe. 14 That is, a change from reſt to uniſorm rectilinear motion, or a change in its uniform rectilinear motion. The term is ſometimes applied to the reſiſtance which a body makes to the production, or alteration of motion, when this reſiſtance acts at a mechanical advantage, or diſadvantage. That a body reſiſts any change in it's ſtate of reſt, or uniform rectilinear motion, is known from conſtant experience. We cannot move the leaſt particle ol matter without ſome exertion; nor can we deſtroy any motion without perceiving ſome reſiſtance*. Thus we ſee, in general, that inertia is a property inherent in all bodies with which we are concerned; different indeed in different caſes, but exiſting, in a greater or leſs degree, in all The quantity we are not at preſent conſidering; the exiſtence of the property, every one, from his own obſervation, will readily allomr. We know indeed from experience f, that the inertia of a body is not altered by altering the arrangement of its parts; but if one portion of matter be added to another, the inertia of the whole is increaſed; and if any part be removed, the inertia is leſſened. This clearly ſhews that it exiſts, independently, in every particle, and that the whole inertia is the aggregate of all its parts. Hence it follows, from our notion of quantity, that if to a body with a certain quantity of inertia, another, which has an equal quantity, be added, the whole inertia will be doubled; and that by the repeated addition of equal quantities, the whole inertia will be increaſed in the ſame proportion with the number of parts. Theſe properties, which are always found to exiſt together in the ſame ſubſtance, have ſometimes been ſaid * It muſt be obſerved, that this reſiſtance is diſtinct from and independent of gravity; becauſe it is perceived where gravity produces no effect: as, when a wheel is turned round its axis, or a body moved along an horizontal plane. 4 See Art. 25. ſaid to be eſſential to matter. Whether they are, or are not neceſſarily united in the ſame ſubſtance, it is impoſſible to decide, nor does it concern us to inquire. The buſineſs of natural philoſophy is not to find out what might have been the conſtitution oſ nature, but to examine what it is in fact; and to account for the phænomena, which fall under our obſervation, from thoſe properties of matter which we know by experience that it poſſeſſes. 9. By the quantity of matter in a body, we underſtand the aggregate of it's particles, each of which has a certain degree of inertia. Or, in other words, if we ſuppoſe bodies made up of particles, each of which has the ſame inertia, the quantity of matter in one body, is to the quantity of matter in another, as the number of ſuch particles in the former, to the number in the latter . When we conſider bodies as made up of parts, and eompare them in this reſpect, it becomes neceſſary to give a definite and preciſe deſcription of thoſe parts; otherwiſe our notion of the quantity will be vague and inaccurate. Now the only properties of matter which admit of exact compariſon, and which depend upon the number, and not upon the arrangement of the particles, are weight and inertia; either of which may æ Quantitas materiæ eſt menſura ejuſdem orta ex illius denſitate et magnitudine conjunctim. NEWT. Princip. Def. 1. Ejuſdem eſſe denſitatis dico, quarum vires inertiæ ſunt ut magnitudines. Lib. III. Prop. 6. Cor. 4. Attendi enim oportet ad punctorum numerum, ex quibus corpus movendum eſt conflatum. Puncta vero ea inter ſe æqualia cenſeri debent, non quæ æque ſunt parva, ſed in quæ eadem potentia æquales exerit effectus. EuL. Mech. 139. may properly be made uſe of as a meaſure of the quantity of matter; and ſince, at a given place, they are proportional to each other, as we ſhall ſhew hereafter (Art. 25), it is of little conſequence which meaſure we adopt. The inertia has been fixed upon, becauſe the gravity of a body, though invariable at the ſame place, is different at different diſtances from the center oſ the earth; whereas, the inertia is always, and under all circumſtances, the ſame. The denſity of a body is meaſured by the quantity oſ matter in a given bulk. 10. By motion we underſtand the act of changing place; and it is of two kinds, abſolute and relative. A body is ſaid to be in absolute motion when it is actually transferred from one point in fixed ſpace to another; and to be relatively in motion, when it's ſituation is changed with reſpect to the ſurrounding bodies. Theſe two kinds of motion evidently coincide when the bodies, to which the reference is made, happen to be fixed. In other caſes, a body relatively in motion, or relatively at reſt, may or may not be abſolutely in motion. Thus, a ſpectator ſtanding ſtill on the ſhore, if his place be referred to a ſhip which ſails by, is relatively in motion; and the ſeveral parts of the veſſel are at reſt, with reſpect to each other, though the whole is transferred from one part of ſpace to another. When a body always paſſes over equal parts of ſpace in equal ſucceſſive portions of time, it's motion is ſaid to be uniform. When the ſucceſſive portions of ſpace, deſcribed in equal times, continually increaſe, the motion is ſaid to be accelerated; and to be retarded, when when thoſe ſpaces continually decreaſe. Alſo the motion is ſaid to be uniſormly accelerated or retarded, when the increments or decrements of the ſpaces, deſeribed in equal ſucceſſive portions of time, are always: equal. 11I. The velocity of a body, or rate of its motion, is meaſured by the ſpace, uniformlv deſcribed in a given time. The given time, taken as a ſtandard, is uſually one ſecond; and the ſpace deſcribed is meaſured in feet. Thus, when v repreſents a body's velocity, v is the number of feet which the body would uniformly deſcribe in one ſecond. If a body's motion be accelerated or retarded, the velocity at any point is not meaſured by the ſpace actually deſcribed in a given time, but by the ſpace which would have been deſcribed in the given time, if the motion had continued uniform, from that point. 12. Cor. 1. If two bodies move uniformly on the ſame line, in oppoſite directions, their relative velocity is equal to the ſum of their abſolute velocities, ſince the ſpace by which they uniformly approach to, or recede from, each other, in any time, is equal to the ſum oſ the ſpaces which they reſpectively deſcribe in that time. When the bodies move in the ſame direction, their relative velocity is equal to the difference of their abſolute velocities. 13. Cor. 2. When a body moves with an uniform velocity, the ſpace deſcribed is proportional to the time of i's motion. Let the body deſcribe a feet in one ſecond; then ſince the motion is uniform, it will deſcribe ? a feet in in ſ ſeconds; that is, the ſpace deſcribed is to the time. 14. Cor. 3. When bodies have diffe motions, the ſpaces deſcribed are propor times and velocit ies jointly æ. Let V and v be the velocities of two t B; Tandt the times of their motions; ſpaces deſcribed. Alſo let S be the ſpace B in the time T: Then S: S :: V: v (Art. 11), §: s  T: t (Art. 13), Comp. S: s : IV: tv3 that is, S æ TV (Alg. Artf. 195). Ex. Let the times be to each other a the velocities as 2: 35 then S: s:: 24 5. 15. Cor. 4. Since Soc TV, we have Toc n (Alg. Art. 205). Ex. 1I. Let A move uniformly through and B through 9 feet in 7'5 required the velocities. V: v :  : :27. 7 35 7 obBg. In  Since the times and velocities may in each caſe by numbers, there is no impropriety in ſpealking of The truth of this obſervation will be evident, if tht expreſſed in different words. When the uniform ve bodies are in the ratio of the numbers V and v, and th motions in the ratio of the numbers Tand t, the ſpac in the ratio of the numbers TV and t1v. when thoſe ſpaces continually decreaſe. Alſo the motion is ſaid to be uniformly accelerated or retarded, when the increments or decrements of the ſpaces, deſcribed in equal ſucceſſive portions of time, are always equal. 11I. The velocity of a body, or rate of it's motion, is meaſured by the ſpace, uniformly deſcribed in a given time. The given time, taken as a ſtandard, is uſually one ſecond; and the ſpace deſcribed is meaſured in feet. Thus, when v repreſents a body's velocity, v is the number of feet which the body would uniformly deſcribe in one ſecond. If a body's motion be accelerated or retarded, the velocity at any point is not meaſured by the ſpace actually deſcribed in a given time, but by the ſpace which would have been deſcribed in the given time, if the motion had continued uniform, from that point. 12. Cor. 1. If two bodies move uniformly on the ſame line, in oppoſite directions, their relative velocity is equal to the ſum of their abſolute velocities, ſince the ſpace by which they uniformly approach to, or recede from, each other, in any time, is equal to the ſum oſ the ſpaces which they reſpectively deſcribe in that time. Whaen the bodies move in the ſame direction, their relative velocity is equal to the difference of their abſolute velocities. 13. Cor. 2. When a body moves with an uniform velocity, the ſpace deſcribed is proportional to the time of is motion. Let the body deſcribe a feet in one ſecond; then ſince the motion is uniform, it will deſcribe 1 a feet in -- in ſ ſeconds; that is, the ſpace deſcribed is to the time. 14. Cor. 3. When bodies have diffe motions, the ſpaces deſcribed are propor times and velocities jointly æ. Let V and v be the velocities of two t B; Tandt the times of their motions; ſpaces deſcribed. Alſo let S be the ſpace B in the time T: Then S: S :: V: v (Art. 11), S': s  T: t (Art. 13), Comp. S: s : IV : tv3 that is, S æ TV (Alg. Art. 195). ExX. Let the times be to each other a the velocities as 2: 3 then S: s:: 2x 4 5. 15. Cor. 4. Since Soc TV, we have To (Alg. Art. 205). Ex. 1I. Let A move uniformly through and B through 9 feet in 7'5 required the velocities. V: v e:  2 :27. ; 35 7 og bn æ Since the times and velocities may in each caſe by numbers, there is no impropriety in ſpeaking of The truth of this obſervation will be evident, if th expreſſed in different words. When the uniform ve bodies are in the ratio of the numbers V and v, and th motions in the ratio of the numbers T and ſ, the ſpac in the ratio of the numbers TV and tv. I4 DEFINITIONS. Ex. 2. Let A's velocity be to B's velocity as 5 to 43 to compare the times in which they will deſcribe 9 and 7 feet reſpectively. T 122:1 2 36 35. 5 342 36 35 16. Cor. 5. Since the areas of rectangles are in the ratio compounded of the ratios of their ſides, if the baſes repreſent the velocities of tuo motions, and altitudes the times, the areas will repreſent the ſpaces deſcribed. 17. The quantity of motion, or momentum, of a body, is meaſured by the velocity and quantity of matter jointly. Thus, if the quantities of matter in two bodies be repreſented by 6 and 7, and their velocities by 9 and 8, the ratio of 6 x 9 to 7 x S, or 27 to 28, is called the ratio of their momenta. 18. Cor. 1. If M be the momentum of a body, Q its quantity of matter, and V it's velocity, then ſince Moc QU, we have Q & iſ and Voc & Ex. If the quantities of motion be as 6 to 5, and the velocities as 7 to 8, what is the ratio of the quantities of matter? Since qeà we have Q ꝗ :: ο 5 148: 35. 19. Cor. 2. If M be given, oc 2 and conſequently if foc M is invariable. (Algebra, Art. 206.) 20. What- 20. Whatever changes, or tends to change, the ſtate of reſt or uniform rectilinear motion of a body, is called force. Thus, preſſure, impact, gravity, &c. are called forces. When a force produces it's effect inſtantaneouſly, it is ſaid to be impulſiuve æ. When it acts inceſſantly, it is called a conſtant force. Conſtant forces are of two kinds, uniform and variable. A force is ſaid to be uniform when it always produces equal effects in equal ſucceſſive portions of time; and variable, when the effects produced in equal times are unequal. Forces which are known to us only by their effects, muſt be compared by eſtimating thoſe effects under the ſame circumſtances. Thus, impulſive forces muſt be meaſured by the whole effects produced; uniform forces, by the effects produced in equal times; and variable forces, by the effects which would be produced in equal times, were the forces to become and continue uniform during thoſe times. The effects produced by the actions of forces are of two Einds, velocity and momentum; and thus we have two methods of comparing them, according as we conceive them to be the cauſes of velocity or momentum. 21. The accelerating force is meaſured by the velocity uniformly generated in a given time, no regard being had to the quantity of matter moved. Thus,  Though we cannot conceive finite effects to be produced otherwiſe than by degrees, and conſequently in ſucceſſive portions ol time; yet when theſe portions are ſo ſmall as not to be diſtinguiſhable by our faculties, the effects may be ſaid to be inſtantaneous. Thus, if the velocities uniformly generated, in two caſes, in equal times, be as 6 to 7, the accelerating forces are ſaid to be in that ratio. The accelerating force of gravity at the ſame place is invariable; for all bodies falling freely, in an exhauſted receiver, acquire equal velocities in any given time. 22. The moving force is meaſured by the momentum uniformly generated in a given time. If the momenta thus generated, in two caſes, be as 14 to 15, the moving forces are ſaid to be in that ratio. 23. Cor. 1. Since the momentum is proportional to the velocity and quantity of matter, the moving force varies as the accelerating force and quantity of matter jointly. The moving force of gravity varies as the quantity of matter moved, becauſe the accelerating force is given (Art. 21). 24. Cor. 2. Hence it follous that the accelerating force varies as the moving force directly, and the quantity of matter inverſely. ù PRoOP. I. 25. The vis inertiæ of a body is proportional to it's weight. The inertia, as was obſerved on a former occaſion, is the reſiſtance which a body makes to any change in it's ſtate of reſt or uniform rectilinear motion (Art. 8); and this reſiſtance is manifeſtly the ſame in two bodies if the ſame force, applied in the ſame manner, and for the ſame time, communicate to each of them the ſame velocity. Le Let two bodies A and B, equal in weight, be placed in two ſimilar and equal boxes, which are connected by a ſtring paſſing over a fixed pulley; then theſe will exactly balance each other; and if the whole be put into motion, the gravity can neither accelerate nor retard that motion; the whole reſiſtance therefore to the communication of motion in the ſyſtem, ariſes from the inertia of the weights, the inertia of the ſtring and pulley æ, the friction upon the axis, and the reſiſtance oſ the air f. Now let a weight C be added on one ſide, and let the velocity generated in any given time, in the whole ſyſtem, by this additional weight, be obſerved. Then in the place of A, or B, ſubſtitute any other maſs of the ſame weight, and it will be found that C will, in the ſame time, generate the ſame velocity in this ſyſtem as in the former; and therefore, the whole reſiſtance to the communication of motion muſt be the ſame. Alſo the inertia of the ſtring and pulley, the friction of the axis, and the air's reſiſtance, are the ſame in the two experiments; conſequently, the reſiſtance ariſing from the inertia of the weights is the ſame: That is, ſo long as the weight remains unaltered, whatever be the form or conſtitution of the body, the inertia is the ſame. Alſo, ſince the whole quantity of inertia is the aggregate inertia of all the parts, if the weight be doubled, * See Note, page 8. 1 This experiment may be made with great accuracy by means of a machine, invented by Mr. Ar woonb, for the purpoſe of examining the motions of bodies when acted upon by conſtant forces. This machine is deſcribed in his well known treatiſe on the Rectilinear Motion and Rotation of Bodies, (p. 299). VOL. III. B doubled, an equal quantity of inertia is added to the former quantity, or the whole inertia is doubled; and in the ſame manner, if the weight be increaſed in any proportion, by the repeated addition of equal weights, the inertia is increaſed in the ſame proportion. It may be obſerved, that the velocity generated in a given time, is the ſame, whether the ſyſtem begins to move from reſt or not; therefore the inertia is the ſame, whether it be at reſt or in motion. 26. Cor. Since the quantity of matter is meaſured by the inertia (Art. 9), it is alſo proportional to the weight. SECTION R ce HEIRRI u k ON THE LAWS OF MOTION THE FIRST LAW. 27. JſF a body be at reſt, it will continue at if in motion, it will continue to move forward in a right line, till it is acted upon by ſi nal force. That a body at reſt cannot put itſelf in m know from conſtant and univerſal experience. That a body in motion will continue to n formly forward in a right line till it is acted ſome external force, though equally certain, muſt be allowed, equally apparent; ſince all tions which fall under our immediate obſervat rectilinear motions in particular, are ſoon d If however we can point out the cauſes which deſtroy the motions of bodies, and ſhew, ex tally, that, by removing ſome of them and din others, the motions continually become more and rectilinear, we may juſtly conclude deviation from the firſt direction, and firſt . 2 muſt be attributed to the agency of external cauſes; and that there is no tendency in matter itſelf, either to increaſe or diminiſh any motion impreſſed upon it. Now the cauſes which retard a body's motion, beſides colliſion, or the evident obſtruction which it meets with from ſenſible maſſes of matter, are gravity, friction, and the reſiſtance of the air; and it will appear by the following experiments that when theſe are removed, or due allowance is made for their known effects, we are neceſſarily led to inſer the truth of the law above laid down. . 1ſt. If a ball be thrown along a rough pavement, is motion, on account of the many obſtacles it meets with, will be very irregular and ſoon ceaſe; but if it be bowled upon a ſmooth bowling-green, it's motion will continue longer, and be more rectilinear; and if it be thrown along a ſmooth ſheet of ice, it will preſerve both it's direction and it's motion for a ſtill longer time. In theſe caſes, the gravity, which acts in a direction perpendicular to the plane of the horizon, neither accelerates nor retards the motion; the cauſes which produce the latter effect are colliſion, friction, and the air's reſiſtance; and in proportion as the two former oſ theſe are leſſened, the motion becomes more nearly uniform and rectilinear. 2d. When a wheel is accurately conſtructed, and a rotatory motion about it's axis communicated to it, iſ the axis and it's ſupporters be well poliſhed, the motion will continue a conſiderable time; if the axis be placed upon friction wheels, the motion will continue longer; and if the apparatus be placed under the receiver of an ail air pump, and the air be exhauſted, the motion will continue, without viſible diminution, for a very long time. In theſe inſtances, gravity, which acts equally on oppoſite points of the wheel, neither accelerates noi retards the motion; and the more care we take to remove the friction, and the reſiſtance of the air, the leſs is the firſt motion diminiſhed in a given time. 3d. If a body be projected in any direction inclined to the horizon, it deſcribes a curve, which is nearly the common parabola. This eſfect is produced by the joint action of gravity and the motion of projection; and ſince the effect produced by the former is known, the efſect produced by the latter may be determined. This, it is found, would carry the body uniformly forward in the line in which it was projected; as will fully appear when we come to the doctrine of projectiles. The deviation of the curve deſcribed from the parabolic form is ſuſficier lv accounted for by the reſiſtance of the air. From theſe, and ſimilar experiments, we are led to conclude that all bodies in motion would uniformly perſevere in that motion, were they not prevented by external impediments; and that every increaſe or diminution of velocity, every deviation from the line of direction, is to be attributed to the agency of ſuch cauſes. 28. It may not be improper to obſerve, that this law ſuggeſts tuvo methods of diſtinguiſhing between abſolute motions, and ſuch as are only apparent; one, by conſidering the cauſes which produce the motions; and the other, by attending to the effects with which the motions are accompanied *. 1ſt. We æ Newr. Princip. Schol. ad Def. 1ſt. We may ſometimes diſtinguiſh abſolute motion, or change of abſolute motion, from that which is merely apparent, by conſidering the cauſes which produce them. When two bodies are abſolutely at reſt, they are relatively ſo; and the appearance is the ſame, when they are moving in the ſame direction, at the ſame rate: a relative motion therefore can only ariſe from an abſolute motion, or change of abſolute motion, in one or both of the bodies. We have ſeen alſo, in the laſt article, that motion, or change of motion, cannot be produced but by force impreſſed; and therefore, il we Xnow that ſuch a cauſe exiſts, and acts upon one of the bodies, and not upon the other, we conclude that the relative motion ariſes ſrom a change in the ſtate of reſt, or abſolute motion of the ſormer; and that with reſpect to the latter, the effect is merely apparent. Thus, when a perſon on ſhipboard obſerves the coaſt receding from him, he is convinced that the appearance ariſes from a motion, or change of motion, in the ſhip, upon which a cauſe, ſufficient to produce this effect, acts, namely, the force of the wind or tide. The preceſſion of the equinoxes ariſes from a real motion in the earth, and not from any motion in the heavenly bodies; becauſe we know that there is a force impreſſed upon the earth, which is ſufficient to account for the appearance. 2d. Abſolute motion may ſometimes be diſtinguiſhed from apparent motion, by the effects produced. If a body be abſolutely in motion, it endeavours by its inactivity to proceed in the line of it's direction; iſ the motion be only apparent, there is no ſuch tendency. It is in conſequence of the tendency to perſevere in rectilinear rectilinear motion that a body revolving in a conſtantly endeavours to recede from the center. effort thus produced is called a centrifugal force; as it ariſes from abſolute motion only, whenever obſerved, we are convinced that the motion is real In order to ſee the nature and origin of this f ſuppoſe a body to deſcribe the circle ABC; the any point 4, it is moving in the direction of the gent AD, and in this direction, by the firſt la. motion, it endeavours to proceed; alſo, ſince e point D in the tangent is without the circle, this dency to move on in the direction of the tangent, tendency to recede from the center of motion; the body will actually fly off, unleſs it is preventec an adequate force. The following experiment is given by SIr I. N TON to ſhew the effect of the centrifugal force, to prove that it always accompanies an abſolute cular motion. Let a bucket, partly filled with water, be ſuſper by a ſtring, and turned round till the ſtring is c derably twiſted; then let the ſtring be ſuffere untwiſt itſelf, and thus communicate a circular tion to the veſſel. At firſt the water remains at reſt, and its ſurface is ſmooth and undiſturbed; but as it gradually acquires the motion of the bucket, the ſurface grows concave towards the center, and the water aſcends up the ſides, thus endeavouring to recede from the axis of motion; and this cffect is obſerved gradually to increaſe with the abſolute velocity of the water, till at length the water and the bucket are relatively at reſt. When this is the caſe, let the bucket be ſuddenly ſtopped, and the abſolute motion of the water will be gradually diminiſhed by the friction of the veſſel; the concavity of the ſurface is alſo diminiſhed by degrees, and at length, when the water is again at reſt, the ſurface becomes plane. Thus we find that the centrifugal force does not depend upon the relative, but upon the abſolute motion, with which it always begins, increaſes, decreaſes, and diſappears. A ſingle inſtance will be ſufficient to ſhew the great utility of this concluſion in natural philoſophy. The diurnal rotation of the heavenly bodies may, as far as the appearance is concerned, be accounted for, either by ſuppoſing the heavens to revolve from eaſt to weſt, and complete a revolution in twenty-four hours; or, the earth to revolve from weſt to eaſt, in the ſame time: but the ſenſible diminution of gravity as we proceed towards the equator, and the oblate figure of the earth, which are the effects of a centrifugal force, prove that the appearance is to be aſcribed to a real motion in the earth. b THE THE SECOND LAW OF MOTION. 29. Motion, or change of motion, produced in a body, is proportional to the force impreſſed, and takes place in the direction in which the force acts. It has been ſeen in the preceding articles, that no motion or change of motion is ever produced in a body without ſome force impreſſed; we now aſſert that it cannot be produced without an adequate force; that when bodies act upon each other, the effects are not variable and accidental, but ſubject to general laus. Thus, whatever happens in one inſtance, will, under the ſame circumſtances, happen again; and when any alteration takes place in the cauſe, there will be a correſponding and proportional alteration in the effect produced. Were not cauſe and effect thus connected with, and related to, each other, we could not pretend to lay down any general rules reſpecting the mutual actions of bodies; experiment could only furniſh us with detached and iſolated facts, wholly inapplicable on other occaſions; and that harmony, which we cannot but obſerve and admire in the material world, would be loſt. llil lIn order to underſtand the meaning and extent oſ this law of motion, it will be convenient to diſtinguiſh it into tvo caſes; and to point out ſuch facts, under each head, as tend to eſtabliſh it's truth. 1ſt. The 1ſt. The ſame force, acting freely for a given time, will always produce the ſame effoct, in the direction in which it acts. Ex. 1. If a body, in one inſtance, fall perpendicularly through 16., feet in a ſecond, and thus acquire a velocity which would carry it, uniformly, through 325 fcet in that time, it will always, under the ſame circumſtances, acquire the ſame velocity. The effect produced is the ſame, whether the body begins to move from reſt or not. Ex. 2. If a body be projected perpendicularly downwards, the velocity of projection, meaſured in feet (Art. 11), will, in one ſecond, be increaſed by 3253 and if it be projected perpendicularly upwards, it will, in one ſecond, be diminiſhed by that quantity. EX. 3. If a body be projected obliquely, gravity will ſtill produce its effect in a direction perpendicular to the horizon; and the body, which by it's inactivitty would have moved uniformly forward in the line of it's firſt motion, will, at the end of one ſecond, be found 16-5 feet below that line; having thus acquired a velocity of 325 feet per ſecond, in the direction of gravity. 2d. If the force impreſſed be increaſed or diminiſhed in any proportion, the motion communicated will be increaſed, or diminiſhed in the ſame proportion. Ex. If Ex. If a body deſcend along an inclined plane, the length of which is twice as great as it's height, the force which accelerates it's motion is half as great as the force of gravity; and, allowing ſor the effect oſ friction, and the reſiſtance of the air, the velocity generated in any time is half as great as it would have been, had the body fallen, for the ſame time, by the whole force of gravity *. 30. In eſtimating the efſect of any force, two circumſtances are to be attended to; firſt, we muſt conſicer what force is actually impreſſed; for this alone can produce a change in the ſtare of motion or quieſcence of a body. Tlius, the effect of a ſtream upon the floats of a water-wheel is not produced by the whole force of the ſtream, but by that part of it which ariſes ſrom the exceſs of the velocity of the water above that of the wheel; and it is nothing, if they move with equal velocities. Secondly, we muſt conſider æ The experiments which moſt ſatisfactorily prove the truth ol this law of motion, are made with Mr. AT woop's machine, mentioned on a former occaſion. Let two weights, each of which is repreſented by 9m, balance each other on this machine; and obſerve what velocity is generated, in one ſecond, when a weight 2m is added to either of them. Again, let the weights 8 m, 8m, be ſuſtained, as before, and add 4m to one of them, then the velocity generated in one ſecond is twice as great as in the former inſtance. Since, therefore, the maſs to be moved is the ſame in both caſes, viæ. 20m together with the inertia of the machine, it is manifeſt that when the moving force is doubled (Art. 23), the momentum generated is alſo doubled; and, by altering the ratio of the weights, it may be ſhewn, in any other caſe, that the momentum communicated is proportional to the moving force impreſſed. conſider in what direction the force acts; and take that part of it, only, which lies in the direction in which we are eſtimating the effect. Thus, the force of the wind actually impreſſed upon the ſails of a windmill, is not wholly employed in producing the circular motion; and therefore in calculating it's efſect, in this reſpect, we muſt determine what part of the whole force acts in the direction of the motion. In the following pages, we ſhall ſee a great variety of inſtances in which this method of eſtimating the efſects of forces is applied; and the concluſions thus deduced, being found, without exception, to agree with experiment, we cannot but admit the truth of the principle. 31. Cor. Since the efſect produced upon each other by two bodies, depends upon their relative velocity, it will always be the ſame whilſt this remains unaltered, whatever be their abſolute motions. THE THIRD LAW OF MOTION. 32. Action and reaction are equal, and in oppoſite directions. Matter not only perſeveres in its ſtate of reſt or uniform rectilinear motion, bur alſo by it's inertia eſiſts any change. Our experience with reſpect to this this reaction, or oppoſition to the ſorce impreſſed, is ſo conſtant and univerſal, that the very ſuppoſition oſ its non-exiſtence appears to be abſurd. For who can conceive a preſſure without ſome ſupport of that preſſure? Who can ſuppoſe a weight to be raiſed without force or exertion? Thus far then we are aſſured by our ſenſes, that whenever one body acts upon another, there is ſome reaction: The law ſarther aſſerts, that the reaction is equal in quantity to the action. By action, we here underſtand moving force, which, according to the definition (Art. 22), is meaſured by the momentum which is, or would be generated, in a given time; and to determine whether action and reaction, in this ſenſe of the words, are equal or not, recourſe muſt be had to experiment. Take two ſimilar and equal cylindrical pieces of wood, from one of which projects a ſmall ſteel point; ſuſpend them bY equal ſtrings, and let one of them deſcend through any arc and impinge upon the other at reſt; then, by means of the ſteel point, the two bodies will move on together as one maſs, and with a velocity equal to half the velocity of the impinging body. Thus the momentum, which is meaſured by the quantity of matter and velocity taken jointly, remains unaltered; or, as much momentum as is gained by the body ſtruck, ſo much is taken from the momentum of the ſtriking body, or communicated to it in the oppoſite direction. If the ſtriking body be loaded with lead, and thus made twice as heavy as the other, the common velocity after impact is found to be to the velocity of the impinging body :: 2: 35 and becauſe the joint maſs after after impact: quantity of matter in the ſtricing body : 3: a, the momentum after impact : momentum before:: 3X 2: 2X 3, or in a ratio of equality, as in the former caſe. In making experiments to eſtabliſh this third law of motion, allowance muſt be made for the air's reſiſtance; and care muſt be taken to obtain a proper meaſure of the velocity before and after impact. See SIr I. NEWTONS Scholium to the Laws of Motion. 33. The third law of motion is not confined to caſes of actual impact; the effects of preſſures and attractions, ĩn oppoſite directions, are alſo equal. When two bodies ſuſtain each other, the preſſures in oppoſite directions muſt be equal, otherwiſe motion would enſue; and if motion be produced by the exceſs of preſſure on one ſide, the caſe coincides with that of impact *. When one body attracts another, it is itſelf alſo equally attracted; and as much momentum as is thus communicated to one body, will alſo be communicated to the other in the oppoſite direction. A loadſtone and a piece of iron, equal in weight, and ſloating upon ſimilar and equal pieces of cork, approach each other with equal velocities, and therefore with equal momenta; and when they meet, or are  The effects of preſſure and impact are manifeſtly of the ſame kind, and produced in the ſame way; exceſs of preſſure, on one ſide, produces momentum, and equal and oppoſite momenta ſupport each other by oppoſite preſſures. Thus alſo preſſures may be compared, either by comparing the weights which they ſuſtain, or the momenta which they would generate under the ſame circumſtances. are kept aſunder by any obſtacle, they ſuſtain each other by equal and oppoſite preſſures. 34. Cor. Since the action and reaction are equal at every inſtant of time, the whole effect of the action in a finite time, however it may vary, is equal to the effect of the reaction; ſince the whole effects are made up of the effects produced in every inſtant. SCHOLIUM. 35. Theſe laws are the ſimpleſt principles to which motion can be reduced, and upon them the whole theory depends. They are not indeed ſelf-evident, nor do they admit of accurate proof by experiment, on account of the great nicety required in adjuſting the inſtruments, and making the experiments; and on account of the eſfects of ſriction, and the air's reſiſtance, which cannot entirely be removed. They are however conſtantly, and invariably, ſuggeſted to our ſenſes, and they agree with experiment as far as experiment can go; and the more accurately the experiments are made, and the greater care we take to remove all thoſe impediments which tend to render the concluſions erroneous, the more nearly do the experiments coincide with theſe laws. Their truth is alſo eſtabliſhed upon a different ground; from theſe general principles innumerable particular concluſions have been deduced; ſometimes the deductions are ſimple and immediate, ſometimes they are made by tedious and intricate operations; yet they are all, without exception, conſiſtent with each other other and with experiment: it foll the principles, upon which the calcul are true x. 36. It will be neceſſary to remen of motion relate, immediately, to the of matter upon each other, or to ll the whole maſs may be conceived tc point; not to all the effects that produced in the ſeveral particles of a A body may have a rectilinear tion given it at the ſame time, and ĩ The action alſo, or reaction, may mechanical advantage or diſadvanta may produce, upon the whole, v menta: theſe effects depend upon are not here conſidered, but which to in computing ſuch effects. * ATwooD on the Motions of Bo VIPOSITION AND RI ON OF MOTION. ProOP. II. , which repreſent the momer the ſame or equal bodies, deſcribed by them in equal which repreſent the ſpace in equal times, will repr of bodies may be repre een Art. 17; but in man e convenient to repreſent will expreſs not only the ut alſo the directions in w  in the proper directio one momentum; but to 1 the direction of the latte C muſt be taken in the ſame proportion to the former line, that the ſecond momentum has to the firſt. Let two lines, thus taken, repreſent the momenta communicated to the ſame, or equal bodies; then ſince Moc Vx Q (Art. 17), and Q is here given, MocV; therefore the lines which repreſent the momenta, will alſo repreſent the velocities, or the ſpaces uniformly deſcribed in equal times. Again, if the lines repreſent the ſpaces uniformly deſcribed in equal times, they repreſent the velocities, and ſince Q is given, Voc QV oc M; therefore the lines repreſent the momenta. PROP. III. 38. Two uniform motions, which, when communicatea ſeparately to a body, would cauſe it to deſcribe the adjacent ſides of a parallelogram in a given time, uill, when the are communicated at the ſame inſtant, cauſe it to deſcribe the diagonal in that time; and the motion in the diagonal aill be uniform. Let a motion be communicated to a body at 4, which would cauſe it to move uniſormly from A to B A C in T, and at the ſame inſtant, another motion which alone would cauſe it to move uniformly from A to in T; complete the parallelogram BG, and draw the diagonal diagonal AD; then the body will arrive at the point D, in T, having deſcribed AD with an uniform motion. For the motion in the direction AC can neither accelerate nor retard the approach of the body to the line BD which is parallel to AC, (Art. 29. Ex. 3); hence, the body will arrive at BD, in the ſame time that it would have done, had no motion been communicated to it in the direction AG, that is in T. In the ſame manner, the motion in the direction 4B can neither make the body approach to, nor recede fiom, CD; therefore, in conſequence of the motion in the direction AC, it will arrive at CD in the ſame time that it would have done, had no motion been communicated in the direction A B, that is in T. Hence it follows that, in conſequence of the twvo motions, the body will be found both in BD and CD at the end of T, and will thereſore be found in D, the point of their interſection. Alſo, ſince a body in motion continues to move uniformly forward in a right line, till it is acted upon by ſome external force (Art. 27), the body A muſt have deſcribed the right line AD, with an uniſorm motion. 39. To illuſtrate this propoſition, ſuppoſe a plane ABDGC, as the deck of a ſhip, to be carried uniformly forward, and let the point A deſcribe the line AC in T; alſo, let a body move uniformly in this plane from 4 to B, in the ſame time. Complete the parallelogram BC, and draw the diagonal AD. Then at the end of T the body, by its own motion, will arrive at B alſo by the motion of the plane, AB will be brought into the ſituation CD, and the point B c 2 will will coincide with D; therefore the body will upon the whole, at the end of T', be found in D. In any other time 1, let the point A be carried from A to D M by the motion of the plane, and the body from 4 to L by. is ovn motion; complete the parallelogram ALNM, and join AN; then as in the preceding caſe, the body will, at the end of /, be found in N and ſince the motions in the directions AC, AB are uniform, T: t 2: AC: AM :: AB: AL (Aſt. 13); that is, the ſides of the parallelograms, about the common angle LAM, are proportional, and conſequently the parallelograms are about the ſame diagonal AD (Evc. 26. 6); therefore the body at the end of any time s will be found in the diagonal AD. It will alſo move uniſormly in the diagonal; for, from the ſimilar triangles AMN, ACD, we have AD: AN : AC: AM :: T: 1, or the ſpaces deſeribed are proportional to the times. (See Art. 10.) 40. Cor. 1. The reaſoning in the laſt article is applicable to the motion of a point. 41. Cor. a2. If two ſides of a triangle, AB, BD, taken in order, repreſent the ſpaces over which two uniform motions would, ſeparately, carry a body in a given time; when theſe motions are communicated at the ſame inſtant to the body at A, it will deſcribe the third ſide AD, uniformly, in that time. For, For, if the parallelogram BC De completed, the ſame motion, which would carry a body uniformly from B to D, would, if communicated at A, carry it in the ſame manner from A to C; and in conſequence of this motion, and of the motion in the direction AB, the body would uniſormly deſcribe the diagonal AD, which is the third ſide of the triangle ABD. 42. Cor. 3. In the ſame mauner, if the lines AB, BGC, CD, DE, taken in order, repreſent the ſpaces over which any uniform motions would, ſeparately, earry a body, in a given time, theſe motions, when communicated at the ſame inſtant, will cauſe the body to deſcribe the line AE which completes the figure, in that time; and the motion in this line will be uniform. 43. Cor. 4. If AD repreſent the uniform velocity of a body, and any parallelogram ABDC (Art. 38), be deſcribed about it, the velocity AD may be ſuppoſed to ariſe from the two uniform velocities AB, AC, or AB, BD; and if one of them, AB, be by any means taken away, the velocity remaining will be repreſented by AC or BD. (Vce Art. 11.) 44. Def. 44. Def. A force is ſaid to be equivalent to any number of forces, when it will, ſugly, produce the ſame eff.ct that the others produce jointly, in any given time. ProP. IV. 45. If the adjacent ſides of a parallelogram repreſent the quantities and directions of two forces, acting at the ſame time upon a body, the diagonal will repreſent one equivalent to them both. Let AB, AC repreſent two forces acting upon a body at A, then they repreſent the momenta communicated to it in thoſe directions (Art. 22), and conſeB bD q c quently the ſpaces which it would uniformly deſcribe in equal times (Art. 37). Complete the parallelogram CB, and draw the diagonal A D; then, by the laſt propoſition, A D is the ſpace uniformly deſeribed in the ſame time, uhen the two motions are communicated to the body at the ſame inſtant; and ſince A8, AC and A D, repreſent the ſpaces uniformly deſcribed by the ſame body, in equal times, they repreſent the momenta, and therefore the forces acting in thoſe directions; that is, the forces B, AC*, acting at the ſame time, produce a force which is repreſented, in quantity and direction, by AD. Desf. * In this, and many other caſes, where forces are repreſentec by lines, the lines are uſed, for the ſake of conciſeneſs, to expreſi the forces which they repreſent. Def. The force repreſented by A D is compounded of the two AB, AC. 46. Cor. 1. If two ſides of a triangle order, repreſent the quantities and directic forces, the third ſide will repreſent a force to them both. For a force repreſented by B D, acting produce the ſame effect that the force Ac equal to it and in the ſame direction, will and AB, AC, are equivalent to AD; ther BD are alſo equivalent to AD. 47. Cor. 2. If any lines A B, BEC, taken in order, repreſent the quantities and of forces communicated at the ſame time at A, the line AE, which completes the f repreſent a force equivalent to them all. For the two AB, BC are equivalent to AC, CD, that is, AB, BC, CD, are equ AD,; in the ſame manner AD, D E, tha BC, CD, and DE, are equivalent to A E. 48. Cor. 3. Let AB and AC repreſent ities and directions of two forces, join BC σ p- AE biſecting it in E, then will 24 E repreſent trittrettrtmtiretmtereneriimrnren28d) equivalent to them both. For, if the parallelogram be completed, ſi diagonals biſect each other, A D, which repre force equivalent to 4 B and AC, is equal to 2. 49. Cor. 4. Iſf the angle at which two giver act be diminiſhed, the compound force is incre Let AB, AC be the two given forces, co A B the parallelogram ABDC and draw the diagon this repreſents the compound force. In th manner, if AE be taken equal to AB, and 4 repreſent the two forces, then AF the diagonal parallelogram A EFC, repreſents the compound and ſince the angle BAC is greater than the angli ACD uwhich is the ſupplement of the ſormer, than ACF the ſupplement of the latter; alſo, AE æ ABæ CD; thereforè in the two triangles ACEPF, the ſides AC, CD are reſpectively equal to AC, CF, and the ZACD is leſs than the ZACF; conſequently AD is leſs than A H Evc. 24. 1). 50. Cor. 5. Two given forces produce the greateſt efſect when they act in the ſame direction, and the leaſt when they act in oppoſite directions; for, in the former caſe, the diagonal A F becomes equal to the ſum of the ſides AC, CF,; and in the latter, to their difference. . 51. Cor. 6. Two ſorces cannot keep a body at reſt, unleſs they are equal and in oppoſite directions. For this is the only caſe in which the diagonal, repreſenting the compound force, vaniſhes. 52. Cor. 7. In the compoſition of forces, force is loſt; for the forces repreſented by the two ſides A B, B D (Art. 45), by compoſition produce the force repreſented by A D; and the two ſides A B, BD, of a triangle, are greater than the third ſide AD. ProP. V. 53. If a body, at reſt, be acted upon at the ſame time by three forces whicl are repreſented in quantity and direction by the three ſides of a triangle, taken in order, it will remain at reſt. Let AB, BC, and CA, repreſent the quantities and c ſ directions of three forces acting at the ſame time upon a body at A; then ſince AB and BC are equivalent to AC (Art. 46); AB, BC and CA, are equivalent to ; AC AC and CA; but AC and CA, which are equal and in oppoſite directions, keep the body at reſt; therefore AB, BC, and CA, will alſo keep the body at reſt. ProOP. VI. 54. If a body be kept at reſt by three forces, and two of them be repreſented in quantity and direction by two ſides AB, BCæ, of a triangle, the third ſide, taken in order, will repreſent the quantity and direction of the other force. Since A B, BC repreſent the quantities and directions of two of the forces, and AB, BC are equivalent to AC, the third force muſt be ſuſtained by AC; therefore CA muſt repreſent the quantity and direction o the third force (Art. 51). 55. Cor. If three forces keep a body at reſt, they act in the ſame plane; becauſe the three ſides oſ a triangle are in the ſame plane (Evuc. 2. 11). ProP. VII. 56. If a body be khept at reſt by three forces, acting upon it at the ſame time, any three lines, which are in the directions of theſe forces, and form a triangle, will repreſent them. Let three forces acting in the directions AB, AC, B / è AD, keep the body A at reſt. In AB take any point. * Fig. Art. 53. CE æaea B, and through B draw BlI parallel to AC, meeting DA produced in I; then will AB, BI, and IA repreſent the three forces. For AB being taken to repreſent the force in that direction, if BI do not repreſent the force in the direction AC or Bl, let BF be taken to repreſent it; join AF; then ſince three forces keep the body at reſt, and AB, BF repreſent the quantities and directions of two of them, FA vwill repreſent the third (Art. 54), that is, FA is in the direction AD, which is impoſſible (Ruc. II. I. Cor.); therefore BI repreſents the force in the direction AC; and conſequently IA repreſents the third force (Art. 54). Any three lines, reſpectively parallel to AB, BI, IA, and forming a triangle, will be proportional to the ſides of the triangle ABI, and therefore proportional to the t hree forces. . 57. Cor. I. If a body be kept at reſt by three forces, any two of them are to each other inverſely as the ſines of the angles which the lines of their directions make with the direction of the third force. . Let ABI be a triangle whoſe ſides are in the directions of the forces; then theſe ſides repreſent the forces; and AB: BI :: ſin. BIA: ſin. BAI :: ſin. IAC: ſin. BAI :: ſin. CAD : ſin. BAD. 58. Cor. 2. Iſf a body, at reſt, be acted upon at the ſame time by three forces, in the directions of the ſides of a triangle taken in order, and any two of them be to each other inverſely as the ſines of the angles which their directions make with the direction of the third, the body will remain at reſt. For in this caſe the forces will be proportional to the three three ſides of the triangle, and conſequently they will ſuſtain each other (Art. 53). PRoOP. VIII. 59. If a body be hept at reſt by three forces, and lines be drauwn at right angles to the directions in whicli they act, sorminug a triaugle, the ſides of this triangle awill repreſent the quantities of the forces. Let AB, BC, CA be the directions in which the forces act; then the lines, AB, BC, CA will repreſent the forces (Art. 56). Draw the perpendiculars DH, B A F EI, FG, forming a triangle GHI; then ſince the four angles of the quadrilateral figure ADHE are equal to four right angles, and the angles at D and F are right angles, the remaining angles DHF, DAF are equal to two right angles, or to the two angles DHF, DHG, conſequently, the angle DAF is equal to the angle IHG. In the ſame manner it may be ſhewn, that the angles ABC, BCA are reſpectively equal to GIH, HGI; therefore the triangles ABC and GHI are equiangular; hence, the ſides about theit equal angles being proportional, the forces which are proportional to the lines AB, BC, CA, are proportional to the lines HI, IG, GH. Cor. Cor. If the lines DH, EI, FG be equally inclined to the lines DB, EC, FA, and ſorm a triangle GHI, the ſides of this triangle will repreſent the forces. ProP. IX. 60. If any number of forces, repreſented in quantit and direction by the ſides of a polygon, taken in order, act at the ſame time upon a body at reſt, they will keep it ai ręſt. Let AB, BC, CD, DE and EA (Fig. Art. 47), repreſent the forces; then ſince AB, BC, CD and DE are equivalent to AE (Art. 47); AB, BC, CD, DE, and Ed4, are equivalent to AE ant EA; that is, they will keep the body at reſt. PRroOP. X. 61. If any number of lines, taken in order, repreſent the quantities and directions of ſorces which keep a body at reſt, theſe lines will form a polygon. Let AB, BC, CD and DE repreſent forces which keep a body at reſt (Fig. Art. 47); then the point E coincides with A. If not, join AE, then AB, BC, CD and DE are equivalent to AE; and the body will be put in motion by a ſingle force AE, which is contrary to the ſuppoſition; therefore the point E coincides with A, and the lines form a polygon. This and the laſt propoſition are true when the forces act in different planes. EEE Provr. XI. 62. A ſingle force may be reſolved into any number of ſorces. Since the ſingle force AD is equivalent to the two AB, BD, it may be conceived to be made up of, or reſolved into, the tuvo AB, BD. The force AD may therefore be reſolved into as many pairs of forces as there can be triangles deſcribed upon AD, or parallelograms about it. Alſo AB, or BD, may be reſolved into two; and, by proceeding in the ſame manner, the original force may be reſolved into any number oſ others. 63. Cor. 1. If two forces are together equivalent to AD, and AB be one of them, BD is the other. 64. Cor. 2. If the force AD be reſolved into the two AB, BD, and AB be wholly loſt, or deſtroyed, the effective part of AD is repreſented in quantity and direction by BD. 65. Cor. 3. In the reſolution of forces, the whole quantity of force is increaſed. For the force repreſented by AD is reſolved into the two AB, BD, which are together greater than AD (Evc. 20. 1). Prov. ProOP. XII. 66. The effects of forces, when eſtimated in given directions, are not altered by compoſition or reſolution. Let two forces AB, BC, and the force AC which is equivalent to them both, be eſtimated in the directions Q AP, AC. Draw BD, CP parallel to AR; and CE parallel to AP. Then the force AB is equivalent to the two AD, DB; of which AD is in the direction AP, and DB in the direction AQ; in the ſame manner BC is equivalent to the two BE, EC; the former oſ which is in the direction BD or &A, and the latter in the direction EC or AP; therefore the forces AB, BC, when eſtimated in the directions AP, AQ, are equivalent to AD, EC, DB and BE; or, AD, DP, DB and BE, becauſe EC is equal to DP; and ſince DB and BE are in oppoſite directions, the part ÆB ol the force DB is deſtroyed by BE; conſequently, the forces are equivalent to AP, DE, or AP, PC. Alſo AC, when eſtimated in the propoſed directions, is equivalent to AP, PC; therefore the effective forces in the directions AP, A are the ſame, whether we eſtimate eſtimate AB and EC, in thoſe directions, or AC, which is equivalent to them. 67. Cor. When AP coincides with AC, EC alſo coincides with it, and D coincides with E. In this caſe the forces DB, BE wholly deſtroy each other; and thus, in the compoſition of forces, force is loſt. SECTION ON THE MECHANICAL POWERS. 68. ſHE mechanical powers are the moſt ſimple inſtruments uſed for the purpoſe of ſupport. ing weights, or communicating motion to bodies, anc by the combination of which, all machines, however complicated, are conſtructed. Theſe powers are ſix in number, viæ. the lever; the wheel and axle; the pulley; the inclined plane; the wedge; and the ſcrew. Before we enter upon a particular deſcription oſ theſe inſtruments and the calculation of their effects; it is neceſſary to premiſe, that when any forces are applied to them, they are themſelves ſuppoſed to be at reſt; and conſequently, that they are either without weight, or that the parts are ſo adjuſted as to ſuſtain each other. They are alſo ſuppoſed to be perfectly ſmooth; no allowance being made for the effects of adheſion. When two forces act upon each other by means of iny machine, one of them is, for the ſake of diſtinction, called the power, and the other the weight. VOL. III. D ON ON THE LEVER. 69. Def. The Lever is an inflexible rod, moveable upon a point which is called the fulerum, or center of motion. The power and weight are ſuppoſed to act in the plane in which the lever is moveable round the fulcrum, and tend to turn it in oppoſite directions. 70. The properties of the lever cannot be deduced immediately from the propoſitions laid down in the laſt ſection, becauſe the forces acting upon the lever are not applied at a point, which is always ſuppoſed to be the caſe in the compoſition and reſolution oſ forces; they may however be derived from the following principles, the truth of which will readily be admitted. AX. I. If two aqveights balance each other upon a ſtraight lever, the preſſure upon the fulcrum is equal to the ſum of the weights, whatever be the length of the lever æ. Ax. 2. If a weight be ſupported upon a lever which reſts on two fulcrums, the preſſure upon the fulcrums is equal to the whole weight. AxX. 3. Equal forces, acting per pendicularly at the extremities of equal arms of a lever, exert the ſame effort to turn the lever round. PROP. * The eſfect produced by the gravity of the lever is not taken into conſideration, unleſs it be expreſsly mentioned. PROP. XIII. 71. If two equal weights act perpendicularly upon a ſtraight lever, the effort to put it in motion, round any fulcrum, will be the ſame as if they acted together at the middle point between them. Let A and B be two equal weights, acting perpendicularly upon the lever FB, whoſe fulcrum is F. 8 C A bò3 343-585 r5 Biſect AB in C; make CEæCPF; and at E ſuppoſe anot her fulerum to be placed. Then ſince the two weights A and B are ſupported by E and F, and theſe fulcrums are ſimilarly ſituated with reſpect to the weights, each ſuſtains an equal preſſure; and therefore the weight ſuſtained by E is equal to half the ſum of the weights. Now let the weights 4 and B be placed at C, the middle point between 4 and B, and conſequent ly the middle point between Æ and F; then ſince E and F ſupport the whole weight C, and are ſimilarly ſituated with reſpect to it, the fulerum E ſupports half the weight; that is, the preſſure upon E is the ſame, whether the weights are placed at A and B, or collected in C, the middle point between them; and therefore, the effort to put the lever in motion round F, is the ſame on either ſuppoſition. D 2 72. Cor. 72. Cor. If a weight be formed into a cylinder AB (Fig. Art. 73) which is every where of the ſame denſity, and placed parallel to the horizon, the effort of any part AD, to put the whole in motion round C, is the ſame as if this part were collected at E, the middle point of AD. For the weight A D may be ſuppoſed to conſiſt of pairs of equal weights, equally diſtant from the middle point. What is here affirmed of weights, is true of any forces which are proportional to the weights, and act in the ſame directions. PROP. XIV. 73. Tuo weights, or two forces, acting perpendicularly upon a ſtraight lever, will balance each other, when they are reciprocally proportional to their diſtances from the fulcrum. Caſe 1. When the weights act on contrary ſides of the fulcrum. Let x and γ be the two weights, and let them be formed into the cylinder AB, which is every where oſ the ſame denſity. Biſect AB in C; then this cylinder A E D c F B ùi will balance itſelf upon the fulcrum C (Art. 72). Divide AB into two parts in D, ſo that AD: DB :: æ: 9, and the weights of AD and DB will be reſpectively æ and y; biſect AD in E and DB in F; then ſince AD and DB Ekeep the lever at reſt, they will keep it at reſt when vhen they are collected at E and F (Art. 72); that is, x, when placed at E, will balance y, when placed at F; and æ: y:: AD: BD :: AB-BD : ABAD :: 2a CB-2 BF : 2 AC-Q2AE :: 2CF : 2 CE :: CF: CE. Caſe 2. When the two forces act on the ſame ſide of the center of motion. Let AB be a lever whoſe fulcrum is C, A and B two weights acting perpendicularly upon it; and let Æ: B:: BC: AC, then theſe weights will balance each other as appears by the former caſe. Now ſuppoſe a power ſufficient to ſuſtain a weight equal to the ſum oſ the weights A and B, to be applied at C, in a direc-  F 9 tion oppoſite to that in which the weights act; then will this power ſupply the place of the fulcrum (Art. 70. Ax. 1.); alſo, a fulcrum placed at A, or B, and ſuſtaining a weight A, or B, will ſupply the place of the body there, and the equilibrium will remain. Let B be the center of motion; then we have a ſtraight lever whoſe center of motion is B, and the two forces A and A- B, acting perpendicularly upon it at the points A and C, ſuſtain each other; alſo, A: B:: BC: AC; therefore A: AB :: BC: BA. i 74. Cor. 1. If two weights, or two forces, acting perpendicularly on the arms of a ſtraight lever, keep each other in equilibrio, they are inverſely as their diſtances from the center of motion. For the weights will balance when they are in that proportion, and if the proportion be altered by increaſing or diminiſhing one of the weights, it's effort to to turn the lever round will be altered, or the equiliDrium will be deſtroyed. 75. Cor. 2. Since A: B:: BC: AC when there is an equilibrium upon the lever AB, whoſe fulcrum is C, by multiplying extremes and means, A x AC æ B x BC. 76. Cor. 3. When the power and weight act on the ſame ſide of the fulcrum, and keep each other in equilibrio, the weight ſuſtained by the fulcrum is equal to the difference bet ween the power and the weight. 77. Cor. 4. In the common balance, the arms of the lever are equal; conſequently, the power and weight, or two weights, which ſuſtain each other, are equal. In the falſe balance, one arm is longer than the other; therefore the weight, which is ſuſpended at this arm, is proportionally leſs than the weight which it ſuſtains at the other. 78. Cor. 5. If the ſame body be weighed at the two ends of a falſe balance, it's true weight is a mean proportional between the apparent weights. Call the true weight x, and the appare nt weights, when it is ſuſpended at A and B, a and b reſpectively; then a: æ:: AC: BC, and x: b:: AC: BC; therefore x :: æ : b. 79. Cor. 6. If a weight C be placed upon a lever which is ſupported upon two props A and B in an horiæontal poſition, the preſſure upon A: the preſſure upon B:: BC: AC. For if B be conceived to be the fulerum, we have this proportion, the weight ſuſtained by A: the weighſ C C:: BC: AB; in the ſame manner, if A be as the fulcrum, then the weight C: the tained by B:: AB: CA; therefore, ex æquo, ſuſtained by A: the weight ſuſtained by B: 80. Cor. 7. If a given weight P be m the graduated arm of a ſtraight lever, the which it will balance at A, is proportion the diſtance at which the given weight acts. When there is an equilibrium, W x Ac (Art. 75); and AC and P are invariable Woc DC (Alg. Art. 199). PRrOP. XV. 81. If tuo forces, acting upon the arms o heep it at reſt, they are to each other inverſely pendiculars drawn from the center of motion to t. in which the forces act. Caſe 1. Let two forces, A and B, act per upon the arms CA, CB, of the leverfulcrum is G, and keep each other at reſt. BC to D and make CDæ CA; then the to move the lever round C, will be the ſame, whether it be ſuppoſed to act perpendicularly at the extremity of the arm CA, or CD (Art. 70. Ax. 3); and on the latter ſuppoſition, ſince there is an equilibrium, A: B 2 CB: CD (Art. 74); therefore A: B:: CB: CA. Caſe 2. When the directions AD, BH, in which the forces act, are not perpendicular to the arms. Take AD and BH, to repreſent the forces; drau CM and CN at right angles to thoſe directions; alſo drav AF perpendicular, and DF parallel to AC, and complete the parallelogram GF; then the force AD is equivalent to the two AF, AG, of which, AG acts in the direction of the arm, and therefore can have no effect in cauſing, or preventing any angular motion in the lever about C. Let BH be reſolved, in the ſame manner, into the two BI, BK, of which BI is perpendicular to, and BK in the direction of the arm CB; then BX will have no efſect in cauſing, or preventing any angular motion in the lever about C; and ſince the lever is kept at reſt, AF and BI, which produce this eſfect, and act perpendicularly upon the arms, are to each other, by the 1ſt caſe, inverſely as the arms; that is, AF: BI :: CB: CA, or AF x CAæ BIX CB. Alſo in the ſimilar j triangles triangles ADF, ACM, AF: AD :: CM: C4 and AF x CAæAD xCM; in the ſame manner, BIX CBEæ BH X CN; therefore AD x CMæ BH x CN, and AD : BH :: CN: CM. 82. Cor. 1. Let a body IK be moveable about the center G, and two forces act upon it at A and B l D in the directions AD, BH, which coincide with the plane ACB; join AC, CB; then this body may be conſidered as a lever ACB, and drawing the perpendiculars CM, CN, there will be an equilibrium, when the force acting at A: the force acting at B:: CN: CM. 83. Cor. 2. The effort of the force A, to turn the lever round, is the ſame, at whatever point in the direction MD it is applied; becauſe the perpendicular CM remains the ſame. 84. Cor. 3. Since CA: CM :: rad.: ſin. CAM, cν-dx fin. CAM ,; and in the ſame manner, NæCxſin CBN therefore, when there is an equilibrium, the power at A: the weight at B:: CBXx ſin. CEN CAXx ſin. caAM CBx fin. CEN: rad. . rad. CAx fin. CAM. 85. Cor. . Cor. 4. If the lever ACB lirections AD, BH, parallel, A ν l A 1ſe, in this caſe, ſin. CAMæ ſin. ence alſo, Ax ACæ B x BC. .Cor. 5. If two weights balan ight lever in any one poſition, other in any other poſition of its act in parallel directions, an are invariable. .Cor. 6. If a man, balanced lles, preſs upwards by means of in the beam, except that from nded, he will preponderate. t the action upwards take plac by the reaction downwards, F. c the ſituation E; and the effec DA, AE, DE conſtituted o drawing EF perpendicular to CA produced, as if the ſcale were applied at F (Art. 83); conſequently the weight, neceſſary to maintain the equilibrium, is greater than if the ſcale were ſuffered to hang freely from 4, in the proportion of CF: CA. 88. Cor. 7. Let AD repreſent a wheel, hearing a weight at it's center C; AB an obſtacle over which it ECE F j ; is to be moved by a force acting in the direction CE; join CA, draw CD perpendicular to the horizon, and from A draw AG, AF, at right angles to CE, CD. Then CA may be conſidered as a lever whoſe center of motion is 4, CD the direction in which ihe weight acts, and CE the direction in which the power s applied; and there is an equilibrium on this lever when the power: the weight :: AF:: AG. Suppoſing the wheel, the weight, and the obſtacle given, the power is the leaſt when AG is the greateſt; that is, when CE is perpendicular to CA, or parallel to the tangent at A. 89. Cor. 8. Let two forces acting in the directions AD, BH, upon the arms of the lever ACB, keep each other in equilibrio; produce DA and l B till they meet in P; join CP, and draw CL parallel to to PB; then will PL, LC repreſent the two forces, and PC the preſſure upon the fulcrum. For, if PC be made the radius, CMand CN are the ſines of the angles CPM, CPN, or CPL, PCL; and PL: LC: ſin. PCL: ſin. LPC:CNCM,; therefore PL, LC, repreſent the quantities and directions of the two forces, which may be ſuppoſed to be applied at P (Art 83), and which are ſuſtained by the reaction of the fulcrum; conſequently, CP repreſents the quantity and direction of that reaction (Art. 54), or PC repreſents the preſſure upon the fulerum. PrOPr. XVI. 90. In a combination of ſtraight levers, AB, CD, whoſe centers of motion are E and F, if they act perpendicularly upon each other, and the directions in which the power and weight are applied be alſo perpendicular to the arms, there is an equilibrium when P: W :: EBXF D : EAXFC. For, For, the power at A: the weight at B, or C:: EB EA; and the weight at C: the weight at D:: FD :FC; therefore, P: W:: EBX FD: EAX EC. By the ſame method we may find the proportion between the power and the weight, when there is an equilibrium, in any other combination of levers. 91. Cor. If E and F be conſidered as the power and weight, A and D the centers of motion, we have, as before, E: F:: FDXBA: AEX CD. Hence the preſſure upon E: the preſſure upon F:: FDX BA :AEXCD. PROP. XVII. 92. Any weights uill heep each other in equilibrio on the arms of a ſtraight lever, when the products, which ariſe from multiplying each weight by its diſtance from the fulcrum, are equal, on each ſide of the fulcrum. The weights A, B, D, and E, F, will balance each other upon the lever AF whoſe fulerum is C, if Ax ACAH BX BCAD X DCE EX EC  Fx FC. A PX D c ꝑ Xx F ſ A b Fi l il c In CF take any point X, and let the weights r, s, t, placed at X, balance reſpectively, A, B, D; then Ax ACær  æx XC; BXBCESXXC; DXDCEEL X XC, (Art. 85); or, AxACBX BC DX DCæÆr 5tt XXC. In the ſame manner, let ꝓ and q, placed at T, balance - balance reſpectively, E and F; then pFꝗxITCæE XEC-FX FC; but by the ſuppoſition A XAC-B XBC  DX DC E EX EC  F X FC; therefore Fπo-1XXCpaqx IC, and the weights r, s, t, placed at X, balance the weights p, q, placed at T; alſo A, B, D, balance the former weights, and E, F, the latter; conſequently A, B, D, vwill balance Æ and F. 93. Cor. 1. If the weights do not act in parallel directions, inſtead of the diſtances we muſt ſubſtitute the perpendiculars, drawn from the center of motion, upon the directions. (Vid. Art. 81.) 94. Cor. 2 In Art. 8o the lever is ſuppoſed to be without weight, or the arms AC, C D to balance each other: In the formation of the common ſteelyard the longer arm CB is heavier than CA, and allowance muſt be made for this exceſs. Let the moveable weight P, when placed at E, keep the lever at reſt; then when æ and P are ſuſpended upon the lever, and the whole remains at reſt, Æ ſuſtains P, and alſo a weight whieh would ſupport P when placed at E; therefore Wχ ACæPXDCHPX ECæ PX DE ; and ſince AC and P are invariable, Woc ED; the graduation muſt thereſore begin from E; and if P, when laced at F, ſupport a weight of one ike FG. GD, &c. equal to each oth and when P is placed at G it will inds; when at D it will ſupport three ON THE WHEEL AND AXLE. bi The uwheel and axle conſiſts of two tAB moveable about it's axis CO, and attached to the cylinder that the a hrough its center, and is perpendiculo power is applied at the circumferenc uſually in the direction of a tangent to ght is raiſed by a rope which winds ro a plane at right angles to the axis. PROP. XVIII. 96. There is an equilibrium upon the wheel and axle, when the power is to the weight, as the radius of the axle to the radius of the wheel. The effort of the power to turn the machine round the axis, muſt be the ſame at whatever point in the axle the wheel is fixed; ſuppoſe it to be removed, and placed in ſuch a ſituation that the power and weight may act in the ſame plane, and let CA, CB, be the radii of the wheel and axle, at the extremities of which the power and weight act; then the machine becomes a lever ACB, whoſe center of motion is C; and ſince the radii CA, CB, are at right angles to AP and B, we have P: W:: CB: CA (Art. 82). 97. Cor. 1. If the power act in the direction Aꝓ, draw CE perpendicular to Ap, and there will be an equilibrium when P: W :: CB: CE (Art. 82). The ſame concluſion may alſo be obtained by reſolving the power into two, one perpendicular to AC, and the other parallel to it. . 98. Cor. 98. Cor. 2. If a2R be the thickneſs of the ropes by which the power and weight act, there will be an equilibrium when P: W:: CBR: CAR, ſince the power and weight muſt be ſuppoſed to be applied in the axes of the ropes. The ratio of the power to the weight is greater in this caſe than the former; for if any quantity be added to the terms of a ratio of leſs inequality, that ratio is increaſed (Alg. Art. 162). 99. Cor. 3. If the plane of the wheel be inclined to the axle at the angle EOD, draw ED perpendicular Æ to CD; and conſidering the wheel and axle as one maſs, there is an equilibrium when P: W:: the radius of the axle: ED. 100. CoOr. 4. In a combination of wheels and axles, where the circumference of the firſt axle is applied to the circumference of the ſecond wheel, by means of a ſtring, or by tooth and pinion, and the ſecond axle to the third wheel, &c. there is an equilibrium when P: W :: the product of the radii of all the axles: the product of the radii of all the wheels. (See Art. 90). 101. Cor. 5. When the power and weight act in parallel directions, and on oppoſite ſides of the axis, the preſſure upon the axis is equal to their ſum; and when they act on the ſame ſide, to their difference. In other caſes the preſſure may be eſtimated by Art. 89. VoL. III. E ; ON ON THE PULLEY. . Def. A Pulley is a ſmall wheel it's center, in the circumference o is formed to admit a rope or flexible pulley is ſaid to be fixed, or moveab the center of motion is fixed or move Propr. XIX. In the ſingle fixed pulley, there is an he power and weight are equal. a power and weight P, H, equal to e means of a perfectly flexible rope Pi over the fixed pulley ADB; then, ; exerted at D in the direction DA an equal force is exerted by the wei n DB , theſe forces will therefore reſt. Cor. 1. Converſely, when there is al power and weight are equal *. Cor. 2. The propoſiton is true i tion the power is applied; the only by changing it's direction, is in the center of motion. (See Art. 106.) Prop. XX. 104. In the ſingle moveable pulley, parallel, the power is to the weight as i A ſtring fixed at E, paſſes und pulley A, and over the fixed pulley. B annexed to the center of the pulleyis applied at P. Then ſince the ſtrii . See Art. 74. 4 In this and the following propoſitions, th iue ſuppoſed to be in equilibrio. E 2 ction in which the weigh ; and they are equally refore they ſuſtain it equ ſuſtains half the weighſ B ſuſtains, P ſuſtains ( P: W: 1I: 2. ProOP. XXI. In general, in the ſingle to the weight, as radius 1 whicli either ſtring makes weight acts. W be the direction in wh BD till it meets AW in ( angles to AC, meeting B be taken to repreſent the power at P, or the power which acts in the direction DB, CA vill repreſent thal part of it which is effective in ſuſtaining the weight, and AD uill be counteracted by an equal and oppoſite force, ariſing from the tenſion of the ſtring CE; alſo, the two ſtrings are equally effective in ſuſtaining the weight; therefore 2 AC will repreſent the whole weight ſuſtained; conſequently, P: W:: CD: 2AC :: rad. : 2coſ. DCA. 106. Cor. 1. Iſf the figure be inverted, and E and B be conſidered as a power and weight which ſuſtain each other upon the fixed pulley 4, W is the preſſure upon the center of motion; conſequently the power: the preſſure:: radius: a coſ. DCA. 107. Cor. 2. When the ſtrings are parallel, the angle DCA vaniſhes, and it's coſine becomes the radius; in this caſe, the power: the preſſure:: 1: 2. PrOP. XXII. 108. In a ſyſtem where the ſame ſtring paſſes round any number of pulleys, and the paris of it between the pulleys are parallel, P: W : I the number of ſtrings at the lower block. Since the parallel parts, or ſtrings at the lower block, are in the direction in which the weight acts, they exactly ſupport the whole weight; alſo, the tenſion in every point of theſe ſtrings is the ſame, otherwiſe the ſyſtem would not be at reſt, and conſequently each of them ſuſtains an equal weight; whence it ollows that, if there be n ſtrings rt of the weight; therefore, P ſ e weight, or P  : I : I 109. Cor. If two ſyſtems of this which there are m and n ſtrings, ver blocks, P: Æ :: I: mn. PRrOP. XXIII. 110. In a ſyſtem where each pulley hangs by a ſeparate siring, and the ſtrings are parallel, P: W :: 1: that power of a whoſe index is the number of moveable pulleys. In this ſyſtem, a ſtring paſſes over the fixed pulley 4, and under the moveable pulley B, and is fixed at E; another ſtring is fixed at B, paſſes under the moveable pulley C, and is fixed at F; &c. in ſuch a manner that the ſtrings are parallel. Then, by Art. 104, when there is an equilibrium, P: the weight at B:: 1: 2 the weight at B: the weight at C:: 1: 2 the weight at C: the weight at D :: 1: 2 &c. Comp. Comp. P: W :: I: ax a x 2 x & many factors as there are moveabl when there are u ſuch pulleys, P: l 11I. Cor. 1. The power and ſuſtained at A, E, F, G, &c. whicl ſpectively, a P, P, 2P, 4P, &c. 112. Cor. 2. When the ſtrings a W :: rad.: 2 coſ. of the angle whiſ with the direction in which the w caſe (Art. 105). . PRoOPr. XXIV. 113. In a ſyſtem of n pulleys eacl rate ſtring, where the ſtrings are attat is repreſented in the annexed figure, P A ſtring, fixed to the weight at pulley G, and is again fixed to the ſtring, fixed at E, paſſes over the pulley B, and is fixed to the pulley 4; &c. in ſuch a manner that the ſtrings are parallel: Then, if P be the power, the weight ſuſtained by the ſtring DA is P; alſo the preſſure downwards upon 4, or the weight which the ſtring AB ſuſtains, is 2 P (Art. 107); therefore the ſtring ÆB ſuſtains 2 P; &c. and the whole weight ſuſtained is P 2P  4 P4-&c. Hence, P: W :: I: I 4 2 44 F&c. to n terms :: I: 21 (Alg. Art. 222). 114. Cor. 1. Both the power and the weight are ſuſtained at H. 115. Cor. 2. When the ſtrings are not parallel, the power in each caſe, is to the correſponding preſſure upon the center of the pulley:: rad.: 2 coſ. of the angle made by the ſtring with the direction in which the weight acts (Art. 106). Alſo, by the reſolution of forces, the power in each caſe, or preſſure upon the former pulley, is to the weight it ſuſtains:: rad.: coſ. of the angle made bDy the ſtring with the direction in which the weight acts. ON THE INCLINED PLANE. PrOP. XXV. 116. If a body act ùpon a perfectly hard and ſimooth plane, the effect produced upon the plane is in a direction per pendicular to it's ſurface, Caſe Caſe 1. When the body acts perpendicularly upon the plane, it's force is wholly effective in that direction; ſince there is no cauſe to prevent the effect, or to alter its direction. Caſe 2. When the direction in which the body acts is oblique to the plane, reſolve it's force into two, one parallel, and the other perpendicular, to the plane the former of theſe can produce no effect upon the plane, becauſe there is nothing to oppoſe it in the direction in which it acts (See Art. 29); and the latter is wholly effective (by the firſt caſe); that is, the effect produced by the force is in a direction perpendicular to the plane. 117. Cor. The reaction of the plane is in a direc. tion perpendicular to it's ſurface (Art. 32). PROP. XXVI. 118. When a body is ſuſtained upon a plane which is inclined to the horizon, P: W :: the ſine of the plane's inclination : the ſine of the angle which the direction of the power makes with a perpendicular to the plane. Let BC be parallel to the horizon, BA a plane ĩnlined to it; P a body, ſuſtained at any point upon the the plane by a power acting in the direction PV. From P draw PC perpendicular to BA, meeting BC in C and from C drdw CV perpendicular to BC, meeting PV in V*. Then the body P is kept at reſt by three forces which act upon it at the ſame time; the power, in the direction PV; gravity, in the direction VC; and the reaction of the plane, in the direction CP (Art. 117); theſe three forces are therefore properly repreſented by the three lines PV, VC and CP (Art. 56); oour P: W:: PVVC ſin. PCV: ſin. VPC; and in the ſimilar triangles APC, ABC (Euc. 8. 6), the angles ACP, and CBA are equal; therefore P: i:ſin. ABC : ſin. VPC. 119. Cor. 1. When PV coincides with PA, or the power acts parallel to the plane, P: Æ :: PA: AC i AC: AB. 120. CoOr. 2. When PV coincides with Po, or the power acts parallel to the baſe, P: Æ:: Pu: oC :: AC : CB; becauſe the triangles PUC, ABC are ſimilar. 121. Cor. 3. When PV is parallel to CV, the power ſuſtains the whole weight. 122. CoOr. 4. Since P: W :: ſin. ABC: ſin. VPC, by multiplying extremes and means, Px ſin. VPCÆ W x ſin. ABC; and if , and the ſine of the ABC I be invariable, Poc VPC (Alg. Art. 206) therefore P is the leaſt, when is the leaſt, or ſin. I ſlin. VPC VPC the greateſt; that is, when ſin. VPC becomes the radius, or PV coincides with PA. Alſo, P is indefinitely great when ſin. VPC vaniſhes; that is, when the power acts perpendicularly to the plane. 123. Cor.  That PV, CV are in the ſame plane, appears from Art. 55. 123. Cor. 5. If P and the L ABC be given, W oc ſin. VPC; therefore W will be the greateſt when ſin. VPC is the greateſt, that is, when PV coincides with PA. Alſo, W vaniſhes when the ſin. VPC vaniſhes, or PV coincides with PC. 124. Cor. 6. The power: the preſſure :: PV PC : ſin. PCV: ſin. PVC :: ſin. ABC: ſin. PVC. 125. Cor. 7. When the power acts parallel to the plane, the power: the preſſure :: PA: PC :: AC: BC. 126. Cor. 8. When the power acts parallel to the baſe, the power: the preſſure:: Pu: PC:: AC: AB. 127. COr. 9. PXx ſin. PVC Æ the preſſure x ſin. ABC; and when P and the æ ABC are given, the preſſure c ſin. PVC; therefore, the preſſure will be the greateſt whem PV is parallel to the baſe. 128. Cor. 10. When two ſides of a triangle, taken in order, repreſent the quantities and directions oſ two forces which are ſuſtained by a third, the remaining ſide, taken in the ſame order, will repreſent the quantity and direction of the third force (Art. 54). Hence, if we ſuppoſe PV to revolve round P, when it falls between Px, which is parallel to C, and PE, the direction of gravity remaining unaltered, the direction of the reaction muſt be changed, or the body muſt be ſuppoſed to be ſuſtained againſt the under ſurface of the plane. When it falls between PE and x P produced, the direction of the power muſt be changed. And when it falls between xP produced, and PC, the directions of both the power and reaction muſt be different from what they were ſuppoſed to be in the proof of the propoſition; that is, the body muſt be ſuſtained againſt the under ſurface of the plane, by a force which acts in the direction VP. 129. Cor. 11. If the weights P, W, he planes AC, CB, which e CD, by means of a ſtring the pulley C and is parallel 1: AC : BC. : the tenſion of the ſtringi e ſuſtaining power, in eacl calling this power x, :æ: AC: CD (Aſt. 1I9) W :: CD:CB; W :: AC: CB. ON THE WEDGE. ſ. A Weaedge is a triangula ated by the motion of a itſelf, upon a ſtraight line e of its angular points *.  See alſo Evc. B. XI. Def. 13 Knives, ſwords, coulters, nails, &c. are inſtruments of this kind. The wedge is called iſoſceles or ſcalene, according as the ſection of it, made by a plane perpendicular to it's ſides, is an iſoſceles or ſcalene triangle. PROP. XXVII. 131. If two equal forces act upon the ſides of an iſoſ celes wedge at equal angles of inclination, and a force aci perpendicularly upon the back, they will heep the wed;ge at reſt, when the force upon the back is to the ſum of tli ſorces upon the ſides, as the product of the ſine of half the vertical angle of the wedge and the ſine of the angle al which the directions of the forces are inclined to the ſides, to the ſquare of radius. Let AVB repreſent a ſection of the wedge, made by a plane perpendicular to it's ſides; draw VC perpendicular to AB; DC, dG, in the directions of the forces upon the ſides; and CE, Ce, at right angles to AV, BV; join Ee, meeting CV in F. Then, in the triangles VCA, VCB, ſince the angles VCA, CAV, are reſpectively equal to VCB, VBC, and VC is common to both, ACæCB, and the æCVA  L.CVB. Again, in the triangles ACD, BC d, the the angles DAC, CDA, are equal to the angles CBd, BdC, and ACÆ BC; therefore, DCEÆdC. In the ſame manner it may be ſhewn that CEæÆCe, and AE Be; hence the ſides AV, BV, of the triangle AVB, are cut proportionally in E and e; therefore E e is parallel to AB (Evuc. 2.6), or perpendicular to CV; alſo, ſince CEæ Ce and CF is common to the rightangled triangles CEF, CeF, w have E Fæ e F (Evuc. 47. 1). Now ſfince DC and dcC are equal, and in the directions of the forces upon the ſides, they will repreſent them; reſolve DC into two, DE, EC, ol which DE produces no effect upon the wedge, and EC, which is effective (Art. 116), does not wholly oppoſe the power, or force upon the back; reſolve EC therefore into two, EF, parallel to the back, and FC perpendicular to it, the latter of which is the only force which oppoſes the power. In the ſame manner it appears that e F, FC are the only effective parts of dC, of which FC oppoſes the power, and e s is counteracted by the equal and oppoſite force EF; hence if 2CF repreſent the power, the wedge will be kept at reſt æ; that is, when the force upon the back: the ſum of the reſiſtances upon the ſides :: 2CF: DCAdC:: 2CF: 2DC:: CF: DC; and CF: CE:: ſin. CEF : rad. :: ſin. CVE: rad. CE: DC:: ſin. CDE: 1ad. Comp. CF: DC :: ſin. CVE x ſin. CDE : rad. n 132. Cor. 1. The forces do not ſuſtain each other, becauſe the parts DE, de are not counteracted. 133. Cor. æ The directions of the three ſorces muſt meet in a point, otherwiſe a rotatory motion will be given to the wedge. 133. Cor. 2. If the reſiſtances act perpendicularly upon the ſides of the wedge, the angle COE become: a right angle, and P: the ſum of the reſiſtances: : ſin. CVEx rad.: rad.? :: ſin. CVE: rad.:: AC: AV. 134. Cor. 3. If the directions of the reſiſtances be perpendicular to the back, the angle CDE æ LCVE, and P: the ſum of the reſiſtances: ſin. CVÆſ2: rad.1: AC2: AVE. 135. Cor. 4. When the reſiſtances act parallel to the back, ſin. COAæ ſin. CAV, and P: the ſum of the reſiſtances: : ſin. CVA x ſin. CAV : rad. :: CAX CV AV2::CEX AVEÆ: AV2:: CE: AV. 136. Cor. 5. In the demonſtration of the propoſition it has been ſuppoſed that the ſides of the wedge are perfectly ſmooth; if on account of the friction, or by any other means, the reſiſtances are wholly efſective, join Dd, which will cut CV at right angles in γ, and reſolve DC, dC into Dy, yC, dy, yC, of which Dy and dy deſtroy each other, and 2yC ſuſtains the power. Hence, the power: the ſum of the reſiſtances :: 25C: aC :: yC: DC :: ſin. CDy or DCA  rad. 137. Cor.  By ſimilar triangles, CE: CA  CV: AV; therefore CE æ AVICAXCV. ON THE WEDGE. 81 137. Cor. 6. If Ee cut DC and dC in x and 2, the forces, æC, 2 C, when wholly effective, and the forces DC, dG, acting upon ſmooth ſurfaces, will ſuſtain the ſame power 2 CF. 138. Cor. 7. If from any point P in the ſide AV, PC be drawn and the reſiſtance upon the ſide be repreſented by it, the effect upon the wedge will be the ſame as before; the only difference will be in the part PE which is ineffective. 139. Cor. 8. If DC be taken to repreſent the reſiſtance on one ſide, and ꝓC, greater or leſs than ãc, repreſent the reſiſtance on the other, the wedge cannot be kept at reſt by a power acting upon the back; becauſe, on this ſuppoſition, the forces which are parallel to the back are unequal. This propoſition and it's corollaries have been deduced from the actual reſolution of the forces, for the purpoſe of ſhewing what parts are loſt, or deſtroyed by their oppoſition to each other; the ſame concluſions may, however, be very conciſely and eaſily obtained from Art. 142. PROP. XXVIII. 140. When three forces, acting per pendicularly upon the ſides of a ſcalene wedge, heep each other in equilibrio, they are proportional to thoſe ſides. π V d Let GI, H I, DI, the directions of the forces, VOL. III. F meet meet in I, then ſince the forces keep each other at reſt, they are proportional to the three ſides of a triangle which are reſpectively perpendicular to thoſe directions (Art. 59); that is, to the three ſides of the wedge. 141. Cor. 1. If the lines of direction, paſſing through the points of impact, do not meet in a point, the wedge will have a rotatory motion communicated to it; and this motion will be round the center of gravity of the wedge. (See Art. 184.) 142. Cor. 2. When the directions of the forces are not perpendicular to the ſides, the effective parts muſt be found, and there will be an equilibrium when thoſe parts are to each other as the ſides of the wedge. ON THE SCREW. 143. Def. The Screw is a mechanical power, which may be conceived to be generated in the following manner: Let a ſolid and a hollow cylinder of equal diameters be taken, and let ABC be a right. angled plane triangle whoſe baſe BC is equal to the circumference of the ſolid cylinder; apply the triangle to the convex ſurface oſ this cylinder in ſuch a manner that the baſe BC may coincide with the circumference of the baſe of the cylinder, and BA uill ſform a ipiral thread on it's ſurſace. By applying to the cylinder, triangles, in ſucceſſion, ſimilar and equal to ABC, in ſuch a manner that their baſes may be parallel to BC, the ſpira thread may be continued; and ſuppoſing this thread tc havt have thickneſs, or the cylinder to be protuberan it falls, the external ſcrew will be formed, in wh A C diſtance between two contiguous threads, meal a direction parallel to the axis of the cylinder, Again, let the triangles be applied in the ſame to the concave ſurface of the hollow cylind where the thread falls let a groove be made, ⸗ internal ſcrew will be formed. The two ſcrew thus exactly adapted to each other, the ſolid or cylinder, as the caſe requires, may be moved riiiirtiſtũ i ùll ll the common axis, by a lever perpendicular axis; and a motion will be produced in the c of the axis, by means of the ſpiral thread. F 2 PrOP. XXIX. 144. When there is an equilibrium upon the ſcretw, I :W : the di iſtance bettveen tiwo contiguous threads, meaſured iu a direction parallel to the axis: the circumferenc of the circle whicl the power deſcribes. Let BCD repreſent a ſection of the ſcrev made by a plane perpendicular to it's axis, CE a part of the ſpiral thread upon which the weight is ſuſtained; then CE is a portion of an inclined plane, whoſe height is the diſtance between two threads, and baſe equal to the circumference BCD. Call F the power which acting at C in the plane BCD, and in the direction CI perpendicular to AC, will ſuſtain the weight , or prevent the motion of the ſcrew round the axis; then ſince the weight is ſuſtained upon the inclined plane CE by a power F acting parallel to it's baſe, E: W: the height: the baſe (Art. 120):: the diſtance between two threads: the circumference BCD. Novw, inſtead of ſuppoſing the power F to act at C, let a power P act perpendicularly at G, on the ſtraight lever GCA, whoſe center of motion is A, and let this power produce the ſame efſect at C that F does; then, by the property of the the lever, P: F :: CA: GA :: the circumference BCD: the circumference FGH. MWe have therefore theſe two proportions, F: W :: the diſtance between two threads : BCD P: F :: BCD : FGH comp. P: W:: the diſtance between two threads: FGH 145. Cor. 1. In the proof of this propoſition the whole weight is ſuppoſed to be ſuſtained at one point C of the ſpiral thread; if we ſuppoſe it to be diſperſed over the whole thread, then, by the propoſition, the power at G neceſſary to ſuſtain any part of the weight : that part:: the diſtance between two threads: the circumference of the circle FGH; therefore the ſum of all theſe powers, or the whole power: the ſum of all the correſponding weights, or the whole weight,: : the diſtance between two threads: the circumference of the circle FGH (Alg. Art. 183). 146. Cor. 2. Since the power, neceſſary to ſuſtain a given weight, depends upon the diſtance between two threads and the circumference FG H, if theſe remain unaltered, the power is the ſamę, whether the weight is ſuppoſed to be ſuſtained at C, or at a point upon the thread nearer to, or farther from, the axis of the cylinder. 147. Some Authors have deduced the properties of the mechanical powers immediately from the Third Law of Motion, contending that if the power and weight be ſuch as would ſuſtain each other, and the machine be put into motion, the momenta of the power and weight are equal; and conſequently, that the power x the velocity of the power æ the weighſ x the x the velocity of the weight; or the power's velocity : the wcight's velocity :: the weight : the poter. Though this concluſion be juſt, the reaſoning by which it is attempted to be proved is inadmiſſible, becauſe the Third Law of Motion relates to the action of one body immediately upon another (Art. 36). It my however be deduced from the foregoing propoſitions; and as it is, in many cales, the ſimpleſt method of eſtimating the power of a machine, it may not be impioper to eſtabi iſh is truth. In the application of the rule, two things muſt be attended to: 1ſt. We muſt eſtimate the velocity oſ the power or weight in the direction in which it acts. adly. We muſt eſtimate that part only of the power or weight which is cfſective. I heſe two conſiderations are ſuggeſted by the Second Law of Motion, according to which, motion is communicated in the direction of the force impreſſed, and is proportional to that force. PrOP. XXX. 148. The velocity of a body in any one direction AB being given, to eſtimate it's velocity in any other direction b. Suppoſe the motion of Æ to be produced by a force acting in the direction BP, by means of a ſtring which paſſes over a pulley at P; produce PB to O, making PO  PA; join AO; then OB is the ſpace which meaſures the approach of Ato P. Now let the pulley be removed to ſuch a diſtance that the angle at P may be conſidered as evaneſcent, and the power will always act in the the ſame direction BP; alſo, the angles at A and C are equal; and they are right angles, becauſe the three angles of the triangle APO are equal to two right angles, and the angle at P vaniſhes; therefore, the ſpace deſcribed in the direction OP, or BP, is determined by drawing AO perpendicular to OP. If the ſpace deſcribed in the direction æy, which is parallel to OP, be required, produce AO to x, and from B draw B at right angles to æy; then the figure OByx is a parallelogram, and OBæ xy the ſpace required. Alſo, if the motion in the direction AB be uniform, the motion in the direction BP, or æy, is uniform; ſince AB : OB :: rad.: coſ. ABO. Hence, the velocity in the direction AB: the velocity in the direction BP :: AB: OB (Aſt. 11). PROP. XXXI. 149. If a power and weight ſuſtain each other on any machine, and the whole be put in motion, the velocity of the power : the velocity of the weight :: the weight : the wer. . souve Caſe Caſe 1. Iu the lever ACB, let a power and wei cting in the directions AD, BH, ſuſtain each ot nd let the machine be moved uniformly round center G, through a very ſmall angle ACa: Joir Bb; draw CM, ax, at right angles tro MD; and by, at right angles to NB; then A's velocity velocity :: Ax : By (Art. 148). Now the tria Axa, MCA are ſimilar; becauſe LxAC æ L⸗ 4 LMCA (Evuc. 32. 1), and Æ4aACæ L4 therefore, LxAa æ LMC A; and the angles at M x are right angles; conſequently, the remaining : are equal; and Ax: Aa :: CM: alſo, in the ſim. As ACa, BCb, Aa: Bb:: CA: and in the ſim. As Bby, BCN, Bb: By :: CB: by compoſition, Aæ: By: CM: CN :: the we the power (Art. 81); or the power's velocity weights velocity: : the weight: the power. Caſe 2. In the wheel aud axle, if the power be made to deſcribe a ſpace equal to the circumference of the wheel with an uniform motion, the weight will be uniformly raiſed through a ſpace equal to the circumference of the axle; hence, the power's velocity: the weights velocity:: the circumſerence of the wheel : the circumference of the axle:: the radius of the wheel : the radius of the axle :: the weight : the power (Art. 96). Caſe 3. In the ſiugle fixed pulley, if the weight be uniformly raiſed 1 inch, the power will uniformly deſcribe 1I inch in the direction of it's action; therefore the power's velocity: the weight's velocity:: the weight: the power. Caſe 4. In the ſingle moveable pulley where the ſtrings are parallel, if the weight be raiſed 1 inch, each of the ſtrings is ſhortencd 1 inch, and the power deſcribes æ inches; therefore, P's velocity : Ws velocity :: M: P (Art. 104). Caſe 5. In the ſyſtem of pulleys deſcribed in Art. 108, if the weight be raiſed 1 inch, each of the ſtrings at the lower block is ſhortened 1 inch, and the power deſcribes n inches; therefore, P's velocity : s velocity :: W: P. In this ſyſtem of pulleys, whilſt one inch of the ſtring paſſes over the pulley A, 2 inches pass over the pulley B, 3 over C, 4 over D, &c. Hence it follows, that if in the ſolid block A, the grooves A, C, E. &c. be cut, whoſe radii are 1, 3, 5, &c. and in the block B, the grooves B, D, F, &c. whoſe radii are 2, 4, 6, &c. and a ſtring be paſſed round theſe grooves as in the annexed figure; the grooves vill anſwer the purpoſe of ſo many diſtinct pulleys, anc 90 RATIO OF THE VELOCITIES and every point in each, moving with the velocity of the ſtring in contact with it, the whole friction will be removed to the two centers of motion in the blocks A and B. Caſe 6. In the ſyſtem of pulleys deſcribed in Art. 1 10, each ſucceeding pulley moves twice as faſt as the preceding; thereſore, 's velocity : Cs velocity :: 1: 2 Cs velocity: B's velocity:: 1: 2 B's velocity: P's velocity :: I: 2 &c. comp. W s velocity : P's velocity :: 1: 2xX2Xa2 x&c. : P: W. Caſe Caſe 7. In the ſyſtem Art. 113, if the weight be raiſed 1 inch the pulley B will deſcend 1 inch, and the pulley A vill delcend 24-1 inches; in the ſame manner, the next pulley will deſcend 2X 2--1 1 inches, or 4-4-2 41 inches; &c. therefore, P's velocity : Æs velocity :: 12 44&c.: 1:: W: P. Caſe 8. Let a body be uniformly raiſed along rhe inclined plane BA from B to P, by a power acting parallel to PV; upon BP deſcribe a ſemicircle BOP, cutting BC in M; produce VP to O, join BO, PM, MO. Then ſince the angles BOP, BMP, in the ſemicircle, are right angles, OP and MP are ſpaces uniformly deſcribed in the ſame time, by the power and weight in their reſpective directions (Art. 148); alſo, becauſe I POM æ L PBM æ ÆPCV, and COPMæ LPVC (Evc. 29. 1), the triangles POM PDVC are ſimilar, and OP: MP :: VC: PV, or the sower's velocity: the weight's velocity:: the weight the power, in the caſe of an equilibrium (Art. 118). Caſe 9. In the iſoſceles wedge, x C is the only effective nart of the reſiſtance DC (See Art. 137); draw VO perpen- perpendicular to CD produced; then if moved uniformly from C to V, CO is t ſormly deſcribed by the reſiſting forc hence, the power's velocity: the velocit ing force:: CV: CO: Cx: CF:: the power. . Caſe 10. In the ſcrew, whilſt the pe deſcribes the circumference of the circ 144), the weight is uniſormly raiſed th tance between two contiguous threads velocity : Is velocity :: the circumſ circle FGH : the diſtance between w : P. Caſe 11. In any combination of the mec let P: , Æ: R, R: S, &c. be the power and weight in each caſe, when tl librium; then P's velocity : Ws velocity :: Ws velocity : R's velocity :: R's velocity : S's velocity:: &c. comp. P's velocity: 8's velocity :: SCHOLIUM. 1350. It has been uſual to diſtinguiſh Levers intc three kinds, according to the different ſituations ol the power, weight, and center of motion; there are however only two kinds which eſſentially differ; thoſe in which the forces act on contrary ſides of the center of motion, as the common balance, ſteelyard, &c. and thoſe in which they act on the ſame ſide, as the ſtock-knife, ſhears which act by a ſpring, oars, &c. the proportion between the forces, when there is an equilibrium, is expreſſed in the ſame terms in each caſe; but the levers differ in this reſpect, that the preſſure upon the fulcrum depends upon the ſum of the forces in the former caſe, and upon their difference in the latter; and conſequently, the friction upon the center of motion, cæteris paribus, is greater in the former caſe than the latter. 1351. The Pulley has, by ſome Writers, been referred to the lever, and they have juſtly deduced its properties from the proportions which are found to obtain in that mechanical power; for, the adheſion of the pulley and the rope, which takes place at the circumſerence of the pulley, will overcome the friction at the center of motion; both hecauſe it acts at a mechanical advantage, and becauſe the ſurface in contact is greater in the former caſe than in the latter; and the friction depends, not only upon the weight ſuſtained, but alſo upon the quantity of ſurface in contact: Thus, in practice, the rope and pulley move on together, and the pulley becomes a lever. 152. The 152. The Wedge has hitherto chieſly been applied to the purpoſes of ſeparating the parts of bodies, and is power, notwithſtanding the friction, is much greater than the theory leads us to expect; the reaſon is, the effect is produced by impact, and the momentum thus generated is incomparably greater than the effect of preſſure, in the ſame time. Mr. ECxHARD, a very ingenious mechanic, by combining it with the wheel and axle, has conſtructed a machine, the power of which, conſidering it's ſimplicity, is much greater than that of any machine before invented. SECTION ON THE CENTER OF GRAVITY 53. Def. THuE Center of Gravity of any or ſyſtem of bodies, is that pon which the body or ſyſtem, acted upon o 1e force of gravity, will balance itſelf in all poſii 154. Hence it follows, that if a line or plane, aſſes through the center of gravity, be ſupportc ody, or ſyſtem, will be ſupported. 155. Converſely, if a body, or ſyſtem, t ſelf upon a line or plane, in all poſitions, the f gravity is in that line or plane. If not, let the line or plane be moved par⸗ ſelf till it paſſes through the center of gravity e have increaſed both the quantity of matter c de of the line or plane, and it's diſtance fro ne or plane, and diminiſhed both, on the de; hence, if the body balanced itſelf in all pc  the former caſe, it cunnot, from the nature æ That there is ſuch a point in every body, or ſyſtem of ill be ſhewn hereafeer. lever, balance itſelf in all poſitions, in the latter; ſequently, the center of gravity is not in this lin plane (Art. 154), which is contrary to the ſuppoſi 156. Cor. By reaſoning in the ſame manner, i pears that a body, or ſyſtem of bodies, cannot more than one center of gravity. PROP. XXXII. 157. To find the center of gravity of any numb particles of matter. Let A, B, C, D, &c. be the particles; and poſe A, B connected by the inſlexible line AB. out weight æ; divide AB into two parts in E, ſo ꝑ E B Ue c A: B:: BE: EA, or comp. AB : B :: AB: then will A and B balance each other upon E, E be ſupported, A and B will be ſupported in all tions (Art. 86); alſo the preſſure upon the point equal to the ſum of the weights A and B (Art AX. I). Join EC, and take A B: C:: CF F. ABC: C: EC FE; then if F be ſupporte and C will be ſupported, that is, A, B and C w ſupported, in all poſitions of the ſyſtem; and the æ The particles muſt be ſuppoſed to be connected, otherwiſ could not act upon each other, ſo as to balance upon any poi ſure upon F will be the ſum of the weights, A, B and C. In the ſame manner, join FD, and divide it into two parts in G, ſo that ABC: D :: DG: FG, or ABCD : D:: FD  FG, and the ſyſtem will balunce itſelſ in all poſitions upon G; that is, G is the center of gravity of the ſyſtem. 158. Cor. 1. From this propoſition it appears that every body, or ſyſtem of bodies, has a center of gravity. 159. Cor. 2. If the particles be ſuppoſed to be connected in any other manner, the ſame point G will be found to be their center of gravity (Art. 156). 160. Cor. 3. The effect of any number of particles in a ſyſtem, to produce or deſtroy an equilibrium, is the ſame, whether they are diſperſed, or collected in their common center of gravity. 16 I. Cor. 4. If A, B, C, &c. be bodies of finite magnitudes, G the center of gravity of the ſyſtem, may be found by ſuppoſing the bodies collected in their reſpective centers of gravity. 162. Cor. 5. If the bodies 4, B, C, &c. be increaſed or diminiſhed in a given ratio, the ſame point G will be the center of gravity of the ſyſtem. For the points E, F, G, depend upon the relative, and not upon the abſolute weights of the bodies. 163. Cor. 6. If any forces which are proportional to the weights, act in parallel directions at A, B, C, D, they vill ſuſtain each other upon the point G; and this point is ſtill called the center of gravity, though the particles are not acted upon by the force of gravity. 164. Cor. 7. A force applied at the center oſ gravity of a body cannot produce a rotatory motion in VoL. III. G it. it. For every particle reſiſts, by it's inertia, the communication of motion, and in a direction oppoſite to that in which the force applied tends to communicate the motion; theſe reſiſtances, therefore, of the particles, act in parallel directions, and they are proportional to the weights (Art. 25)5 conſequently, they will balance each other upon the center of gravity. PROP. XXXIII. 165. To find the center of gravity of a right line*. The center of gravity of a right line compoſed of particles of matter which are equal to each other and uniformly diſperſed, is it's middle point. For, there are equal weights on each ſide, equally diſtant from the middle point, which will ſuſtain each other, in all poſitions, upon that point (Art. 86). PrOP. XXXIV. 166. To ſind the center of gravity of a parallelogram. Let AB be an uniform lamina of matter in the form of a parallelogram; biſect AO, Al, in & anc D æ When we ſpeak of a line or plane as having a center of gra vity, we ſuppoſe it to be made up of particles of matter, uniformlj diffuſed over it. D; draw KL, DE reſpectively parallel to AI, AO, cutting each other in C; this point C is the center of gravity of the figure. For if the parallelogram be ſuppoſed to be made up of lines parallel to AI, any one of theſe, as KL, is biſected by the line DE (ſince AC, CI are parallelograms, and therefore, Kc ADZI DIæCL); conſequently, each line will balance itſelf upon DE (Art. 165), or the whole figure vill balance itſelf upon DE, in all poſitions; therefore, the center of gravity is in that line (Art. 155). In the ſame manner it may be ſhewn that the center of gravity of the figure is in the line KL, conſequently G, the interſection of the two lines, is the center of gravity required. PrOP. XXXV. 167. To find the center of gravity of a triangle. Let ABC be an uniform lamina of matter in the form of a triangle; biſect AB, AC in D, E; join CD, BE, cutting each other in G, this point is the eenter of gravity of the triangle. Suppoſe the triangle to be made up of lines parallel o CA, of which let cea be one; then ſince the tringles BEC, B ec are ſimilar, G 2 B E BE: EC :: Be: ec; alſo, in the triangles BEA, Bea, EA : BE :: ea: Be; by compoſition, EA: EC :: ea: ec; and EAæ EC, therefore ea æ ec; and conſequently, the line ac will balance itſelf in all poſitions upon BE. For the ſame reaſon, every other line parallel to AC will balance itſelf, in all poſitions, upon BE, or the whole triangle will balance itſelf in all poſitions upon BE; therefore the center of gravity of the triangle is in that line. In the ſame manner it may be proved that the center of gravity is in the line CD; therefore it is in G, the interſection of the two lines BE, CD. 168. Cor. The diſtance of G from B is two thirds of the line BE. Join ED; then ſinceA Dæ DB, and AE 2 EC, ED is parallel to BC (Evc. 2. 6); therefore, the triangles AED, ACB are ſimilar, and CÆ: C4 1 ED: EA; alternately, CB: ED :: CA: EA : 2: 1. Alſo, the triangles CGB, EGD are ſimilar, therefore, BG: CB :: EG: ED,; alternately, BG: GE :: CB: ED : 2: 15 hence, BG: BE :: 2: 3. PROP. XXXVI. 169. To find the center of gravity of any rectilinear figure. Let ABCDE be an uniform lamina of matter oſ the propoſed figure. Divide it into the triangles ABC, ACD, AD E, whoſe centers of gravity a, b, c, may be found by the laſt propoſition; then if the triangles be collected in their reſpective centers of gravity (Art. 160), their common center of gravity maj be found as in Prop. 325 that is, join ab and take di the triangle ABC: the triangle e center of gravity of the two u Join de, and take ce: ed :: the ABC, ACD : the triangle AED, of gravity of the figure. PROP. XXXVII. find the center of gravity of any nu in a ſtraight line. , C, D, be the bodies, collected enters of gravity; S any point SAD; O the center of gravity of hen ſince the bodies balance eacl ; A BO C xAO4 B Xx BOæ CX COA4D x D that is, 4 x SO S4 4 B x S SO  DxX SD-SO; hence, by ſition, 4XxSO4ã4 B XSOA4 CX SC xSAAB X SBC X SCHD X SD; therefore, x SA4 B x SBA C X SCD X SD A r B F C Fr D i Cor. If any of the bodies lie the other way their diſtances muſt be reckoned negative; SO be negative, the diſtance SO muſt be meaom S in that direction which, in the calcuwas ſuppoſed to be negative. (See Alg. Art. PrROP. XXXVIII. If perpendiculars be drawn from any number s to a given plane, the ſum of the products of each ultiplied by it's perpendicular diſtance ſrom the i equal to the product of the ſum of all the bodies d by the perpendicular diſtance of their common gravity from the plane. A, B, C, &c. be the bodies, collected in ſpective centers of gravity; PQ the giver draw Aa, Bb, Cc at right angles to PQ, anc conſequently conſequently, parallel to each other (Euc. 6. 11); join AB, and take AE: EB :: B: A4, then E is the center of gravity of Aand B; through E draw Ee perpendicular to P, or parallel to Aa, and æEy perpendicular to Aa or Bb; then in the ſimilar triangles AEx, EB)y, Ax: AE :: By: BE, alternately, Ax: By:: AE: BE :: B: A; therefore AX Axæ BX By, that is, 4 XxaAa æ BX Bbyb, or ſince Ea, Eb are parallelograms, AX EeAa æ BX Bb- Ee; and by multiplication and tranſpoſition, AX Ee- BX Eeæ AX Aa-BXxX Bb, that is, A-BX Ees AX AaBX Bb. Again, join EC, and take CG: GE :: AB : C, then G is the center of gravity of the bodies A, B, C; draw Gg perpendicular to P; and it may be ſhewn, as before, that A Bx Ee4C x Ccæ ABCXx Gg, or Ax AaB x Bb4C x CcæABCXGgG. The ſame demonſtration may be extended to any number of bodies. 173. Cor. 1. Hence Gg æ Ax Aa-Bx Bb Cx Cc A F B F C and if a plane be drawn parallel to P, and at the diſtance Gę ſrom it, the center of gravity of the ſyſtem lies ſomewhere in this plane. In the ſame manner two other planes may be found, in each of which the center of gravity lies, and the point where the three planes cut each other is the center of gravity of the ſyſtem. 174. Cor. 2. If any of the bodies lie on the other ſide of the plane, their diſtances muſt be reckoned negative. . 175. Cor. 3. Wherever the bodies are ſituated, if their reſpective perpendicular diſtances from the plane plane remain the ſame, the diſtance of their eommon center of gravity from the plane will remain the ſame. 176. Cor. 4. Let the bodies lie in the ſame plane, and let perpendiculars, Aa, Bb, Cc, Gg be drawn to any given line in that plane, then ſe dA x Aa B X Bb4-CXxXCc 43I 7 E F C 177. Cor. s. If A and B be on one ſide of the plane, and C on the other, and the plane paſs through the center of gravity, then A x Aa B x Bbæ C x Cc. For Gg x æBCæ Ax AaB x BbC x Cc, and Gg æ o, therefore Ax Aa B x Bb Cx Ceo3 or Ax Aa B x BbæCx Cc. PrOP. XXXIX. 178. If &ny momenta be communicated to the paris of a ſyſtem, it's center of gravity will move in the ſame manner that a bodv, equal to the ſum of the bodies in the ſyſtem, would move, were it placed in that center, and the ſame momenta, in the ſume directions, communicated to it. Let A, B, C be the bodies in the ſyſtem, and the points A, B, C their reſpective centers of gravity; join BCG, and take BT: TC :: C: B; join AĩT, and take TE EA: A: BAGC, or TE: TA : A: ABAæc, then will E be the center of gravity of the ſyſtem (Art. 161). Suppoſe the momentum communicated to 4 would cauſe it to move from A to x in T, and at x let the body be ſtopped; join Txæ, and take TF: Tx :: A A-B4cC, then F is the center of gravity of the bodies when they are at x, B, C; join ERE, and ſince TE: TA 1: 4 12:A: A B-C:: TF: Tx, EF is parallel to Ax (Evc. 2. 6), and conſequently the triangles TEF, TAx are ſimilar; therefore EF: Ax:: A: A4B FcC. Hence if one body A in the ſyſtem be moved from Ato x, the center of gravity is moved from E to F; which point may be thus determined; draw EF parallel to Ax, and take EF : Ax:: A: ABC. Next let a momentum be communicated to B which would cauſe it to move from B toy in T; aty let the body be ſtopped; then, according to the rule above laid down, draw FG parallel to By, and take FG: By:: B: AHB 4c, and G uvill be the center of gravity of the bodies when they are at æ, γ, C. In the ſame manner, let a momentum be communicated to C which would cauſe it to move from C to æ in T, and at 2Z let the body be ſtopped; draw GH parallel to Cæ and take GH : Cæ :: C: AB 4C, then H is the center of gravity of the bodies when they are aſ x, γ, æ. If now the momenta, inſtead of being communicated ſeparately, be communicated at the ſame inſtant to the bodies, at the end of T they will be found found in æ, y, æ reſpectively; therefore at the end of T their common center of gravity will be in H. Now let Æ be a body equal to A4 Bc, and let the ſame momentum be communicated to it that was before communicated to A, and in the ſame direction; then ſince EF is parallel to Aa, EF is in the direction in which the body E will move; alſo, ſince the quantities of motion communicated to A and E are equal, their velocities are reciprocally proportional to their quantities of matter (Art. 19), or E's velocity : A's velocity :: A: A4BC :: EF: Ax; therefore, EF and Ax are ſpaces deſcribed by E and A in equal times (Art. 11), or E vwill deſcribe the ſpace EF in T. In the ſame manner FG is the ſpace which the body E will deſcribe in T', if the momentum, before communicated to B, be communicated to it; and GH the ſpace it will deſcribe in T, if the momentum before communicated to G, be communicated to it; join EH; and when the motions are communicated a the ſume inſtant to E, it will deſcribe EH in T' (At. 42). Hence it follows, that when the ſame momenta are communicated to the parts of a ſyſtem, and to a body, equal to the ſum of the bodies, placed in the common center of gravity, this body and the center of gravity are in the ſame point at the end of T; and T may repreſent any time; therefore, they are always in the ſame point. The ſame demonſtration may be applied whatever be the number of bodies in the ſyſtem. 179. Cor. 1. If the parts of a ſyſtem move uniformly in right lines, the center of gravity will either remain at reſt, or move uniformly id a right line. For if the momenta communicated to the ſeveral parts oſ the the ſyſtem be communicated to a body, equal to the ſum of the bodies, placed in the center of gravity of the ſyſtem, it will either remain at reſt or move uniformly in a right line (Art. 27). 180. Cor. 2. If two weights ſupport each other upon any machine, and it be put in motion, the center oſ gravity of the weights will neither aſcend nor deſcend. For the momenta of the weights in a direction perpendicular to the horion, are equal and oppoſite (Art. 149); therefore, if they were communicated to a body equal to the ſum of the bodies, placed in the common center of gravity, they would neither cauſe it to aſcend nor deſcend. 181. Cor. 3. The motion or quieſcence of the center of gravity is not affected by the mutual actions oſ the parts of a ſyſtem upon each other. For action and reaction are equal and in oppoſite directions, and equal and oppoſite momenta communicated to a body, equal to the ſum of the bodies in the ſyſtem, will not diſturb it's motion or quieſcence. 1 82. Cor. 4. The effect of any force to communicate motion to the common center of gravity, is the ſame, upon whatever body in the ſyſtem it acts. 183. Cor. 5. If G be the center of gravity of the B Il C D particles of matter, 4, B, C, D, which are acted upon upon only by their mutual attractions, they will meet at G. For they muſt meet, and their common center of gravity will remain at reſt (Art. 181); therefore, they muſt meet at that center. 184. Cor. 6. If a rotatory motion be communicated to a body, and it be then left to move freely, the axis of rotation will paſs through the center of gravity. For the center of gravity itſelf, either remaining at reſt or moving uniformly forward in a right line, has no rotat ion. ProOP. XL. 185. If a body be placed upon an horizontal plane, and a line be drawn from it's center of gravity perpendicular to that plane, the body will be ſuſtained, or not, accoraing as the perpendicular falls within or without it baſe. Let ABDC repreſent the body, G it's center ol gravity; draw G E perpendicular to the horiæon; join CG, and with the radius CG deſcribe the circular arc HGF; then the body cannot ſall over at C unleſs the eenter of gravity deſcribes the circular arc GF. Suppoſe the whole force of gravity applied at G (Art. 160), and take GE to repreſent it; drav Ex perpendicular dicular to CG; then the force GE is equivalc the two Gæ, x E, of which GxX cannot move the either in the direction GF or GH; and when I within the baſe, æ Æ acts at G in the direction therefore the center of gravity cannot deſcribe tl GUF, that is, the body cannot fall over at C. I ſame manner it may be ſhewn that it cannot ſall at D. When the perpendicular GE falls without the xE acts in the direction GF, and ſince there ia G II r c force to counteract this, the center of gravity will in that direction, or the body will fall. 186. Cor. 1I. In the ſame manner it may be ſ that if a body be placed upon an inclined plane the lateral motion be prevented by friction, the will be ſuſtained or not, according as the perpend to the horizon, drawn through its center of gr falls within or without the baſe. Ex. Let ABCD repreſent a cube of uniform d placed upon the inclined plane RS; G its cer gravity; draw GÆ perpendicular to CD, and perpendicular to the horiæon; then this body wi be ſuſtained upon the inclined plane, if the angle plane's inclination SRT, exceed half a right angle. if the LlFRH be greater than half a right angle, the L RFH, or GFE, is leſs than half a right angle, and the LFGE is greater than half a right angle; therefore, EF is greater than ÆG, or EC, and the body will roll. 187. Cor. 2. The higher the center of gravity oſ a body is, cæteris paribus, the more eaſily it is overturned. The ſame conſtruction being made as in the propoſition, the whole weight of the body: that part oſ the weight which keeps it ſteady upon it's baſe, or oppoſes any power employed to overturn it :: GE :xE :: GC: CE; and when CE and the whole weight of the body are given, the force which keeps the body ſteady oc Ct (Alg. Art. 206); thereſore as GC increaſes, that is, as GE increaſes, the force which keeps the body ſteady decreaſes, or the more eaſily will the body be overturned. 188. Cor. 3. When CE vaniſhes with reſpect to GC, the force which keeps the body ſteady vaniſhes, and the body may be overturned by a very ſmall force. Thus it is extremely difficult to balance a body upon a point placed under the center of gravity. ProOP. PRroOP. XLI. 189. If a body be ſuſpended by any point, it uvill not remain at reſt till the center of gravity is in the line which is drawn through that point, perpendicular to the horizon. Let S be the point of ſuſpenſion of the body ABC; R G its center of gravity; join SG and produce it; through S, and G, draw ÆST, and G H perpendiculars to the horiæon; then the immediate eſſect of gravity is to draw the point G in the direction GH; take GH to repreſent the force in that direction, and draw H I perpendicular to GI; then the force GH is equivalent to the two GI, IIi, of which GI is ſuſtained by the reaction of the point of ſuſpenſion S, and IH is employed in moving the center of gravity in a direction perpendicular to SG; thercſore the center of gravity cannot remain at reſt till IH vaniſhes; that is, is, till the angle IGH, or GST vaniſhes, or SG coincides with RT. 190. Cor. Hence it follows that if a body be ſuſpended ſucceſſively by different points, and perpendiculars to the horion be drawn through the points of ſuſpenſion, the center of gravity will lie in each of theſe perpendiculars, and conſequently, in the point of their interſection. SECTION ON THE COLLISION OF BODIES. 191. Deſ. ARDNESS, which is found in different bodies in different degrees, conſiſts in a firm coheſion of the component particles; and that body is ſaid to be harder than another, whoſe particles require a greater force to ſeparate them. By a perfectly hard body we mean one whoſe parts cannol be ſeparated, or moved one amongſt another by any finite force. 192. Def. The tendency in a body to recover it's former figure, after having been compreſſed, is called elaſticit. That body is ſaid to be more elaſtic than another, which recovers its figure with the greater force, ſuppoſing the compreſſing force the ſame. By a perfectly elaſtic body we mean one which recovers it's figure with a force equal to that which was employed in compreſſing it. That ſuch a tendency exiſts in bodies is evident from a variety of experiments. If an ivory ball, ſtained with VOL. III. H ink, ink, be brought gently into contact with an unſtained ball, the ſpot received by the latter will be very ſmall, ſince two ſpheres touch each other only in a ſingle point; but if one of the balls be made to impinge upon the other, the ſpot will be enlarged; and the greater the force of impact, the greater will be the ſurface ſtained; hence it is manifeſt, that one, or both of the balls, has been compreſſed, and afterwards recovered it's ſpherical figure. Almoſt all bodies with which we are acquainted are elaſtic in a greater or leſi degree; but none perfectly ſo. In ſteel balls the force of elaſticity is to the compreſſing force as 5 to 9; in glaſs as 15 to 165 though in all caſes, the force of elaſticity ſeems to depend, in ſome meaſure, upon the diameter of the ball. 193. Def. The impact of two bodies is ſaid to be directi, when their centers of gravity move in the right line which paſſes through the point of impact. In conſidering the effects of colliſion, the bodies are uſually ſuppoſed to be ſpheres of uniform denſity; and in their actions upon each other, not to be affected by gravity, or any other force but that oſ inertia. ProPr. XLII. 194. If the impact of tuo perfectly hard bodies be direct, after impact they will either remain at reſt, or move on uniformly, together. Since there is no force to turſ tther body out of the line of direction, they will continue in that line afte impact. impact æ Let A and B be the two bodies, moving in the ſame direction, and let A overtake B; then will Æ continue to accelerate Ss motion, and B uill continue to retard As, till their velocities are equal, at which time they will ceaſe to act upon each other; and ſince there is no force to ſeparate them, they will move on together, and their common v. city, by the Firſt Law of Motion, will be uniform. When they move in oppoſite directions, if their forces be equal, they will reſt after impact; if A' force be greater than B's, the whole velocity of B will be deſtroyed, and A's not being deſtroyed, A will communicate velocity to B, and B by it's reaction will retard 4, till they move on together, as in the former caſe. PROP. XLIII. 195. If the impact of two perfectly hard bodies be direct, their common velocity may be found by dividing the whole momentum before impgct, eſtimated in the direction of either motion, by the ſum of the quantities of maier. Let A and B be the quantities of matter contained in the bodies, æ and ò their velocities; then, when they move in the ſame direction, Aa B b is the whole momentum in that direction, before impact. When they move in oppoſite directions, Aa DB ò is the whole momentum eſtimated in the direction in which 4 moves. In æ The momeuta of the particles in each body are proportional to their weights, ſince their velocities are equal; theſe momenta, therefore, will not turn the body to either ſide of te line paſſing through the center of gravity (Art. 163). H 2 - In the former caſe, as much as Aa, the momentum of A, is diminiſhed, ſo much is Bb, the momentum of B, increaſed by the impact (Art. 32); therefore Aa 4 Bòb is equal to the whole momentum after impact. In the latter caſe, if Aa be greater than Bò, befort the bodies can begin to move together, Bb, the momentum of B, muſt be deſtroyed; and therefore A' momentum muſt be diminiſhed by the quantity Bl (Art. 32). Thus, when the bodies begin to move in the ſame direction, AaBb is their whole momentum; and as much momentum as is afterwards communicated to B, ſo much is loſt by A; therefore Aa B ò is equal to the whole momentum after impact. If Aa be leſs than Bò, the momentum after impact, in the direction of B's motion, will be Bb Aa; or, in the direction of A's motion, AaBb. Let v be the common velocity after impact; then A4 Bx v is the whole momentum; conſequently, 2 In which expreſſion, the poſitive ſign is to be uſed when the bodies move in the ſame direction before impact, and the negative ſign when they move in oppoſite directions. 196. Cor. 1. When the bodies move in oppoſite directions with equal momenta, they will remain at reſt after impact. In this caſe AaBbæ o; therefore væ o. 197. Cor. 2. If Bò be greater than A a, v is negative. This ſhews that the bodies will move in the direction of B's motion, which was ſuppoſed, in the propoſition, to be negative. Pror. XLIV. 198. In the direct impact of tavo perfectly hard bodies A and B, eſtimating the effects in the direction of A's motion, A 4 B x væ Aa æ Bb, and væ motion, AB: A : the relative velocity of the tuo bodie : the velocity gained by B. And AB: B :: their rela tive velocily : the velocity loſt by A. The ſame notation being retained; when the bodies move in the ſame direction, aò is their relative velocity (Art. 12); and , their common velocit) Aa8 T5E5 b Art: 195); therefore, the . Aa  Bb velocity gained by B, or v-ò, is I5E5 8, or AadAò hence, A-B : A :: a-b: the velocity AB . . AaBb Bò. gained by B. Alſo, a G47ã5 or e velocity loſt by A; therefore AB: B:: a-b: the velocity loſt by A. Whaen the bodies move in oppoſite directions, a  ò . . . . Aa B b is their relative velocity (Art. 12)3 and væ 455 after impact, is is the (Art. 195) alſo, the velocity communicated to B upon the wholo. in the direction of A's motion, is -Bò ,, Ba-t dè b4-v, or p4da TE i that i T55 therefore, AB : A :: iũt the velocity by B; Aa - Bb Ba  Bb The velocity loſt by A is a- ZTIπB TE therefore, A4B: B:: a: the velocity loſt by A. Ex. Let the weights of A and B be 10 and 6*; their velocities 12 and 8, reſpectively; then, when they move in  See Art. 26. in the ſame direction, 1046: 10:: 12-8: ae g 2, the velocity gained by B; and 1046 : 6 :: 12-8: & , the velocity loſt by A. Whaen they move in oppoſite directions, 1248 is their relative velocity; and 106: 10 :: 1248: 2σ- 1a. the velocity gained by B in the direction of A's motion. Alſo, ſince it had a velocity 8 in the oppoſite direction before impact, it's velocity aſter impact is a- in the direction of 's motion. Again, 1046: 6 : 1248: tiò æ715 the velocity loſt by A. 199. Cor. 1. Wnuſt éte relative velocity remains the ſame, the velocity gained by B, and the velocity loſt by A, are unaltered. 200. Cor. 2. Hence it alſo follows that the velocities, gained by B, and loſt by A, are the ſame, whether both bodies are in motion, or A impinges upon B at reſt, with a velocity equal to their relative velocity in the former caſe. .Cor. 3. If the relative velocity be the ſame, the cuomentum communicated is the ſame, whether 4 impinges upon B, or B upon A. Call r the relative relosi then when A impinges upon B, A-B : A :: Ar ã5 the velocity gained by B; therefore 26 is the momentum gained by imbi Br B. When B impinges upon A, AB: B:: rt 735 the the velocity gained by 4; therefore Zq is the mo mentum gained by A; which is alſo the momentur gained by B on the former ſuppoſition. ProP. XLV. 202. When the bodies are perfectly elaſtic, the velocit gained by the body ſtruck, and the velocity lost by the ſtriking body, will be twice as great as if the bodies were perfectly hard. Let A and B be the bodies; then, as in Art. 194, A vill accelerate s motion, and B will retard A's, till their velocities are equal; and if they were perfectly hard they would then ceaſe to act upon each other, and move on together; thus, during the firſt part of the colliſion, the ſame effect is produced, that is, the ſame velocity is gained and loſt, as if the bodies were perfectly hard. But during this period the bodies are compreſſed by the ſtroke, and ſince they are, by the ſuppoſition, perfectly elaſtic, the force with which each will recover it's former ſhape is equal to that with which it was compreſſed; therefore, each body will receive another impulſe from the elaſticity equal to the former, or B will gain, and A loſe upon the whole, twice as great a velocity as if both bodies had been perfectly hard. 203. The ſame demonſtration may be applied to the caſe where one body is perfectly hard, and the other perfectly elaſtic. ProOP. PrOP. XLVI. 204. In the direct impact of two perfectly elaſtic bodies Aand B, A4 B: 2AA:: their relative velocity before impact : the velocity gained by B in the direction of A's molion; and AB: 2B :: their relative velocity: the velocity loſt by A, in that direction. Call r the relative velocity of the bodies,  the velocity gained by B, and ꝑy the velocity loſt by A, when both bodies are perfectly hard; then 2x is the velocity gained DY B, and 2y the velocity loſt by 4, when they are perfectly elaſtic; and A4B: A : r:æ (Art. 198); therefore, A4B : 24: r: ax (Alg. Art. 185), the velocity gained by B. Again, AB: B :: r: y (Art. 198); therefore, A4B : 28:: r 27, the velocity loſt by 4. Ex. Let the weights of the bodies be 5 and 4, theit velocities 7 and 53 then, when gher move in the ſame direction, 54: 10:: 7-5: Æ Æ the velocity gained by B; therefore 522. or  1 is B's velocity after impact. Alſo, 544: 8:: 7 5: .1 the velocity loſt by Æ; therefore 7-1 . , Oſ 5 5 is A velocity aſter impact. When they move in oppoſitt directions directions, 54: 10:: 74 5: tho- 13 3the velocity gained by B. Alſo, ſince it had a velocity 5 in the oppoſite direction, it's velocity after impact, in the direction of A's motion, is 155. or 8 Again, 54: 8: 7t5: & 103 As velocity loſt; and ſince it had a velocity. 7 before impact, after impact it will move in the oppoſite direction with a velocity 35. 205. Cor. 1. When Aæ B, the bodies interchange velocities. For, in this caſe, A-B æ2 Aæ 2B; therefore, the velocity gained by B, and the velocity loſt by A, are reſpectively equal to their relative velocity before impact. Let a and b be their velocities before impact; then, when they move in the ſame direction, a ò is the velocity gained by B, or loſt by A; therefore a b4-8, or a, is B's velocity after impact; and a -a 8, or b, is A's velocity. If b be negative, or the bodies move in oppoſite directions, a b b8, or a, is B's velocity, and aa 6, orb, is A's velocity after impact. 206. Cor. 2. If the bodies move in oppoſite directions with equal quantities of motion, the whole momentum of each will be deſtroyed during the compreſſion, and an equal one generated by elaſticity in the oppoſite direction; each body will therefore be reflected with a velocity equal to that which it had before impact. 207. Cor. 3. The relative velocity of the bodies aſter impact is equal to their relative velocity before impact. Leſ Let a and b be the velocities of the bodies before impact; p and q their velocities after; then a bæ q-)9. 24 x a òb E 24 æ ab8 b v E Alſo, AB: 28: For, AB: 24:: aùb: , the velocity gained by B; therefore q æ bb: 2B x a b the velocity loſt by A; therefore pæ a AFB 2B X a b 24  2 BXx al a7TI5E and q-pæ ba q5B8 æ ba-2a 2bæ ab. When the bodies A and l move in oppoſite directions, the ſign of b is negative; in other reſpects the demonſtration is the ſame. 208. Cor. 4. The ſum of the products of each body multiplied by the ſquare of it's velocity, is the ſame before and after impact. The notation in the laſt article being retained; Aa 4 Bb æ Ap-Bq (Art. 34); by tranſpoſition, AaAjſ ZBꝗq-Bò; or Ax apæ B x ꝗ b. Alſo abqp (Art. 207); or a pæ ꝗb; therefore Ax a -p x apæ B x q b? x qτ; or Aa Aptæ BBò; therefore Aa Bb6 æ Ap --Bq. If any of the quantities, b, ꝓ. q, be negative, it's ſquare will be poſitive, and therefore the concluſion will not be altered. 209. Cor. 5. If there be a row of equal elaſtic bodies, A, B, C, D, &c. at reſt, and a motion be communicated to A, and thence to B, C, D, &c. they will all remain at reſt after the impact, except the laſt, which will move off with a velocity equal to that with which the firſt moved. For A and B will interchange velocities (Art. 205); that is, A will remain at reſt, and B move on with A's velocity. velocity. In the ſame manner it may be ſhewn that all the others will remain at reſt after impact, except the laſt, which will move off with the velocity communicated to A. 210. CoOr. 6. If the bodies decreaſe in magnitude, they will all move in the direction of the firſt motion, and the velocitt communicated to each ſucceeding body will be greater than that which was communicated to the preceding. For, A B: aB :: A's velocity before impact: the velocity loſt by A; and ſince 28 is leſs than A--B, A does not loſe it's whole velocity; therefore it will move on after impact in the direction of the firſt motion. Alſo, AB : 24 :: A's velocity before impact: the velocity gained by B; and ſince 24 is greater than AB, the velocity gained by B is greater than A's velocity before impact. In the ſame manner it may be ſhewn that B, C, D, &c. will move on in the direction of the firſt motion; and that the velocity communicated to each will be greater than that which was communicated to the preceding body. 211. Cor. 7. If the bodies increaſe in magnitude they will all be reflected back, except the laſt, and the velocity communicated to each ſucceeding body will be leſs than that which was communicated to the preceding. For, in this caſe, 28 is greater than A4 B; therefore, A loſes more than it's whole velocity, or it will mowe in the contrary direction. Alſo, 24 is leſs than A 4 B; therefore, the velocity gained by B is leſs than Ass velocity before impact. In the ſame manner it may be ſhewn that B, C, D, &c. vill be reflected; anc and that the velocity communicated to each will be leſs than that which was communicated to the pre ceding body. 212. Cor. 8. The velocity thus communicatec from A through B to C, when B is greater than one of the two A, C, and leſs than the other, exceeds the velocity which would be communicated immediately from A to C. Let a repreſent A's velocity; then 24a AB: 24: a44P5 the velocity of B; and 24a 24a 28 aFB AæB. EC communicated from B to C. BC: 2B :: the velocity Again, AC: 24 f. the velocity communicated immediately from  to C. Hence it follows, that the velocity communicated to C, by means of B, is greater than that which would be communill ada 28 cated to it immediately, iſ-5 a4 Q4B5 Bæt FC be greater than 2ã mat is, if 4C be greater than a3c nat is, 1 Hã greater an d* 2æ BC. or 244-2C greater than AC B4. or A--cC greater than ꝑ4 Suppoſe Aæ B4x, CæBGy3 then A4Cæ 2B-4uxæ 9, and B4c Bf Bret Bæxſ 2Bræ434234 there7π B- B ſore, the velocity communicated to C by means of B, is is greater than the velocity communicated to it without B, if a B x ty be greater than 2 B æ r) 4 2. which will always be the caſe when xy is negative, or when x and γ have different ſigns; that is, when B is leſs than one of the bodies, A, C, and greater than the other æ. 213. Cor. 9. If the bodies be in geometrical progreſſion, the velocities communicated to them will be in geometrical progreſſion; and when there are n ſuch bodies, whoſe common ratio is r, the velocity of the firſt: the velocity of the laſt: : T1-nnr: on-r. Let A, Ar, Ar2 , Ar3, &c. be the bodies; a, b, c, d, &c. the velocities ſucceſſively communicated to them; then A Ar : 24 :: a: b, or I  1r22 a: b; and in the ſume manner, 1I  r:2 :9b: c I  r: 2 2:c: d&c. therefore a: b: b: c: c: d &. Alſo, by compoſition, 1nmt1: at : a: the velocity of che laſt. 2 14. Cor. 10. Iſf the number of mean proportionals, interpoſed between two given bodies A and X, be increaſed without limit, the ratio of A's velocity to the velocity thus communicated to X will approximate to the ratio of / X: Vã as ivs limit. Let A, B, C, D,... .X be the bodies; a, b, c, d,.. x the velocities communicated to them. Then ſince the number of bodies interpoſed between A and æ The velocity communicated from A through B to G, is a maximum when A, B, and C, are in geometrical progreſſion (Flux. Art. 21. Ex. 9.) A and X is increaſed without limit, will be diminiſhed without limit; let 2442: 24 2: or 4 2 A :: * and a2 A: VIãæ: Vã therefore, VB: V à4 : in the ſame manner, C: VB8B : VD: /C: &c. comp. VX: VUA : Cor. The concluſion is the ſame diate bodies vary according to any otl ference of the ſucceeding bodies, in ſeries, be evaneſcent. PROP. XLVII. 215. In the direct impact of tuwo bodies A and B, if the compreſſiug force elaſticitp :: 1: m, then AB : I n tive velocity before impact : the velocity direction of A's motion. And AB: relative velocity beſore impact : the ve that direction. By reaſoning as in Art. 202, it zſ ESi * Since At3 Ar 2: At4Ar A x2 BA B i A, the ratio of A- ,l Ai2, wher miniſhed, approximates to the ratio of B: the ratio of A t, : A approximates to the rati limit. velocity gained by B, and the velocity loſt by A d the compreſſion are the ſame as if the bodies perfectly hard; and the velocity communicate the elaſticity is to the velocity communicate the compreſſion :: m: 1. Call r the relative vel before impact, x the velocity gained by B, and velocity loſt by A, during the compreſſion; ĩ4m x x is the velocity gained by B, and I πm x velocity loſt by A, upon the whole. Now A4 B: A :x (Art. 198), and A4B: B 2r::γ; therefore, A HB: THm x A :: r: I Æmx x, the city gained by BE. ll and AB : I tmx B:: r: I mxy, the city loſt by A. - 216. Cor. 1. The relative velocity before in : the relative velocity after impact :: 1: m. Let a and b be the velocities of the two b before impact, ꝓ and q their velocities aſter; then I -mx Ax ab --AeAs-, the A--B : Tmx A :: ab: A 8B city gained by B; 1mx Axa b therefore, qæ b- ILUãEB ; ũ ll 1mx Bxa b in the ame manner, pæ a - IE A  Bx ab hence, q p æba lsL una. ba 4abmx ab, i. e. mx a b, is the re velocity aſter impact; and ab: mx a 6 1: I: V When the bodies move in oppoſite directions the ſign of b is negative. 217. Cor. 2. Hence it appears that if the velocities of the bodies before and after impact be known, the elaſtic force is known. 218. Cor. 3. If A impinge upon B at reſt, A wil remain at reſt after impact when A: B :: m: 1. In this caſe A loſes its whole velocity, and A1 1 Fm x B :: a: the velocity loſt by A; therefore A4 BæIm x B, and Aæ mB; conſequently, A: B: m: I. 219. Cor. 4. The momentum communicated is the ſame, whether  impinges upon B, or B upon 4, if the relative velocity be the ſame. This is the caſe when the bodies are perfectly hard (Art. 2o1); and the effect produced in elaſtic bodies is in a given ratio to that which is produced when the bodies are perfectly hard. PrOP. XLVIII. 220. When a perfectly hard body impinges obliquely on a perfectly hard and immoveable plane AB, in the direction CD, after impact it will move along the plane, and the velocity before impact : the velocity after :: radius: the coſine of the angle C DA. Take CD to repreſent the motion of the body before a nx2 c F. impact; draw CE parallel, and DE perpendicular to AB. Then Then CD may be reſolved into the two CE, ED (Art. 43), of which ED is wholly empſoyed in carrying the body in a direction perpendicular to the plane; and ſince the plane is immoveable, this motion will be wholly deſtroyed, (See Art. 116) The other motion CE, which is employed in carrying the body parallel to the plane, will not be afſected by the impact; and conſequently, there being no force to ſeparate the body and the plane, the body will move along the plane; and it will deſcribe D BæCE in the ſame time that it deſcribed CD before impact; alſo, theſe ſpaces are uniformly deſcribed (Art. 27); conſequently, the velocity before impact: the velocity aſter :: CD: CE :: radius :ſin. LCDE :: radius: coſ. L C DA. 221. Cor. The velocity before impact: the difference between the velocity before and the velocity after, that is, the velocity loſt :: radius: rad. coſ. CCDA :: rad.: the verſed ſine of the angle C. DA. PrOP. XLIX. 222. If a perfectly elaſtic body impinge upon a perfectly hard and immoveable plane AB, in the direction CD, it will be reflected from it in the direction DF, vohich makes, with D B, the angle BDF equal to the angle ADC. Let C D repreſent the motion of the impinging E body; draw CF parallel, and D E perpendicular tc VOL. III. I AB AB; make EFæ CE, and join DF. Then the whole motion may be reſolved into the twvo C E, E D, o which CE is employed in carrying the body paralle to the plane, and muſt therefore remain after the impact; and ED carries the body in the direction ED perpendicular to the plane; and ſince the plane is im moveable, this motion will be deſtroyed during the compreſſion, and an equal motion will be generated in the oppoſite direction by the force of elaſticity. Hence it appears, that the body at the point D has two motions, one of which would carry it uniformly from D to E, and the other from E to F, in the ſame time, viZ. in the time in which it deſcribed CD before the impact; it will, therefore, deſcribe DF in that time (Art. 38). Alſo, in the triangles C DE, EDVPF, CE is equal to E F, the ſide E D is common, and the  CE D is equal to the LDE F; therefore, the  CD Eæthe ZEDF; hence, the L CDAÆ the LFDB. 223. Cor. 1. Since CDæ DFPF, and theſe are ſpaces uniformly deſcribed in equal times, before and aſfier the impact, the velocity of the body after reſlection is equal to it's velocity before incidence. 224. Cor. 2. If the body and plane be imperfectly elaſtic, tace DE: Dæ :: the force of compreſſion: the force of elaſticity; draw æſ parallel and equal to EF, join Ff. Df; then the two motions which the body has at Dare repreſented by Dx, xæſæ, and the body will deſcribe Df, aſter reflection, in the ſame time that it deſcribed CD æ Here we ſuppoſe the common ſurſace of the body and plane, during the impact, to remæin parallel to AB, in which caſe there is no cauſe to accelerate or retard the motion CE (See Art. 1 16). CD before incidence; therefore, the velocity before incidence: the velocity aſter reflection :: CD: Df :: DF : Df :: ſin. DfF, or ſin. of its ſupplement EDſ : ſin. DFſ, or ſin. FDE :: ſin. EDſ: ſin. EDC. PrOP. L. 225. Having given the radii of two ſpherical bodies moving in the ſame plane, their velocities, and the directions in which they move, to find the plane which touches them both at the point of impact. Let AE, BE be the directions in which the bodies A and B move; and let AE and BD be ſpaces uniformly deſcribed by them in the ſame time; complete the parallelogram A BKE; join KD, and with the center E and radius equal to the ſum of the radii oſ the two bodies, deſcribe a circular arc cutting D in H; C;Oo 757 join EH, and complete the parallelogram EHMR. Then R and M vill be the places of the centers of the 12 two two ſpheres when they meet; and if RC be taken equal to the radius of the ſphere 4, the plane CL, which is drawn through C perpendicular to MR, will be the plane required. Since MH is parallel to AE or BKE, the triangles DMH, DBK are ſimilar, and B: BD:: MH: MD,; or AE: BD :: RE: MD,; therefore AE: BD :: AR: BM (Rvuc. 19. 5); and ſince AE and BD are ſpaces deſcribed in the ſame time by the uniform motions of A and B, AR and BM, which are proportional to them, will be deſcribed in the ſame time; when, therefore, the center of the body A is in R, the center of the body B is inM, and the diſtance MRæÆ HE æ the ſum of the radii of the bodies; hence, they will be in contact when they arrive at thoſe points. Alſo, MR which joins their centers will paſi through the point of contact; and L C will be a tangent to them both. PROP. LI. 226. Having given the motions, the quantities of matter, and the radii of tuo ſpherical bodies which impinge obliquely upon each other, to find their motions after impact. Let LN be the plane which touches the bodies at the point of impact; produce AB, which joins the centers of the bodies, indefinitely both ways; through the centers A and B, draw EAF, GBH parallel to LN; let CA, DB repreſent the velocities of the bodies before impact; reſolve CA into the two CI, IA*, of which CI is parallel, and IA perpendicular to LN; alſo reſolve DB * See Art. 43. DB into two, DK parallel to LN, and XB perpendicular to it. Then CA and the angle CAI, which the direction of A's motion makes with AI perpendicular to LN, being known, CI and IA are known; in the ſame manner, DK and KB are known. Now Cl, DEK, which are parallel to the plane LN, uill not be affected by the impact; and IA, KB, which are perpendicular to it, are the velocities with which the bodies impinge directly upon each other, and their effects may be calculated by Prop. 44, when the bodies are perfectly hard; and by Prop. 47, when they are elaſtic. Let AR and BS be the velocities of the bodies after impact, thus determined; take AFæ CI, and BHæ DE; complete the parallelograms RF, SH, and draw the diagonals AP, BS; then the bodie: will deſcribe the lines A P, BQ after impact, and in the ſame time that they deſcribed CA, DB before impact. SECTION RECTILINEAR MOT ACCELERATED OR RI FORM FORCES. ProOP. LII. body be impelled in a right line , the velocity communicated to lime of it's motion . lerating force is meaſured by enerated in a given time (A the force is invariable, by the qual increments of velocity in this and the following propoſitio rating force, no regard being paid to unleſs it be expreſsly mentionesn. he force acts, to generate or deſtroy de with the direction of the motion. generated in equal times (Art. 20); and ſince a body, by the third lav of motion, retains the increments of velocity thus communicated to it, if, in the time 1, the velocity a be generated, in the time mt the velocity ma is generated; that is, the velocity generated is proportional to the time (Alg. Art. 193). PROP. LIII. 228. I bodies be impelled in right lines by different uniform forces, the velocities generated in any times are proportional to the forces and times jointly. Let F and ſ be the forces, T and ſ the times of their action, V and v the velocities generated; alſo, let æ be the velocity generated by the force f in the time T; then, V: x 1t F: f(Art. 21); x:v: T :t (Art. 227); by compoſition, ? : v:: FT  ft; that is, the velocities generated are proportional to the forces and times jointly (Alg. Art. 195). Ex. If a force repreſented by unity, generate a velocity repreſented by am, in one ſecond of time, what velocity will the force F generate in T ſeconds? Since Vc FT, we have 1x 1: FT:: am: am FT, the velocity required. 229. Cor. Since Voc FT, Toh (Alg. Art. 205). PRoOP. LIV. 230. If a body's motion be retarded by an uniforn force, the velocity deſti oed in any time is equal to tha wlirich would be generated in the ſame time, were thi motion accelerated by the lame force. Th The force impreſſed is the ſame, by the ſuppoſition, whether the body move in the direction of the force, or in the oppoſite direction; therefore, the velocity generated in the former caſe, is equal to the velocity deſtroyed, in the ſame time, in the latter (Art. 29). 231. Cor. 1. Hence, the velocity deſtroyed by an uniform force is proportional to the time of it's action. For, the velocity generated by the action of the force is in that ratio (Art. 227). 232. Cor. 2. The velocities deſtroyed by different uniform forces, are proportional to the forces and times jointly (Art. 228). PROP. LV. 233. If a body be moved through any ſpace, from a ſate of reſt, by the action of an uniform force, and then be projected in the oppoſite direction with the velocity acquired, and move till that velocity is deſtroyed, the whole spaces deſcribed in the two caſes are equal. The velocity generated in any time, is equal to the velocity deſtroyed in the ſame time by the action of the ſame force (Art. 230); hence, the whole times of motion, in the two caſes, are equal; alſo, if equal times be taken, from the beginning of the motion in the former caſe, and from the end of the motion in the latter, the velocities at thoſe inſtants are equal Since then the whole times of motion are equal, and alſo the velocities at all correſponding points of time the whole ſpaces deſcribed are equal. PROP PROP. LVI. 234. If a body be moved from a ſtate of reſt by the action of an uniform force, the ſpace deſcribed, rechoning from the beginning of the motion, varies as the ſquare of the time, or as the ſquare of the laſt acquired velocity. Take AB to repreſent the time of the body's motion; draw BC at right angles to AB, and let BC repreſent the laſt acquired velocity; join AC; divide the time AB into ſmall equal portions AD, DE, EF, FG, &c. and from the points D, E, F, G, &c. draw DEK, EL, FM, GN, &c. parallel to BC, meeting AC in the points Æ, L, M, N, &c. complete the parallelograms DX, EW, FV, GT, &c. Then, in the ſimilar triangles ABC, ADK, we have AB: AD :: BC: DE, and ſince BC repreſents the velocity acquired in the time A B, DX repreſents the velocity acquired in the time AD (Art. 227); in the ſame manner it appears, that EL, FM, GN, &c. repreſent the velocities generated in the times A E, AF, AG, &c. Now, if the body move with the uniform velocity D &, during the time A D, and with the uniform velocities E L, FM, GN, &c. during the times DE, E F, FG, &c. reſpectively, the ſpaces deſcribec deſcribed may properly be repreſented by the rectangles DX, EN, FV, GT, &c. (Art. 16); therefore, the whole ſpace deſcribed, on this ſuppoſition, will be repreſented by the ſum of the rectangles, or by the triangle 4 BC together with the ſum of the triangles AXKX, KWL, LVM, MTN, &c. that is, becauſe the baſes of theſe ſmall triangles are reſpectively equal to IB, and the ſum of their altitudes is equal to BC, by the triangle 4 BC together with half the rectangle BQ. Let the intervals A D, DE, EF, FG, &c. be diminiſhed without limit with reſpect to AB, and the rectangle B is diminiſhed without limit with reſpect to the triangle A BC or ABC2BQ approaches to ABC as its limit; therefore, when the motion of the body is conſtantly accelerated, the ſpace deſcribed is repreſented by the area of the triangle A BG. The ſpace deſcribed in any other time AG, reckoning from the beginning of the motion, is repreſented, on the ſame ſcale, by the area of the triangle AGN; and becauſe theſe triangles are ſimilar, the ſpace deſcribed in the time A B: the ſpace deſcribed in the time AG: : AB: AG.. Alſo, BC, GN repreſent the velocities generated in the times AB, AG; and from the ſame ſimilar triangles, the ſpace deſcribed in the time AB: the ſpace deſcribed in the time AG :: BC: GN. 255. Ex. If a body be accelerated from a ſtate o reſt by an uniform force, and deſcribe m feet in the firſt ſecond of time, it will deſcribe 4m, om, 16m,.... mT feet, in the 2, 3, 4.. .. T firſt ſeconds. 236. Cor. 1. The ſpace deſcribed, reckoning from the beginning of the motion, is half that which would be be deſcribed in the ſame time with the laſt acquired velocity continued uniform. Complete the parallelogram BD; then, it appears from the propoſition, that the ſpace deſcribed in the time AB, reckoning from the beginning of the motion: the ſpace deſcribed in the time IB with the uniform velocity BC :: the triangle ABC: BR. Alſo, the ſpace deſcribed in the time IB, with the uniform velocity BC: the ſpace deſcribed in the time AB, with the ſame uniform velocity :: IB: AB (Art. 13) : BQ: BD; and by compounding theſe tuvo proportions, we have, the ſpace deſcribed in the time AB, when the body's motion is accelerated from a ſtate of reſt: the ſpace deſcribed in the ſame time with the laſt acquired velocity continued uniform :: the triangle ABC : the rectangle BD :: I: 2. 237. Cor. 2. The ſpace deſcribed in the time GB is repreſented by the area GBCN,; or, if NM be drawn parallel to GB, by the rectangle GM together with the triangle NMC. Nou, GM repreſents the ſpace which a body would deſcribe in the time GB, with the uniform velocity GN; and the triangle NMC, which is ſimilar to the triangle ABC, repreſents the ſpace through which the body would be moved from a ſtate of reſt, by the action of the force, in the time G B GB; thus, the ſpace deſcribed in any time, when a body is projected in the direction of the force, is equal to the ſpace which it would have deſcribed, in that time, with the firſt velocity continued uniform, together with the ſpace through which it would have been moved from a ſtate of reſt, in the ſame time, by the action of the force. 238. Cor. 3. If a body be projected in a direction oppoſite to that in which the uniform force acts, with the velocity BC, and move till that velocity is deſtroyed, the whole time of it's motion is repreſented by BA, (Art. 230), and the ſpace deſcribed by the area ABC (Art. 233). Alſo, the ſpace deſcribed in the time BG is repreſented, on the ſame ſcale, by the area BGNC, that is, by the rectangle BL diminiſhed by the triangle CLN, or CNM. Thus it appears, that the ſpace deſcribed in the time BG, is equal to that which would have been deſcribed with the firſt velocity conrinued uniform during that time, diminiſhed by the ſpace through which the body would have been moved from a ſtate of reſt, in the ſame time, by the action oſ the uniform force. PROP. LVII. 239. When bodies are put in motion by uniform forces, the ſpaces deſcribed in any times, reckoning from the beginning of the motion in each caſe, are proportional to the times and laſt acquired velocities jointly. Let S and s be the ſpaces deſcribed in the times T and 1 V and v the velocities acquired; then 2 and 25 are the ſpaces which would be deſcribed in the times times T and 1, with the uniform velo (Art. 236); and the ſpaces deſcribed velocities are proportional to the times jointly (Art. 14); hence, 25 : as :: TV : to, ors : s :: TV : tv (Alg. Art. 1 that is, Soc TV (Alg. Art. 195). 240. Cor. Hence, the times vary directly and the laſt acquired velocities PRoOP. LVIII. 241. The ſpaces deſcribed vary alſo a ſquares of the times; or as the ſquares directly and the forces inverſely. In general, Soc TV (Art. 239) and 228); hence, To FI (Alg. Art. ac Soc FET:. Ailſo, T2 therefore, conſequently, Soc Q 242. COr. I. If T be given, S& I ſpaces deſcribed in equal times, by boc put in motion by uniform forces, are thoſe forces. 243. Cor. 2. Since soſ , we have Art. 203); that is, the ſquares of the municated are proportional to the for deſcribed jointly. 244. Cor. 3. If V be given, Sock. 245. Cor. 4. When bodies in motion are retarded by uniform forces, and move till their whole velocitie: are deſtroyed, the ſpaces deſcribed vary as the force and ſquares of the times; or, as the ſquares of the firſi velocities directly and the forces inverſely. For, the time in which any velocity is deſtroyed, is equal to the time in which it would be generated by the ſame force; alſo, the ſpaces deſcribed, on ſuppoſition that the body in the latter caſe is moved from a ſtate of reſt, are equal (Art. 233); therefore, the ſame expreſſions which repreſent the relations of the forces, ſpaces, times, and velocities, in accelerated motions, repreſent them alſo when the motions are retarded, and the bodies move till their whole velocities are deſtroyed. Thus, when bodies are made to impinge upon banks of earth, ſand, &c. where the retarding forces are invariable, the depths to which they ſink, or the whole ſpaces deſcribed, are as the ſquares of the firſt velocities directly and the forces inverſely; and the reſiſting forces are as the ſquares of the firſt velocities directly and the ſpaces inverſely. PROP. LIX. 246. If a body be moved from a ſtate of reſt by the action of an uniform force, the ſpaces deſcribed in equal ſucceſſive portions of time, reckoned from the beginning of the motion, are as the odd uumbers 1, 3, 5. 7a 9, &c. If m be the ſpace deſcribed in the firſt portion of time, 4m will be the ſpace deſcribed in the two firſt portions (Art. 235); therefore amm, or 3m, will be the  nuun the ſpace deſcribed in the ſecond portion alone. Alſo, 9m will be the ſpace deſcribed in the three firſt portions of time, and conſequently qm - qm, or 5m, will be the ſpace deſcribed, in the third portion, &c. Thus the ſpaces deſcribed, in the equal ſucceſſive portions oſ time, are m, gm, 5m, 7m, om, &c. which are as the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, &c. 247. Cor. When a body is retarded by an invariable force, the ſpaces deſcribed in equal portions of time, reckoning from the end of the motion, are as the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, &c. For, when a body moves till is whole motion is deſtroyed by an uniform force, the ſpace deſcribed in any time is equal to that which would be deſcribed in the correſponding time, were the body moved from a ſtate of reſt by the action of the ſame force (See Art. 23 3)ProP. LX. 248. The force of gravity, at any given place, is an uniform force, which always acts in a direction per pendicular 120 the horizxon, and accelerates all bodies equally. The ſame body will by it's gravity always produce the ſame effect under the ſame circumſtances; thus, it will, at the ſame place, bend the ſame ſpring in the ſame degree; it will alſo fall through the ſame ſpace in the ſame time, if the reſiſtance of the air be removed; therefore, the force of gravity is uniform. Alſo, all bodies which fall freely by this force, deſcend in lines perpendicular to the horizon; and, in an exhauſted receiver, they all fall through the ſame ſpace in the ſame time; conſequently, gravity acts in a direction perpen- perpendicular to the horiæon (Art. 29), and accelerates all bodies equally (Art. 242). It is found by experiments made on the deſcent o heavy bodies, and on the oſcillations of bodies in ſmall circular ares (Art. 302), that every body which fall: freely in vacuo by the force of gravity, deſcends from reſt through 16, feet in one ſecond. This fact being eſtabliſhed, every thing relating to the deſcent of bodies when they are accelerated by the force of gravity, and to their aſcent when they are retarded by that force, ſuppoſing the motions to be in vacuo, may be deduced from the foregoing propoſitions. 1ſt. When a body falls by the force of gravity, the velocity acquired in any time, as T', is ſuch as would carry it uniformly over am T feet in 1, where mæ 16,. Since a body falls 16,4, feet in 1, it acquires a velocity which would carry it uniformly through 323 feet in 1 (Art. 236); and when a body is accelerated by a given invariable force, the velocity generated is proportional to the time (Art. 226); therefore 1: T' 2:325: 323 T, the velocity acquired in T'; that is, the velocity acquired is ſuch as would carry the body uniformly over 325 T feet in 1. Let V be the velocity acquired, and m æ 16.5, then Væ 2mT. 2d. The ſpace fallen through in T', reckoned from the beginning of the motion, is m T feet. For Soc T* (Art. 234); therefore 12: Tæ: :: m: mT, the ſpace deſcribed in T. That is, SæmT.. EX. 1. In 3 a body ſalls qm, or 9x 16,, æ 144 feet. Ex. I949 m . Ex. 2. In ,a body falls 4 or 16-.  feet. 3d. The ſpace fallen through to acquire t l ty V, isfeet. 4m For, S o V2 (Art. 234); therefore, æm* : S, and 5 fgeet. 4m Ex. If a body fall from reſt till it has ac locity of ao feet per ſecond, the ſpace fallen 20 X 20 , or 6.21 feet, nearly. 645 From the three preceding expreſſions, V: ra smT?; and sZa any one of the quan V, being given, the other two may be foun Ex. To find the time in which a body wil t; and the velocity acquired. . 5 ſ5 Since RESU  90 and T& 23 ſ90 ſe, Tæ V  2. 36 ſeconds, nearly. 1645 Alſo, , therefore, Væa Vmò5; in æ 2 V 16-5 x 90 2 76 feet per ſecond, near 4th. If a body fall from reſt by the force of e ſpaces deſcribed in any equal ſucceſſive pc VOL. III. K time, reckoning from the beginning of the motion, are as the numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, &. Thũs, the ſpaces fallen through in the 14, an, 31, 4ù ſeconds are 1645. 3 x 16,, 5 x 16-/5, 7 x 16,. feet, reſpectively. Alſo, if a body, projected upwards, move till it's whole velocity is deſtroyed, the ſpaces deſcribed in equal ſucceſſive portions of time are as the numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, &c. taken in an inverted order. Thus, if the velocity be wholly deſtroyed in 4, the ſpaces deſeribed in the 1, 1, 3t, 4 ſeconds are 7 x 16-5, 5x 16,.,, 3 x 16,, 16,, feet, reſpectively. 5th. If a body begin to move in the direction oſ gravity with any velocity, the whole ſpace deſcribed in any time is equal to the ſpace through which the firſt velocity would carry the body, together with the ſpace through which it would fall by the force of gravity in that time (Art. 237). Ex. If a body be projected perpendicularly downwards, with a velocity of 20 feet per ſecond, to find the ſpace deſcribed in 4'. The ſpace deſcribed in 4 with the firſt velocity is 4X 20, or 8o feet; and the ſpace fallen through in 4'by the action of gravity is 1624 x 16, or 2575 feet; therefore, the whole ſpace deſcribed is 80 2 575, or 3375 feet. 6th. If a body be projected perpendicularly upwards, the height to which it will aſcend in any time is equal to the ſpace through which it would move with the firſt velocity continued uniform, diminiſhed by the ſpace through which it would fall by the action of gravity in that time (Art. 238) Ex. Ex. 1. To what height will a body riſe in 3ꝰ, il projected perpendicularly upwards with a velocity ol 100 feet per ſecond? Thè ſpace which the body would deſcribe in 3, with the firſt velocity, is 300 feet; and the ſpace through which the body would fall by the force oſ gravity in 3', is 16.2, x 9, or 1443 feet; therefore the height required is 300 - 1444, or 1557 feet. Ex. 2. If a body be projected perpendicularly upwards with a velocity of 8o feet per ſecond, to find it's place at the end of 6. The ſpace which would be deſcribed in 6', with the firſt velocity, is 480 feet, and the ſpace fallen throngh in the ſame time is 1644. x 36, or 579 feet; therefore the diſtance of the body from the point of projection, at the end of 6, is 480 579, or99 feet. The negative ſign ſhews that the body will be below the point of projection (See Alg. Art. 474)PrROP. LXI. 249. The force which accelerates or retards a body's motion upon an inclined plane, is to the force of gravily, as the height of the plane to it's length. Let AC be the plane, BC it's baſe, parallel to the A B horiæon, AB it's perpendicular height, D the place ſ X 2 of of a body upon it. From the point D draw DE parallel to AB, and take D E to repreſent the force of gravity; from E draw E F perpendicular to AC. Then the whole force DE is equivalent to the two DF, FE, of which FE is perpendicular to the plane, and conſequently, is ſupported by the plane's reaction (Art. 116); the other force D F, not being afſfected by the plane, is wholly employed in accelerating or retarding the metion of the body in the direction o the plane; therefore, the accelerating force: the force of gravity :: DF : DE :: (from the ſimilar triangles DEPF, ABC) AB: AC. 250. Cor. 1. Since the accelerating force, on the ſame plane, is in a given ratio to the force of gravity, it is an uniform force. 251. Cor. 2. If H be the height of an inclined plane, L it's length, and the force of gravity be repreſented by unity, the accelerating force on the inclined plane is repreſented by a For, the accelerating force: the force of gravity (1) 1: H: L; therefore the accelerating force æ ĩ 252. Cor. 3. Since H: L :: the ſine of the planes inclination: the radius, æ or the accelerating force, varies as the ſine of the plane's inclination to the horizon. 253. Cor. 4. If a body fall down an inclined plane, the velocity V, generated in T, is ſuch as would carry it uniformly over - X2m T feet in 1'; where L. mæ 1625. In In general, Voc F T (Art. 228); therefore, the velocity acquired when a body falls by the ſorce of grarity : che velocity acquired on the inclined plane :: the product of the numbers which repreſent the force and time in the former caſe: the product of the numbers which repreſent them in the latter*; alſo, the force of gravity being repreſented by unity, the accelerating force upon the plane is 7 Æ and the velocity generated by the force of gravity in 1is am; therefore, am: H H V :: I X I  x T; and VæT x anT ſ. Ex. Thus, if the length of an inclined plane be twice as great as it's height, a body which falls down this plane will, in 3', acquire a velocity of à x 323 x 3, or 48ã feet per ſecond. 2 54. Cor. 5 The ſpace fallen through in T', from a ſtate of reſt, is l x mT feet. In general, Soc FT (Art. 241); thereſore, the ſpace through which a body falls by the action of gravity in 1: the ſpace through which it falls down the inclined plane in T :: the product of the numbers which repreſent the force and ſquare of the time in the former caſe: the product of the numbers which repreſent them in the latter; or, if S be the ſpace deſcribed * See note, page 12. 4 In this, and the following articles, the planes are ſuppoſed to be perſectly ſmooth, and the reſiſtance of the air inconſiderable. ſcribed upon the plane, m: S :: 1x 1 H H SæT. x mTU. Ex. 1. If Læ 2H, the ſpace through which falls in 3' is 2x 162, x 9, or 723 feet. Ex. 2. To find the time in which a body ſcend 12 feet down this plane. Since 5à xmT⸗, m&⸗ § u (in this X I 2 X I E1.49; and Tæ 1.2, nearly. I 61 255. Cor. 6. The ſpace through which muſt fall, from a ſtate of reſt, to acquire the L V: V, is qH m feet. In general, so& (Art. 241); therefore, tl through which the body falls by the force ofſ the ſpace through which it falls down the pla in the former caſe: - in the latter; and if m be the ſpace fallen through by the action of 2m is the velocity acquired; hence, m: S: L L V πm*V H and § ꝗx qm . Ex. 1. If Læ2H, and a body fall from a reſt till it has acquired a v of 30 feet per the ſpace deſcribed is 2 2x Æ ara1. 97 feet, nt Ex. 2. If a body fall 12 feet ſrom a ſtate of reſt down this plane, to find the velocity acquired. Since S tE this caſe) 643 x 12 x - 386; hence, Væ 19.6 feet per v c IFr. x cm we have V s4mS x J Æ (in ſecond, nearly. Cor. 7. In the ſame manner, if a body be acted upon by any uniform force, which is to the force oſ gravity as F: 1, and V repreſent the velocity generated, T the time in ſeconds, S the ſpace deſcribed, in feet, recconed from the beginning of the motion, then Væ am FT; SæmFT; and V?æ 4mF&. PROP. LXII. 2 56. The velocity which a body acquires in falling down the whole length of an inclined plane, varies as the ſquare root of the perpendicular height of the plane *. In general, when the force is uniform, V:oc FES (Art. 243); in this caſe, H and S æ L, by the H ſuppoſition; therefore Vè & TX Lx H; and Voc VH (Alg. Art. 202). 257. Cor. 1. When the heights of two inclined planes are equal, the velocities acquired in falling down their whole lengths are equal. 258. Cor. 2. The velocity which a body acquires in falling down the length of an inclined plane is equal to the velocity which it would acquire in falling down its perpendicular height. ProOP.  Bodies, in this, and the ſubſequent propoſitions, are ſuppoſed to fall from a ſtate of reſt. PRrOP. LXIII. 259. The time of a body's deſcent douwn the whole length of an inclined plane, varies as the length directly, and as the ſquare root of the perpendicular height inverſely. In general, Soc TV (Art. 239); therefore, Toc RE and in this caſe, Voc / H (Art. 256); conſeuently, T- S  Æ q Y. i VH VH 260. Cor. I. If the height, or the laſt acquired velocity be given, Toc L. 261. Cor. 2. If the inclination be given, or Hoc L, then ſEe and Toc / T. Tnat is, the times of deſcent. down planes equally inclined to the horizon, vary as the ſquare roots of their lengths. 262. Cor. 3. The time of deſcent down an inclined plane, is to the time of falling down iv's perpendicular height, as the length of the plane to its height. PROP. LXIV. 263. If chords be drawn in a circle from the extremity of that diameter which is perpendicular to the horizon the velocities which bodies acquire by salling down them are proportional to their lengths; and the times of deſcen are equal. Let ACB be the circle, AB it's diameter perpendicular to the horion; BC a chord drawn from the extremit; f the diameter; join AC, and dra A to AB, or parallel to the horizon. nſidered as an inclined plane who iight is DB, and the velocity acqui it varies as / DB (Art. 256). ar triangles DBC, ABC, DB: CB cꝑ l fore DB æ a58ꝰ and VDE CB HlJ Voc, and AB is invariable; v2ae s ll, V (Art. 240), and in this caſe ſpace deſcribed, has been proved to the velocity acquired; therefor me of deſcent is invariable. I. The time of deſcent down any to the time of deſcent down the di 2. In the ſame manner, the ti AC is equal to the time of deſcen AB; therefore the time of deſcent down AC is equa to the time of deſcent down CB. 266. Cor. 3. The times of deſcent down the chord: thus drawn, in difſerent circles, are proportional to the ſquare roots of the diameters. For, the times of deſcent down the chords are equal to the times of deſcent down the diameters which are perpendicular to the horizon; and theſe times vary as the ſquare roots of the diameters (See Art. 234). 267. When a body falls freely by the force of gravity, every particle in it is equally accelerated; that is, every particle deſcends towards the horizon with the ſame velocity; in this deſcent, therefore, no rotat ion will be given to the body. The ſame may be ſaid when a body deſcends along a perfectly ſmooth inclined plane, if that part of the force which acts in a direction perpendicular to the plane (Art. 249), be ſupported; that is, if a perpendicular to the plane, drawn from the center of gravity of the body, cut the plane in a point which is in contact with the body. If this part of the force be not ſuſtained by the plane, the body will partly roll and partly ſlide, till this force is ſuſtained; and afterwards the body will wholly ſlide. Waen the lateral motion is entirely prevented by the adheſion of the body to the plane, we have before ſeen on what ſuppoſition the body will roll (Art. 186); if the adheſion be not ſufficient to prevent all lateral motion, this body will partly ſlide and partly roll; and to eſtimate the ſpace deſcribed, the time of it's motion, or the velocity acquired, we muſt have recourſe to other principles than thoſe above laid down. On this ſubject the Reader may conſult Prof. VINCE'S Plan of a Courſe of Lectures, p. 39. 268. When 268. When a body falls freely by the force oſ gravity, or deſcends along a perfectly ſmooth inclined plane, the accelerating force is the ſame, whatever be the weight of the body (Arts. 248. 249.); conſequently, the moving force, on either ſuppoſition, is proportional to the quantity of matter moved. In all caſes, the accelerating force varies as the moving force directly and the quantity of matter inverſely (Art. 24); and when the moving force and quantity oſ matter moved are invariable, the accelerating force is uniform, and it's effects may be eſtimated by the rules laid down in the firſt part of this ſection. Ex. If two bodies, whoſe weights are P and , be connected by a ſtring, and hung over a fixed pulley, to find how far the heavier P will deſcend in T. The moving force of gravity is proportional to the weight; if therefore P be taken to repreſent the moving force of the former body when it deſcends freely, Q vill repreſent the moving force of the latter, and PQg& uwill repreſent the moving force when the bodies are connected and oppoſe each other's motion; hence, neglecting the inertia of the ſtring and pulley, the accelerating force of gravity: the accelerating force PQVP2 in this caſe::  pFQ: and, ſince FT: P P8U PæQ ccx. PQ cS, 1 x 1  ;5Qx Ti 162 162, x ꝑ x T? the ſpace required. SECTION ON THE OSCILLATIONS OF BODIES IN CYCLOIDS AND IN SMALL CIRCULAR ARCS. ProPr. LXV. 269. TF a body deſcend down a ſyſtem of inclined planes, the velocity acquired, on the ſuppoſition that no motion is loſt in paſſing from one plane to another, is equal to that which would be acquired in falling through the perpendicular height of the ſyſtem. Let ABCD be the ſyſtem of planes; draw AE, D F DF parallel to the horion; produce CB, DC till . they they meet AE in G and E; and draw EF perpendicular to DF. Then the velocity acquired by a body in falling from A to B, is equal to that which it would acquire in falling from G to B, becauſe the planes AB, GB have the ſame perpendicular height (Art. 257); and ſince, by the ſuppoſition, no velocity is loſt in paſſing from one plane to another, the body wvill begin to deſcend down BC with the ſame velocity, whether it fall doun AB or GB; conſequently, the velocity acquired at C will be the ſame on either ſuppoſition. Alſo, the velocity acquired at C is equal to that which would be acquired in falling down EC (Art. 257); and no velocity being loſt at C, the body will begin to deſcend down C D with the ſame velocity, whether it fall from A through B and C to D, or from E to D; and the velocity acquired in falling down ED is equal to the velocity acquired in falling through the perpendicular height EF (Art. 258) therefore, the velocity acquired in falling down the whole ſyſtem, is equal to the velocity acquired in falling through tlie perpendicular height of the ſyſtem. PROP. LXVI. 270. IFf a body fall from a ſtate of reſt down a curve ſurface which is perſectly ſmocth, the velocity acquired is equal to that which would be acquired in falling from reſt through the ſame perpendicular height. When a body paſſes from one plane AB to another BC, the whole velocity: the quantity by which the velocity is diminiſhed : : radius: the verſed ſine of the LABG (Art. 221); when, thereſore, the angle ABG is is diminiſhed without limit, the velocity loſt is diminiſhed without limit; and if the lengths of the planes as well as their angles of inclination ABG, BCE be continually diminiſhed, the ſyſtem approximates to a curve, as it's limit, in which no velocity is loſt; conſequently, the whole velocity acquired is equal to that which a body would acquire in falling through the ſame perpendicular altitude (Art. 269) *. 271. Cor. 1. If a body be projected up a curve, the perpendicular height to which it will riſe is equal to that through which it muſt fall to acquire the velocity of projection. For * When the chord of an arc is diminiſhed without limit with reſpect to the diameter, the verſed ſine is diminiſhed without limit with reſpect to the chord; becauſe, the diameter: the chord:: the chord: the verſed ſine; hence, the ratio of the diameter to the verſed ſine, and conſequently, the ratio of the radius to the verſed ſine, is, in this caſe, indefinitely greater than the ratio of the diameter to the chord. Let BC be one of the evaneſcent planes, V the velocity of the deſcending body at B, V-ro it's velocity at C; produce CB to G, and let GB be the ſpace through which the body muſt deſcend to acquire the velocity ; then, V: V4 v2: VGB: /GUBUBC; and when GB: BC :: the radius : an evaneſcent chord, V: V4v : GB: c  Æ (See note, page 126); therefore, V: v :: c8. &. aGB: EC. Alſo, V: the veIocity loſt at B:: radius: the verſed ſine of the angle 4 BG. Hence it follows, that the ratio of V to the velocity loſt at B, is indefinitely greater than the ratio of V to the velocity acquired in the deſcent from B to C; and conſequently, the velocity loſt at B is indeſinitely leſs than the velocity acquired in the deſcent from Æ to C; in the ſame manner, the velocity loſt at any other plane, is indefinitely leſs than the velocity acquired in the deſcent down that plane; therefore, the velocity loſt in the whole deſcent is indefinitely leſs than the whole velocity acquired. For the body in it's aſcent will be retarded by the ſame degrees that it was accelerated in it's deſcent. 272. COr. 2. If BAb be a curve in which the loweſt point is A, and the parts A B, Ab are ſimilar and equal, a body in falling down BA uwill acquire a b velocity which will carry it to ò, and ſince the velocities at all equal altitudes in the aſcent and deſcent are equal, the whole time of the aſcent will be equal to the time of deſcent. 273. Cor. 3. The ſame propoſition is true, if the body be retained in the curve by a ſtring which is in every point perpendicular to it. For the ſtring will now ſuſtain that part of the weight which was before ſuſtained by the curve (Art. 117). PROP. LXVII. 274. The times of deſcent down ſimilar ſyſtems of inclind planes, ſimilarly ſituated, are as the ſquare roots of their lengths, on the ſuppoſition that no velocity is loſt in paſſiug from one plane to another. Let ABCD, abed, be two ſimilar ſyſtems of inclined planes, ſimilarly ſituated; that is, let AB: ab :: BC: be:: CD: cd; the angles ABC, BCD, reſpectively equal to the angles abe, bed; and the planes AB, ab, equally inclined to the horizon. Complete the figures as in the laſt propoſition; then, ſince AB: ab :: BC tion is loſt in paſſing from one plane to another, the times of deſcent down BC and bc are the ſame, whether the bodies deſcend from A and a, or from G and 5; conſequently, when the bodies deſcend down the ſyſtems, the time down BC: the time down bc :: VUB: / ab. In the ſame manner it may be ſhewn that the time down CD: the time down cd: VãB: dab. Hence, the time down AB: the time down ub :: the time down BC: the time down be:: the time down CD: the time down cd; therefore, the time down AB-BCCD : the time down ab- bc 4 cd :: the time down AB: the time down ab :: VãB : Vqb (Algebra, Art. 183) 2: VAB4 BCHCD: vVab  be4cd. 275. Cor. 1. If the lengths of the planes, and their angles of inclination ABG, BCE, &c. be continually diminiſhed, the limits, to which theſe ſyſtems approximate, are ſimilar curves, ſimilarly ſituated, in which no velocity is loſt (Art. 270); hence, the whole times of deſcent down theſe curves will be as the ſquare roots of their lengths. 276. Cor. 2. The times of deſcent down ſimilar circular arcs, ſimilarly ſituated, are as the ſquare roots of the arcs, or as the ſquare roots of their radii. 277. Def. If a circle be made to roll in a given VOL. III. L plane plane upon a ſtraight line AB, the point C in the circumference, which was in contact with AB at the beginning of the motion, will, in a revolution of the circle, deſcribe a curve ACE B called a cycloid. The line AB is called the baſe of the cycloid. The circle HCD is called the generating circle. The line FE, which is drawn biſecting AB at right angles, and produced till it meets the curve in E, is called the axis, and the point E, the vertex, of the cycloid. 278. Cor. 1. The baſe AB is equal to the circumference of the generating circle; and AF to half the circumference. 279. Cor. 2. The axis FE is equal to the diameter of the generating circle. Waen the generating circle comes to F, draw the diameter Fæ, which will be perpendicular to AB (Evuc. 18. 3); and becauſe the circle has completed half a revolution, x is the generating point; that is, æ is a point in the cycloid, or æ coincides with E. PROP. LXVIII. 280. If a line CGK, drawn from a point C in the cycloid, parallel to the baſe AB, meet the generating circle, deſcribed upon the axis, in G, the circular arc EG is equol to the right line CG. Let the generating circle HCD touch the baſe in D when the generating point is at C; drav D H perpen dicular to AB, and it will be the diameter of the circli H CD (Evuc. 19. 3), and therefore equal to FE; jpoir CH, GE; and ſince DHæFE, and DIæ FK, (Eve 34. 1), the remainders IH and KE are equal; con ſequently ſequently, CI, which is a mean proportional b H I and I.D (Evc. Cor. 8. 6), is equal to G, is a mean proportional between E K and & each of theſe equals add IG, and CGEæ IK. C H, which is a mean proportional between l H D, is equal to GE, which is a mean propo between EKX and EF; therefore, the arc C Hæ GE (Evuc. 28. 3); and ſince every point in C been ſucceſſively in contact with AD, C Dæ A HCDI AF (Art. 278); hence, the arc C H: therefore, the arc EGæ DF æ IKæCG. Cor. Iſf the line GC be always drawn perpe lar to EF the diameter of the circle EGF, and taken equal to the arc EG, the locus of the pol a cycloid, whoſe axis is EF. PRrOP. LXIX. 281. If a line LM, drawn from L taralle baſe A B, meet the generating circle deſcribed upon in M, and EM be joined, the tangent to the cycloid point L is parallel to the chord EM. Draw SR parallel and indefinitely near to LM EM, RM. S L; produce EM till it meets SR Irav EN, MN touching the ciicle in Æ and à meeting each other in N. L 2 Then ſince RM is ultimately in the direction of the A tangent MN (NEWT. Lem. 6), the angles RMP, EMMN are equal; and becauſe EN is parallel to RS (Eve. 18. 3), the angles MPR, MEN are equal; therefore, the triangles EMN, RMP are equi-angular, and EN: MN: RP: RM, and ſince ENæNM, RPæ RMæthe arc RM (NEWT. Lem 7). Agiin, ſince the arc EMRæ RS (Art. 260), and RMæÆRP, the remainders, the arc EM and the right line PS are equal; alſo, ML æ the arc EM; therefore, PSæ ML; conſequently, SL is equal, and parallel to PM (Evc. 33. 1æ); and ſince SL is ultimately in the direction of the tangent at L (NEWT. Lem. 6), MP, or EM, is parallel to the tangent at L. 282. Cor. The tangent to the cycloid at B or 4 is perpendicular to AB. PrOP. LXX. 283. The ſume conſtruction being made, the cycloidal EL is double of EM the correſponding chord of the gen rating circle deſcribed upon the axis. Jo * The propoſition may be juſtly applied, becauſe the differer between LM and S P is evaneſcent with reſpect tbo M P, or L S. Join ER, and in EP take Eo æ ER; join Ro. Then, when the are MR, and conſequently the angle MEMBR, is diminiſhed without limit, the ſum of the angles E Ro, EoR approximates to two right angles as it's limit; and theſe angles are equal to each other; therefore, each of them is a right angle; and ſince the angles RMo, RoM are reſpectively equal to RPo, RoP, and Ro is common to the triangles RoM, RPo, Moæ oP, and MPæ2Mo; alſo, Mo ER-EM) is the quantity by which the chord EM increaſes, whilſt the cycloidal arc EL increaſes by L S; and it appears from the demonſtration of the laſt propoſition that MP æ L Sæ arc LS (NEWT. Lem. 7); therefore, the arc L Sæ a Mo; or, the cycloidal arc EL increaſes twice as faſt as the correſponding chord EM; and they begin together at E; conſequently, the cycloidal arc EL is double of EM, the correſponding chord oſ the generating circle. 284. Cor. The whole ſemi-cycloidal arc E B is equal to twice the axis EF. PrOP. LXXI. 285. To make a body oſcillate in a given &eloid. Let AVB be the given cycloid, placed with it's vertex downwards, and it's axis DV perpendicular to the horizon. Produce V D to C, making DCæVD; complete the rectangles DE, DF; upon AE deſcribe a ſemicircle AGE, and with A as the generating point. and baſe EC, deſcribe a ſemi-cycloid Æ TC; this will paſs through the point C, becauſe the ſemi-circumference AGEæ DHV æ A Dæ EC; in the ſame manner, deſcribe deſcribe an equal ſemi-cycloid between C and B Then, if a body P be ſuſpended from C by a ſtring whoſe length is CV or CTA (Art. 284), and made to vibrate between the cycloidal cheeks CA, CB, it will always be found in the cycloid AV. Let the ſtring be brought into the ſituation CTP, and ſince it is conſtantly ſtretched by the gravity, and the centriſugal force of P, it will be a tangent to the cycloid at the point T where it leaves the curve. From T and P draw TGHW, PHR parallel to AD; join AG, GE, D H, HV; and through X draw xKy perpendicular to TG or PH. Then, ſince the chord AG is parallel to TP (Art. 281), and TG is parallel to AK, the figure GX is a parallelogram, and AGæ TK, GTæ AK; and becauſe the length of the ſtring is equal to CTA, and the part CT is common to the ſtring and the cycloidal are, TPæATæ  24G (Art. 283) æ 2 T&; or TKæKP; hence, the triangles Tx, PKy are ſimilar and equal, and Kææ Ky; alſo, Kxæ AW and Kyæ DR,; therefore AW æDR; and AEæ DV, hence, the arc AGæ the arc DH; and the angle GEAæ the the angle HVD,; or, the angle GAKæ the angle KDH (Evc. 32. 3); conſequently, AG is parallel to DH; and therefore, TP is parallel to DH, and the figure KPHD is a parallelogram; hence, KD æ PH. Again, ſince the arc AGEGT (Art. 280) æ AK, the arc DH æ AK and the ſemi-circumference DHV æAD; therefore, the arc VH æ KDæ H P; that is, P is in the cycloid, whoſe axis is DV, and vertex V (Art. 2 80). 286. Cor. 1. Since DH is parallel to TP, and VH to the tangent at P, the angle contained between TP and the tangent, or between TP and the curve, is equal to the angle DHV; that is, TP is always perpendicular to the curve. 287. Cor. 2. If Pp be an evaneſcent arc, the perpendiculars to the curve at P and pꝓ, ultimately meet in T; and Pp may be conſidered as a circular arc whoſe radius is TP. 288. Cor. 3. An evaneſcent arc at the vertex oſ the cycloid may be conſidered as a circular arc whoſe radius is CV. 289. Def. If a body begin to deſcend in a curve, from any point, and again aſcend till it's velocity is deſtroyed (Art. 272), the time in which the motion is performed is called the time of an oſcillation. PrOP. LXXII. 290. If a body, vibrating in the cycloid AVB, begin to deſcend from L, the velocity acquired at any point M varies as VVL2 VM;; or, as the right ſine of a circular arc whoſe radius is equal to VL, and verſed ſine to LM. From From the points L and M, draw LOR, MÆQ right angles to DV, meeting the circle DOV and à; join OV, QV; with the radius Vlæ VL ſcribe the ſemicircle 17 p, and take Imæ LM; m x, VI, at right angles to VIl; and join Vx. The velocity acquired in the deſcent from L. is equal to the velocity acquired in falling from S (Art. 270); and therefore it varies as VRS 241); that is, & VRV SVoc VDVX RVDV (becauſe DV is invariablel, o / VO Vi VIVOT 4VQ  /VLVMFT (Art. 283) VVI:Vm o / VX-Vm: o V n æt oc m x. 291. Cor. The velocity at M: the velocity al næ: VI :: mx : Væ. PROP. LXXIII. 292. The time of an oſcillation in the are LVP is equal to the time in which a body would deſcribe the ſemicircumference 1Z.p with the velocity acquired at V continued uniform. Let MN be a very ſmall arc, and take m næ MN; draw nt, ær, reſpectively parallel to mæ and Vl; and ſuppoſe a body to deſcribe the circumference Iã with the velocity acquired at V continued uniform. Then, when MN is diminiſhed without limit, the velocity with which it is deſcribed: the velocity with which æt is deſcribed :: mæ: VI (A1t. 2913) therefore the time of deſcribing MN: the time oſ MN 1x xr cxt v TVT imæ Væ (Art. 15.) Now, the triangles Væm, xrt are ultimately ſimilar, and deſcribing x1 :: xr xt Vx: mæ:: xt: xr; therefore  æ ; conſequentl , . mx V& q ſ. the time of deſcent dowvn MN, is equal to the time of deſcribing the correſponding circular arc xt with the velocity Z; and the ſame may be proved of all other correſponding arcs in the cycloid and the circle; therefore the whole time of an oſcillation is equal to the time of deſcribing the ſemi-circumference Iã p, with the velocity acquired at V continued uniform. PrOP?. LXXIV. 293. The time of an oſcillation in a eycloid is to the time of deſcent down it's axis, as the circumference of a circle to its diameter. If If a body fall down the chord OV, the velocity acquired at V is equal to the velocity in the cycloid at V (Art. 270)5 and with this velocity continued uniform, the body would deſcribe a OV, or VL, or VI, in the time of deſcent dowun OV (Art. 237); that is, in the time of deſcent dovn DV (Art. 264). It E. c * appears then, that the time of an oſcillation is equal to the time of deſcribing I ã p with the velocity acquired in the cycloid at ? (Art. 292) and that the time of deſcent down the axis DV is equal to the time of deſcribing VI with the ſame velocity; therefore, the time of an oſcillation : the time oſ deſcent down the axis:: the time of deſcribing the circumference I ã p, with the velocity VZ: the time of deſcribing VI with the ſame velocity :: IZp : Vl (Art. 13) :: 2lZp: àVl :: the circumference of a circle: it's diameter. 294. 294. Cor. 1. The time of an oſcillation in a given cycloid, at a given place, is the ſame, whether the body oſcillate in a greater or a ſmaller arc. For, the time of an oſcillation bears an invariable ratio to the time of deſcent down the axis, which, in a given cycloid, is given. 295. Cor. 2. The time oſ an oſcillation in a ſmall circular arc whoſe radius is CV, is to the time of deſcent down 3CV, as the circumference of a circle to it's diameter. For, the time of an oſcillation in this circular arc is equal to the time of an oſcillation in an equal arc of the cycloid AVB (Art. 2588). 296. Cor. 3. The time of an oſcillation in a cycloid, or ſmall circular arc, when the force of gravity is given, varies as the ſquare root of the length of the ſtring. For, the time of an oſcillation varies as the time oſ deſcent down half the length of the ſtring; that is, as the ſquare root of half the length of the ſtring, or as the ſquare root of it's whole length. Ex. 1. To compare the times in which two pendulums vibrate, whoſe lengths are 4 and 9 inches. Since Toc VL, we have T: t:: V4: V9 :2 t 3. Ex. 2. If a pendulum, whoſe length is 39.2 inches. vibrate in one ſecond, in what time will a pendulum vibrate whoſe length is L inches? ſ 7T. 392: VL :: I1: TS & the time re quired, in ſeconds. Ex. Ex. 3. To compare the lengths of tuvo pendulums, whoſe times of oſcillation are as 1 to 3. Since Toc / L, T'æ L; therefore, 1: 9:: L: l. 297. Cor. 4. The number of oſcillations. which a pendulum makes in a given time, at a given place, varies inverſely as the ſquare root of it's length. Let n be the number of oſcillations, ? the time oſ one oſcillation; then, nt is the whole time, which, by the ſuppoſition, is given; therefore, noct (Alg. Art. 206), and 10c / L; conſequently, no vL Ex. 1. If a pendulum, whoſe length is 39.2 inches, vibrate ſeconds, or 60 times in a minute, how oſten will a pendulum whoſe length is ro inches vibrate in the ſame time? . Since no 90 we have V TO:  39.2 :1 60: 6o x V 3.92æ 118.8, nearly, the number of oſcillation: required. Ex. 2. If a pendulum, whoſe length is 39.2 inches vibrate ſeconds, to find the length of a pendulun which will vibrate double ſeconds, or 30 times in⸗ minute. . T Since noc, we have, Loc and in this caſe VU. i nꝰ 30: 6ο:: 39.2: LZÆ4 x 39.2 æ 156. 8 inches, tht length required. Ex Ex. 3. To find how much the pendulum of a clock which loſes one ſecond in a minute, ought to be ſhortened. Since the pendulum vibrates 59 times, whilſt a pendulum of 39.2 inches vibrates 60 times, it's length may be found as in the laſt example; 591: 60 39.2: 40.5, it's length; and it ought to be 39.2 inches; therefore, 40. 5 39.2, or 1.3 inches, is the quantity by which it ought to be ſhortened, in order that it muy vibrate ſeconds. 298. Cor. 5. If the force of gravity be not given, the time of an oſcillation varies as the ſquare root of the length of the pendulum directly, and as the ſquare root of the force of gravity inverſely. For, the time of an oſcillation varies as the time of deſcent down half the length of the ſtring; and in general, the time of deſcent through any ſpaceov§ (Art. 240); in this caſe, Sæ J L; therefore S o- L, and the time of deſcent æ v e hence T, the time oſ T an oſcillation, Vũ foss 299 Cor. 6. leci lengſlh of the pendulum be given, ñ and Foc 7The time in ha a  giten pendulum vibrates, increaſes as it is carried from a greater latitude on the earth's ſurſace to a leſs; therefore, the force of gravity decreaſes as the latitude decreaſes. 300. Cor. 7. The force of gravity at the equato : the force of gravity at any propoſed latitude :: the lengtſ length of a pendulum which vibrates ſeconds at the equator: the length of a pendulum which vibrates ſeconds at the propoſed latitude. For, Toc v ſ Fi VL, or Fo L. 301. Cor. 8. If the chord BV* be drawn, the time of deſcent down the cycloidal are BV: the time of deſcent down the chord:: DB: BV. For, the time of deſcent down the arc BV is equal to half the time of an oſcillation (Art. 272); therefore, the time of deſcent down the arc BV: the time of deſcent dovn DV :: half the circumference of a circle : its diameter:: DB: DV; alſo, the time of deſcent down DV: the time of deſcent down the chord BV :: DV: BV; therefore, ex æquo, the time of deſcent, down the arc BV: the time of deſcent down the chord 2DB: BV. if therefore T be given, / Foc Prop. LXXV. 302. The ſpace through which a body falls by the force of gravity in the time of an oſcillation in a cycloid, or ſmall circular arc, is to half the length of the pendulum, as the ſquare of the circumference of a circle to the ſquare of it's diameter. The ſpaces through which bodies fall by the action of the ſame uniform force are as the ſquares of the times (Art. 241); and ſince the time of an oſcillation : the time of deſcent down half the length of the pendulum :: the circumference of a circle: it's diameter, the ſpace fallen through in the time of an oſcillation: half * The line BV is wanting in the figure. half the length of the pendulum :: the ſquare of the cir. cumference of a circle: the ſquare of it's diameter. EX. To find how far a body will fall by the ſorce ol gravity in one ſecond, where the length of the pendulum, which vibrates ſeconds, is 39.2 inches. The circumference of a circle: it's diameter:: 3.14159: 15 conſequently, the ſpace fallen through in one ſecond: Q 23.141591: 1; hence the ſpace fallen through is 19.6 x 3.14159 æ 193 inches, or 16, feet, nearly. If the arc, in which a body oſcillates, be diminiſhed, the effect of the air's reſiſtance is diminiſhed; and when the arc is very ſiall, this reſiſtance does not ſenſibly diminiſh the time of an oſcillation. By obſerving, therefore, the length of a pendulum which vibrates ſeconds in very ſmall arcs, we determine the ſpace through which a body would fall in vacuo in one ſecond, with ſufficient accuracy for all practical purpoſes. PrOP. LXXVI. 303. The time of deſcent to the loweſt point in a ſmall circular arc is to the time of deſcent down it's chord, as the circumference of a circle to four times the diameter. Let AB be the arc, C its center, BD the diameter perpendicular to the horizon; T the time of deſcent down the arc AEB, t the time of deſcent down the chord, C the circumference of a circle, D it's diameter. Then, 2T is the time of an oſcillation of the pendulum CB; therefore, 2T: the time aon 2:C: D (Art. 295); CB e time down i the time down a (Art. 241); therefore, 2T: the 1 C: abb, and T: t :: C: 4D. PrOP. LXXVII. ſorce which accelerates or retards a oid varies as the arc intercepted betu weſt point. preſent the whole force of gravity 5.) from P draw PH parallel t ircle DHV in H; join DH, HV. whole force DV, which acts upo ay be reſolved into thè tvo DH, H in the directionof the ſtring, and ccelerates nor retards the motion the direction of the tangent at F erefore wholly employed in accelt he motion in the curve; conſeqt gravity: the accelerating force:: nce the force of gravity, and D e accelerating force o HV oc a HV 305. Cor. 1. If a body move in any line, and be acted upon by a force which varies as the diſtance from the loweſt point, the motion of this body will be ſimilar to the motion of a body oſcillating in a cycloid. For, if an arc, meaſured from the vertex of a cycloid, be taken equal to the line, and the accelerating forces, in the line and the cycloid, at theſe equal diſtances from the loweſt points, be equal, they will always be equal, becauſe they vary according to the ſame law; and the bodies, being impelled by equal forces, will be equally accelerated, and deſcribe equal ſpaces in any given time. 306. Cor. 2. The time of deſcent to the loweſt point in the line will always be the ſame, from whatever place the body begins to fall. 307. Cor. 3. If the diſtance of the body from the loweſt point at the beginning of the deſcent, be made the radius, the velocity acquired will be repreſented by the right ſine, and the time by the arc, whoſe verſed ſine is the ſpace fallen through. PROP. LXXVIII. 308. If a body vibrate in a circular arc, the force which accelerates or retards it's motion varies as the ſine of it's diſtance from the loweſt point. Let a body oſcillate in a circular arc whoſe radius is AC; from the center C, and A the place of the body, draw C B, AE perpendicular to the horizon, and take A E to repreſent the force of gravity; draw AD perpendicular to C B, and E F perpendiVoL. III. M cular cular to AF, which is a tangent to the circle at 4. Then, the force AE is equivalent to the two AF, FE; of which FE is perpendicular to the tangent APF, or in the direction of the radius CA, and can neither accelerate nor retard the motion of the body; the other, AF, is in the direction of the tangent, and is wholly employed in accelerating or retarding the body's motion; therefore, the force of gravity: the accelerating force :: AE: APF, that is, from the ſimilax triangles AEF, CAD, :: CA: AD,; and conſequently, gravity x A D AC preſſion, gravity and the radius AC are invariable; therefore, the accelerating force varies as AD. the accelerating force æ ; in which ex309. Cor. 1. If the accelerating force were proportional to the arc, the oſcillations, whether in greater or ſmaller arcs, would be performed in equal times (Art. 306); but, ſince the ſine does not increaſe as faſt as the arc, the force in the greater arc is leſs than that which would be ſufficient to make the time of oſcillation equal to the time in the ſmaller arc; there- therefore, the time of oſcillation in the greater circular arc is greater than in the leſs. 310. Cor. 2. Call F the force in the direction AE, then ſince AC is invariable, the accelerating force in the curveoc FEx AD; and if ExADoc AB, or Foc 25 the accelerating force varies as AB, and the times of oſcillation in different arcs are equal (Art. 306). M 2 SCHO- SCHOLIUM. 311. In this Section we have conſidered the vibrations of a ſimple pendulum only, or of a ſingle particle of matter, ſuſpended by a ſtring, the gravity of which is neglected. The propoſitions are indeed applicable in practice, when the diameter of the body is ſmall with reſpect to the length of the ſtring by which it is ſuſpended, and the weight of the ſtring inconſiderable when compared with the weight of the body. That the concluſions are not ſtrictly true in this caſe, is evident from the conſideration that two particles of matter, at different diſtances from the axis of ſuſpenſion, do not vibrate in the ſame time (Art. 296); and conſequently, that when they are connected. together, they affect each other's motion; thus, the time of vibration of the two particles when united, is different from the time in which either would vibrate alone. The method of determining the time of vibration of a compound pendulum, the Reader will find in the Principles of Fluxions, Art. 633 to which place he is alſo referred for the inveſtigation of the rules for determining the centers of Gyration, and Percuſſion; queſtions properly belonging to Mechanics, but inſerted in that part of the Work, becauſe the rules cannot eaſily be applied to the determination of thoſe points, even in the moſt ſimple caſes, without the aſſiſtance of the fluxional calculus. 312. To avoid the introduction of analytical demonſtrations in ſubjects profeſſedly geometrical, ; Sir Sir I. NEwTON and other Writers, have had recourſſ to indefinitely ſmall or evaneſcent increments, which continually approximate to the true increments oſ the quantities whoſe finite values are required. This method may be applied with ſucceſs in all caſes where the difference between the aſſumed and the true increments continually decreaſes, and at length vaniſhes, with reſpect to the increments themſelves; or, which amounts to the ſame thing, when the ratio which the ſum of the differences bears to one of the increments, does not exceed a finite ratio: for, by obſerving the limit to which the ſum of the aſſumed increments approaches, when their number is increaſed and their magnitudes are diminiſhed in infinitum, it is evident that the ſum of the real increments is obtained. In the ſame manner, when there are two ranks of quantities, in which the aſſumed increments continually approximate to the real increments, as in the former inſtance, and the limiting ratio of the ſums of the aſſumed increments in theſe caſes, when their numbers are increaſed and their magnitudes diminiſhed without limit, is obtained, the exact ratio of t he quantities themſelves is obtained. Theſe propoſitions are laid down by Sir I. NEWTON in the firſt Section of the Principia, Lem. 3d. and 4th. and the ſame mode of reaſoning has been applied in Art. 292 to compare the time of an oſcillation in the cycloid BVA, with the time of deſcribing the arc IZp with the velocity acquired at V continued uniform. In this Art. it is ſuppoſed that the time of deſcribing MN, with the uniform velocity mæ, is the increment of the former time, and that the time of deſcribing æ1, the ſide ſide of a triangle ſimilar to Vxm, with the velocity V2Z, is the increment of the latter; theſe aſſumed increments, it is manifeſt, differ from the true increments of the times under conſideration; but when they are diminiſhed without limit, they differ from them by quantities which are evaneſcent with reſpect to the whole increments, and therefore by determining the limiting ratio of the ſums of the aſſumed increments, we obtain the ratio of the actual times of deſcribing the correſponding arcs. SECTION ON THE MOTION OF PROJECTILES. Propr. LXXIX. 313. A BODY projected in any direction, not per pendicular to the horizon, will deſcribe a parabola. on ſuppoſition that the force of gravity is uniform, and acis it parallel lines, and that the motion is not affected by the reſiſtance of the air. Let a body be projected from A in the direction AE, from which point drav ABF perpendicular to the horizon; alſo, let AE be the ſpace over which the velocity of projection would carry the body in any time T, and AB the ſpace through which the force oſ gravity would cauſe it to deſcend in the ſame time; complete the parallelogram ÆC; then, in conſequence of the tuo motions, the body will be found in C at the end of that time. For, the motion in that direction AE AE can neither accelerate nor retard the approach ol the body to the line BC (Art. 29); therefore, at the end of the time T, the body will be in the line BC. and, by the ſame mode of reaſoning, it appears that it will be in the line EC at the ſame time; conſequently, it will be at G, the point of their interſection, at the end of the time T. Now, ſince AE is the ſpace which would be deſcribed in the time Tĩ, with the velocity of projection continued uniform, AE T (Art. 13); and BCæ AE; therefore BCoc T, and BC x Te. Alſo, ſince AB is the ſpace through which the body would fall by the force of gravity in the time T, ABoc T: (Art. 241); hence, AB& BC?; and this is the property of a parabola, in which AF is a diameter, and BC an ordinate to the abſciſſa AB. 314. Cor. 1. The axis, and all the diameters oſ the parabola deſcribed, being parallel to AF, are perpendicular to the horivon. 315. 315. Cor. 2. The direction of projection AE is parallel to the ordinate BC, and therefore it is a tangent to the curve at A. 316. Cor. 3. The time in which a body deſcribes the arc AC is equal to the time in which it would fall from A to B by the force of gravity, or deſcribe AE with the firſt velocity continued uniform. 317. Cor. 4. If the EA be made equal to the L EA b, the line Af will paſs through the focus oſ the parabola deſcribed. 318. Cor. s. The body will always be found in the plane ACB which paſſes through the direction oſ projection and the perpendicular to the horiZon. 319. Cor. 6. If the motion in the direction AE be produced by the action of an uniform force, AE ooc T20c AB; or ABœx BC; therefore, the locus of the point C is a right line. PrOP. LXXX. 320. The velocity of the projectile, at any point in the parabola, is ſuch as would be acquired in falliug througlh one fourth part of the parameter belonging to that point. Let AB be the ſpace through which a body muſt fall by the force of gravity to acquire the velocity oſ the projectile at A; and AE the ſpace deſcribed with that velocity continued uniform, in the time of falling through AB; then 2A8æ AE (Art. 237); and, completing the parallelogram AC, 24B æ BC; hence, 448  BC. Alſo, ſince C is a point in the parabola, bola, and C an ordinate to the abſciſſa AB (Art. p if P bo the parameter belonging to the po P x ABæ BC' æ 44B, therefore ABæ 3 P. 321. Cor. 1. If the velocity at A be givel parameter at that point is the ſame, whatever direction of the body's motion. 322. Cor. 2. If AB be the ſpace through a body muſt fall to acquire the velocity at 4, circle he deſcribed from the center A with the AB, the focus of the parabola deſcribed will lie circumference of this circle, whatever be the di of projection; ſince the diſtance of any point parabola from the focus, is one fourth part parameter belonging to that point. 323. Cor. 3. The velocity in a parabola va the ſquare root of the parameter. Since the velocity is ſuch as would be acqui falling through 2P, it varies as /3P (Art. 24 as PF. 324. Cor. 4. The velocity is the leaſt in the vertex of a parabola; and at equal diſtances from the vertex the velocities are equal. For, the parameter belonging to the vertex is the leaſt; and the parameters at equal diſtances from the vertex are equal. PrOP. LXXXI. 325. To find the direction in which a body must be projected from a given point, with a given velocity, to hit a given mark. Let A be the point from which the body is to be projected, C the given mark; join AC, and from 4 . draw draw AB parallel, and AP perpendicular to the horizon; take AP equal to ſour times the ſpace through which a body muſt fall to acquire the given velocity oſ projection, (determined by Art. 248, Caſe 3); then will AP be the parameter belonging to the point A ol the parabola deſcribed (Art. 320). Draw AK per. pendicular to AC; biſect PA in G, and draw KG H perpendicular to AP, meeting AK in Æ; join P; then the triangles KG P, KGA being ſimilar and equal, KPæ KA. From K as a center, with the radius 4, or P, deſcribe a circle AHP, cutting KGH in H; through C draw CEI parallel to AP, and cutting the circle in E and I; join AE, AI; and if a body be projected, with the given velocity, in the direction AE or Al, it will hit the mark C. Let the body be projected in the direction AE; join PE, and complete the parallelogram AECX; then AX is a diameter of the parabola deſcribed; and XC, which is parallel to the tangent AE, is in the direction of an ordinate to the abſciſſa AX; if then XC be the length of the ordinate to this abſciſſa, C is a point in the parabola. Now, ſince the angles AEC, EAP are alternate angles, and the angle EACÆ the angle EPA, becauſe AC is a tangent to the circle at A (Evc. 16. 3), the triangles EPA, EAC are ſimilar; and AP: AE :: AE: EC,; or by ſubſtituting for AE and EC their equals XC and AX, AP : XC :: XC: AX; that is, XC is a mean proportional between the parameter and the abſciſſa; and therefore it is the ordinate belonging to that abſciſſa; hence, C is a point in the parabola which the body deſcribes. In the ſame manner it may be ſhewn that, if te body body be projected with the ſame velocity in the direction AlI, it will hit the mark C. 326. Cor. 1. Join AH, HP; then the angle HAP  the angle H PAæ the angle HAC. 327. Cor. 2. Becauſe KH is drawn through the center of the circle perpendicular to the chord El, it biſects it, and conſequently it biſects the are IH Æ (Eve. 30. 3); therefore, the angle I4 Hæ the angle HAE. That is, the two directions AE, AI make equal angles with A H, which biſects the angle PAC. 328. Cor. 3. Draw HLM touching the circle in H; then, when the point C coincides with L, the two directions AE, AI, coincide with AH. 329. Cor. 4. If the point C be taken in the plane AL, beyond L, the line CEI will not meet the circle. In this caſe, the velocity of projection is not ſufficient to carry the body to the diſtance AC. 330. Cor. 5. Biſect AC in r, and draw tvr parallel to AP; then tovr is in the direction of a diameter, to which AC is a double ordinate. Alſo, rt is the ſubtangent; and if rt be biſected in v, this point is in the parabola. 331. Cor. 6. A tangent to the parabola at v is parallel to the ordinate AC; therefore, v is the point in the parabola which is at the greateſt diſtance from AC *. 332. Cor. 7. The greateſt height of the projectile above the plane, meaſured in the direction of gravity, is 21 EC. For, ruæ3j rt, and rtæ 3 EC; therefore, rvæ 3 EC. PROP.  THe properties of the parabola here referred to, may be found in any Treatiſe of Conic Sections. PROP. LXXXII. ring given the velocity and nd where the body will ſtril paſſes through the point of pro (Art. 325) coincide with hen AK coincides with AG P ; alſo, HAC is an angle oſ ully inclined to A H. e laſt propoſition it appea projection be ſuch as would ugh 1 PA, and AE, or Al ection, the range is AC. Frſ IC, or perpendicular to AP; equal AC, is the ſine of the and the angle EXA æ a LEI therefore, AC is the ſine of 2.4 EAC to the radius KA; and the ſine of a given angle is proportional to the radius; conſequently, rad. : KA : ſin. 2.4 EAC L AC, nence, AG ſin 2 tâxκd 3/ 1e taken to repreſent the velocity of projection, P the parameter A P, and m æ 1624, then AC Æ ſin. 2  EACX P ſin.2  EAC x V (Att. 248) 2 rad. 2 rad. x m li 49). In the ſame manner, if AI be the direction of prona: ſin. 2  IACX P ſin. 2 L IAC x V jection, 4 C  2 rad. 2 rad. x m 334. Cor. 1. Hence, AC & ſin. 2  EAC x V2. 335. Cor. 2. If the velocity of projection be invariable, the horizontal range varies as ſin. 2  EAC. 336. Cor. 3. The range is the greateſt when ſin. a L EAC is the greateſt; that is, when the LEAC is rad. x P p 2 rad. 337. Cor. 4. If the angle EAC be 150, or 75, ſin. 2 L EACæ 3 rad. and ACæ 3P. 3368. Cor. 5. If the range and the parameter be given, the angle of elevation may be found. For, AC æ ſin. 2 L E ACX P a rad. 2AC x rad. P 339. Cor. 6. If AC and the angle EAC be known. 2AC x rad. a2 rad. x mAC ſmn. EãC ænâ P ſin.  EAC 45. In this caſe, ACÆ ; therefore, ſin. 2  EAC æ - lli Peor PrOP. LXXXIII. hings being given, to fiud the time 1 which the velocity of projec red, or the time of deſcent dou 18); hence, the double of this I ent down PA, is ſ- (Art. 241) of deſcent down EA (Art. 264 f deſcent down PA, or EA, t thi EC, or the time of ſlight (A Dy ſù EA : EC (Art. 262); that LEAC, and  æ fin &Ed C rad. I. If the velocity of projectio ne of flight oc ſin.  EAC. 342. Cor. 2. Hence, the time of flight is the greateſt, when ſin. LEAC is the greateſt. In this mùxT or T; that is, the rad. greateſt time of ſlight is equal to the time of deſcent down the parameter. r caſe, the time becomes PRrOP. LXXXIV. 343. The ſame things being given, to find the greateſi height to which the projectile riſes above the horizontal plane. The greateſt height is EC, or 24D; and AD is the verſed ſine of the LAKE, or a cEAC, to the radius AK; conſequently, ſince the verſed ſine of a given angle varies as the radius, rad. : A& (P) :: the verſed ſine of 2  EAC: AD. Hence, ADæ ver. ſin. 24 EACXP. and 3 AD, the greateſt height, 2 rad. ll ver. ſin. 2 L EAC X Ppver. ſin. 2  EACXV: i 8 rad. i 8 rad. xm 344. Cor. 1. The greateſt height oc ver. ſin. 2  EACXV?; and when V is given, the greateſt height o ſin. 2  EAC. 345. Cor. 2. The verſed ſine of an arc varies as the ſquare of the ſine of half the arc; therefore the greateſt height oc ſin. ZEACVXV. 346. Cor. 3. A body, projected with a given velocity, will riſe to the greateſt height above the horizontal plane, when the angle of elevàlon EAC is a right angle. In this caſe, ver. ſin. 2 EACæ 2 rad. 2rad. x PP 8 rad VOL. III. N PROP. and the greateſt altitude is PrOP. LXXXV. 347. The velocity and direction of projection being given, to find where the body will ſirike a given inclined plane which paſſes through the point of projection. It appears from Art. 325, that if a body be projected from A, in the direction AE, with the velocity acquired in falling down 3 P4, it uill ſtrike the plane AC in the point C. Let I be the angle of inclination CAB; E the angle of elevation EAC; T the angle EAP. Then, in the triangle EAP, AE : AP : ſin. LEPA  ſin. ZAEP; and the LEPA æhe LEACE E; alſo the LAEP æ the L ECAE the ſupplement of the LACB; hence, AE ſin. ExAP coſ. I Again, :AP :: ſin. E: coſ. I; therefore, AEæ angle EAC, AC: AE :: LACE (coſ. I); there by ſubſtituting for Al ſin. E x ſin. 7 4c cor . V ſin. E x ſin. ence, AC & Corĩ PROP. LXXXVI. ne things being given, to ſi time of deſcent down P. EC or the time of ſlig :12 :: PA: EC; and PAE, AEC, PA: AE AE :: PA: EC:: T?: but PA: AE : ſin. Æ L ECA : ſin. L EAC :: :1 :: coſ. I: ſin. E, and ſin. ExV Hence, t oc col T ſin. E coſ. T PRrOP. LXXXVII. 351. The ſame things being given, to find the greateſt height of the projectile above the plane AC, meaſured in the direction of gravity. The greateſt height is 3 EC (Art. 332); and in the triangle AEC, EC: AE : ſin. E: coſ. I therefore, EcæſinÆ x E, and, by ſubſtituting for 4 E it's value fin, 2X a& (Art. 347), we have CE æ ſin. Æ x AP ſin. E x AP ſin. EPx ſ ; and 3 ECæ 4 coſ. ? CcoL. Ir x 4m coſ. I'l1è the greateſt height required. . . ſin. B2 x Ve 352. Cor. The greateſt height varies as oſπ S C H O LIUM. l 353. The theory of the motion of projectiles, given in this ſection, depends upon three ſuppoſitions, which are all inaccurate; 1ſt. that the force oſ gravity, in every point of the curve deſcribed, is the ſame; 2d. that it acts in parallel lines; 3d. that the motion is performed in a non-reſiſting medium. The two former of theſe, indeed, differ inſenſibly from the truth. The force of gravity, without the Earth's ſurface, varies inverſely as the ſquare of the diſtance from the center; and the altitude to which we can project a body from the ſurface is ſo ſmall, that the variation of the force, ariſing from the alteration of the diſtance from the center of the Earth, may ſafely be neglected. The direction of the force is every where perpendicular to the horivon; and if perpendiculars be thus drawn, from any two points in the curve which we can cauſe a body to deſcribe, they may be conſidered as parallel, ſince they only meet at, or nearly at, the center of the Earth. Even the reſiſtance of the air does not materially affect the motions of heavy bodies, when they are projected with ſmall velocities. In other caſes, however, this reſiſtance is ſo great as to render the concluſions drawn from the theory almoſt entirely inapplicable in practice. From experiments made to determine the motions of cannonballs, balls, it appears that when the initial velocity is conſiderable, the air's reſiſtance is 20 or 30 times as great as the weight of the ball; and that the horizontal range is often not .t, part of that which the preceding theory leads us to expect. It appears alſo, that when the angle of elevation is given, the horizontal range varies nearly as the ſquare root of the velocity of projection; and the time of flight as the range; whereas, according to the theory, the time varies as the velocity, and the range as the ſquare of the velocity of projection (Arts. 340. 334). Theſe experiments, made with great care, and by men of eminent abilities, ſhew how little the parabolic theory is to be depended upon in determining the motions of military projectiles. See RoBINSS New Theory of Gunnery, and HUTTON'S Mathematical Dictionary, article Guunery. Beſides diminiſhing the velocity of the projectile, the air's reſiſtance will alſo change it's direction, whenever the body has a rotatory motion about an axis which does not coincide with the direction in which it is moving. For the velocity of that ſide of the body, on which the rotatory and progreſſive motions conſpire, is greater than the velocity of the other ſide, where they are contrary to each other; and therefore the reſiſtance of the air, which increaſes with the velocity, will be greater in the former caſe than in the latter, and cauſe the body to deviate from the line of it's motion; this deviation will alſo be from the plane of the firſt motion, unleſs the axis of rotation be perpendicular to that plane. Upon this principle Sir I. NEWTON explains the irregular motion of a tennis-ball *, and the ſame cauſe æPhil. Tranſ. Vol. VI. B. 30786. MAGLAURIN'S NawTON, D. 120 been aſſigned by Mr. RoBINs for ſ ullet from the verticle plane æ. Mi his remarks on the New Theory o that the reſiſtance of the air cani ror diminiſhed by the rotation of ich a motion can produce no effect of a tangent to the ſurface of the d the tangential force, he affirms, oſt. In this inſtance, the learned w een misled by the common theor cording to which the tangential forc whereas, from experiments lately m certain the quantity and laws of the appears that every theory which n l force muſt be erroneous. * Tracts, Vol. I. p. 151. 196. 214. TH E END. . . b - hl . . 