OF MECHIANTICAL. PHILOSOPHI BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF A COURSE OF LECTLRES S C IE NCE. BY JOHN ROBISON, LL.D. PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, FELLOW OF THE ROVAL SOCIETY OF EDINEURGUH, THE IMPERIAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES AT 5T. PETERSBURI AND OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETIES OF MANCHESTER AND NEW YORE, &c. &c. VOLUME FIRST, INCLUDING DYNAMICS AND ASTRONOMY. EDINBURGH: Printed ſor ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE & CO. FDINDURGH; T. CADELL & W. DAVIES, AND LONGMAN HURST REES & ORME, LONDON. R ADVERTISEMENT. Tu: following pages contain the ſubſtance of a Courſe of Lectures, which have been read by me during the annual ſeſſions of the Colleges, ever ſince the year 1774. Any perſon, well acquainted with Natural Philoſophy muſt be ſenſible that, in the ſhort ſpace of a ſix months ſeſſion, juſtice cannot be done to the various branches of this extenſive ſcience. I found that I muſt either treat in a looſe manner ſubjects which require and admit of ſtrict reaſoning, or muſt omit ſome articles uſually taught in this claſs; and I as induced to prefer the latter method, becauſe I was of opinion that a looſer manner of proceeding is neither ſuitable to the Inſtitution in this Univerſity, nor calculated to convey uſeful knowledge. In one ſeſſion I omitted the conſideration of Magnetiſm and Electricity, and in the next ſeſſion theſe were treated of, and Optics was omitted. : But But this plan was not always acceptable. I was thereſore induced to print theſe Elements, in the hopes of being able to ſhorten the lecture, and thus to include all the articles of the courſe. I ſhall now think myſelſ at liberty to Iecture in a more popular manner, as the ſtudent, by conſulting the text-book, will find the demonſtration of what was only ſketched in the lecture of the day. Such being the intention in this publication, the reader will ſee in what reſpects, and for what reaſons, it may difſer a little from a formal ſyſtem of Natural Philoſophy. It is intended that it ſall contain a ſyſtem. But all the articles will not be treated with the ſame minuteneſs. The experience of thirty years has enabled me to judge what articles are more abſtruſe or intricate, and require a more detailed diſcuſſion. The general doctrines of Dynamics are the baſis of Mechanical Philoſophy, diſtinguiſhing it ſrom every other department of ſcience. They re nearly abſtract truths, containing the laws of human judgement concerning all thoſe phenomena which we call mechanica. We ſhall ſind theſe laws nearly as ſimple and preciſe as the propoſitions in geometry, and that they carry with them a ſimilar accuracy, wherever they can be properly appliedl. We ſhall have the pleaſure of ſecing the complete ſucceſs of this application, to very extenſive and important articles of the ſcicnce. Theſe doctrines being ſo important, and ſo ſuſceptible of accurate treatinent, nothing is omitted here that is neccſſary for their ſull eſtubllſment; and hence this occaſions the ſirſt part oſ the courſe to be very minute and particular. Iut, aterwards, a more ſamiliar mode of diſculllon may be admitted. If the ſtudent make himſſ familiarly acquainted with the principles of Dynomics, it is hoped that he will find little diſiculty afterwards, in the application of theſe abſtract doctrines to the inveltigation of the Iaws oſ mechanical nature, or to the explanation of ſubordinate phenomena. For this reaſon, it is not intended to annex the mathematical demonſtrurion to every propoſition in the ſubſcquent parts of the courſe. This will not be omitted, however, when either the diſſiculty or importance oſ the ſubject ſeems to require i. : The ſtudent muſt be mindſul that this beok vill not ſuperſede the neceſſity oſ careſully attending to the lecturee Many things, illuſtrative and intereſting, will be heard in the claſs, which have no place heree It will alſo contribute to his improvement, if he accuſtom himſelf to take notes in the claſs; and he is adviſed to take particular notice of ſuch formulæ, or other ſymbols of mathematical reaſoning, as occur in the lecture. Theſe will frequently give a compendious expreſſion of a proceſs of reaſoning which he may otherwiſe find very diſicult to remember with diſtinctneſs. In applying the abſtract doctrine of Dynamics to the mechanical hiſtory of nature, ſome arrangement muſt be adopted which may facilitate the taſk. It is propoſed, in this courſe of lectures, to arrange the mechanical appearances as much as poſſible in the order of their generality or extent. It will be found that this is, in fact, arranging. them by the great diſtinguiſhing powers of natural ſubſtances, by which this generality of event is eſfected. All the mechanical phenomena that we obſerve are eſſected, 1. By gravity. 5 . By coheſion 3. By magnetiſm. 4. By electricity. 5 By the affections of light. va Hence is ſuggeſted the ſollowing arrangement the articles which will be treatel oſ in thi. urſe of lectures. GRAVITY. I. As it is ſeen in the celeſtial motions its law of action diſcovered by Sir Iſaac Newton—applied by him, with greot ſucceſs, to the explanation of all the phenomenauniverſal gravitation. a. As it is obſerved on this globemotion of ſalling bodicsof projectilestheory of gunnery. COHESION. Corpuſcular forcesTheory of Boſcovich. Mechanical qualities of tangible matterbodies are ſolidor ſluidand theſe diſſer excecdingly in their mechaniſm. Mechanism of Solid Bodies. Eaws of the excitement of corpuſcular ſorces. 1. Motion in free ſpace—impulſiondirect —obliquepreceſſiun of the equinoxes force of moving bodies. 2. Motion in conſtrained paths. Rotationrcentriſugal force. Solidity combined with gravity—ſtability theory of arches and domes. Motion on inclined planes. Motion of pendulumsmeaſure of gravity nmeaſure of time. Theory of machinesor MECHANICS commonly ſo calledmechanic powerscompound machinesmaxims oſ conſtruction. Of friction. OF the action of ſprings. Mechanism of Fluid Bodies. Coherent ſluids&HYDROSTATICS, treating of the preſſure and equilibrium oſf ſluids HYDRAULICS, treating of the motion, impulſe, and reſiſtance of fluids. Hydraulic machines. Conſtruction and working of ſhips. Expanſive fluidls&/PNEUMATICS, treating of the preſſure of the airits elaſticity—its motion, impulſe, and reſiſtance—Pneumatic machinesſoundtheory of muſicaction of gunpowdertheory oſ artillery, and of minesaccount of the ſteam engine. MAGNETISM. General lIaws of the phenomena—theory oſ ZEpinusGilbert's terreſtrial magnetiſin mariner's compaſscvariationdip of the needleartiſicial magnetiſm. ELECTRICITY. General laws. Theory of ſpinus. Thunderaurora borealis, &e. Galvanic phenomena. OPTICS. Mathematical lawscatoptriesdioptrics. Viſion—optical inſtruments. Newtonian diſcoveries concerning colours. Phyſical opticsſurther diſcoveries of Newton—mechanical nature of light—mutual action of bodies and light. Province, and hiſtory of natural philoſophy. DINBURGH, Oober 31. 1804. ERRORS OF THE PRESS. Line. Page Line. m C 231 1 O) ;as) 13 C 29 19 carultion calculation 8 AFRæTS AFB, aFV 226 10 pn- ?Pun 17 LKIH ILTH 33 I7 to of 18 KiCB, KHDB LICB,LHD 334 9 conſilering conſider 23 KC IC . 385 27 retrets rerreat 1 a5 cr 194 26 poliente pellente 12 V 390 9 ar: is 20 AP AC 38 a8 MP MR 12 tom from E tom  438 4 cltted dotted I5 o m 449 12 PI GlI 1 ADV ADO 13 P/DPG PH—/DPI I17 A BK l 16 PPP5 PH/VPI 23 ultimate alternate 45 2a6 Fir 64. Fig 64. NOſ. 2 diſecting forces deſlections 4;8 28 after P (Fig.64.N%.) 12 paralil particle 471 18 LeQQ EæQę 12 diveſting dividing 476 19 BDV PDF 4 5 C Not:z. Boſſuet Boſſut 28 equal, equally 591 26 5 s 1 ACI AEI 59 3 Coſ? 2æ Coſ 2 æ 20 AEM ACM 6459 19 corroſpondss correſpoꝶ 12 MI Mi CORRECTIONS FOR THE FIGURES. e Draw Eq. Drav ED. The line ES was drawn (295.) perpendicular to IC. In ſect. 298, it is ſuppoſed to he perpendicular to i C. The two perpendiculars would not be diſtinguiſhable. e ſould he Produce BS to M Draw SN perpendicular to PN D ſhould be in the eroſſing of Iĩ and fq Drav A The upper S ſhould he ⸗ Inſert G at the croſſing of EQ and NS Write F to the leſt of F, on the outſide oſ all. E  ———— THE BOOKBINDER IS DESIRED TO PLACE THE PLATES AS FOLLOWS:  I. to face page 48. Plate 7. to ſace page 182. 2. to face page 72. 8. to face page 224. 3. to face page 80. 9. and ſucceeding ones to he placed A. to face puge Ta4. aerecably to the engraved re5. to face page 160. ſeignce at th- to; oſ each. USED IN THE FOLLOWING PAGES. (a) Th: ſymbol a: b expreſſes the ratio or propor⸗ tion of a magnitude a to another magnitude b of the ſame ind, ſuch as two lines, two ſurfaces, two weights, velocities, times, &c. Qſ) a:b5c:d. The ratio of a to b is equal to, or is the ſame ith, that of c to This is uſually read, a is tob as c to d. () ab is the product of two numbers, or the rectangle of two lines, a and ſ. ) a æb is a ſymbol made up of the ſymbol: of proportion, and the ſymbol æ oſ equality. It means that a increaſes or decreaſes at the ſame rate with b, ſo that iſ b become double or triple, &c. of its primitive value, the contemporaneous a is alſo double, triple, &e. of its ſirſt value. This is a ſhort way of writing A: a æ B: b, in which A and a are ſucceſſive values 6f one changeable magnitude, and B, b, the correſponding or ſimultaneous values of the other. In this ſymbol, a and b may be magnitudes of different inds, which cannot hold with reſpect to the ſymbol a: b, becauſe there is no proportion between magnitudes of diſferent kinds, as between a yard and æ pound, an hour and a force, &e. This may be called the ſymbol of a PROPORTIONAL EQUATION. ) ab:cd expreſſes the ratio compounded of the ratio of a to  and that of b to d. It therefore expreſſes the ratio of the product of the numbers a and b to that of the numbers c and d. In like manner, it repreſents the proportion of two rectangles, a and b beſng the ſides of the firſt, and  and d the ſides of the ſecond. In the ſame manner a bc: d e f is the ratio compounded of thoſe of a to d, of b to e, and of c to ſZ and ſo on, of any number of ratios compounded together. (See Euclid, VLL 23.) til a:b m- t means that a ĩs to b in the ipverſe proportion of d, or, that a: b=ad: c. It is plain LEll that if c be doubled or trebled, the fraction 7 is reduced to one hatt or one third, &c. ſo that E or l are increaſed in the ſame proportion that c or are diminiſhed. d ; : Z means that the ratio oſ a to b is the s . j cex d ſame with that of the fraction-to the fraction /, or L ® ab=2: that the ratio of a to b is compounded of the direct ratio of c to d and the inverſe or reciprocal ratio of æ to ſ It is the ſame with a: b æcf: de. t . . EES ; means that æ increaſes at the ſame ratio ; . i llit that  diminiſhes, and is equivalent to X: x v or equivalent to X: x æ4: V. ) ææ  means that  varies in the ratio comz pounded of the direct ratio of 5 and the inverſe ratio of æ. ()) :5 expreſſcs the proportion between the diſference of two ſucceſſive values oſ æ and the diſference of the two correſponding values of 53. It is equivalent to the ratio of Xæ to Y/). ) Suppoſe that, in the continual variation of æ and , theſe ſimultaneous and correſponding diſferences are always in the ſame ratio; then :; is a conſtant ratio. Thus, Let AD and AF (ſig. A) be two right lines diverging from A, and let BC, B?, BD, be ſucceſſive values of æ, and the parallel ordinates CE, cę, DF be correſponding values of 3. Drawv E G and fg parallel to AD, and conſequently equal to CD and  D, then ceſſive values of  and 5. So are ? D and g2F. Nov it is plain that CD: GF =æc D: gF, and æ:y is a conſtant ratio. (m) But it more frequently happens that the ratio æ: 5 is not conſtant. Thus, if the lIine Eæ F (ſig. B) be an arch of a curve, ſuch as a hyperbola, of which A is the centre, we know that CD has not the ſame ratio to GTF that eD has to gF, and that the ratio of  toy continually increaſes as the point C or  approaches o D. We know that while C is above D, the ratio of CD to GF, or eD to gF is leſs than that of the ſubtangent TD to the ordinate DF. But when  gets below D, the ratio of E G, or ?D, to GF is greater than that of TD to DF; and the difference of theſe ratios mereaſes, as æ ſeparates from D on either ſide. The ratio of  toj, therefore, approximates to that of TD to DF as c approaches to D from either ſide. For this reaſon, the ratio of TD to DF has been called the ultimate ratio of the evaneſcent magnitudes  and 5, as the magnitudes  and y are continually diminiſhed, till both vaniſb together, when c coaleſces with D. If, again, we conceive the point C to ſet out, either upward or downward, from D, the ratio TD: DF is called the prime ratio of the naſcent magnitudes  andy. We know alſo that the ratio of the ſubtangent 7c to the ordinate cæ is leſs than that of TD to DF, and that the ratio of the ſubtangent to the ordinate increaſes continually, as D is taben further from the vertex V of the hyperbola. But we know alſo that it never is ſo great as the ratio oſf A D t DA (the ordinate produced to the aſymptote) but approaches nearer to it than by any diſference that can be aſſigned. For this reaſon, AD: D has been called the ultimate ratio of the ſubtangent and ordinatein the ſame manner, the ultimate ratio of DF to D has been ſaid to be the ratio of oquality. (n) But, in theſe two caſes, the employment of the term ultimatæ is rather improper, becauſe this ratio ĩs never attained. Perhaps the term limiting ratio, alſo given it by Sir Iſaac Newton, is more proper in both theſe caſes. TD: DF is the limiting ratio of æ: 5, or the ſmit, to which the variable ratio of the naſcent, or, evaneſcont magnitudes  and y continually approaches. (o) Sir Iſaac Newton, the author of this way of conſidering the variations of magnitude, has expreſied by a particular ſymbol this limiting ratio of the variations and 5. He expreſſes it by : 37. It is not the ratio of any æ to any 5, however ſmall, but the limit to which their ratio continually approaches. When we chance to employ the terms ultimate or prime, we deſire to be underſtood always to mean this limiting ratioo. The foreign mathematicians employ the ſymbol dæ: d;, in which à means the infinitely or incomparably ſmall diſfer, ence between two ſucceeding values oſ æ or 3. We have been thus particular in deſcribing this view of the variations of quantity, becauſe ithout a knowledge of ſome of thoſe limiting ratios, it is ſcarcely poſſible to advance in mechanical philoſophy. (7) The caſe already mentioned, namely TD: DF =æ:5, occurs very frequently in our inveſtigations. And, in like manner, if the arch BF be repreſented by the ſymbol æ, we have æ:2TD: TF, and ,: æ =DF:TF. Alſo, if E: be drawn parallel to the tangent ?æ, we have Eæ to E: ultimately in the ratio of equality. For, becauſe the triangles ?cæe and Eds are ſimilar, we have Ed: Ei=tc:te, that is, = æ: æ, that is, æCc: E., or Ed: Ee, and therefore, ultimately, E: æEe. ꝗ Such limiting ratios may alſo be obtained in eurves that are reſerred to a pole or focus, inſtead of an abſciſ?a. Thus, let BF G (ſig. C) be an ellipſe, whoſe centre is C, and focus D. Let Fæ be a very ſmall arch of the curvee. Draw DF and D, and about the pole D, with the diſtance Dæ, deſcribe the circular arch Eeg™, cutting FD in g2. Draw the tangent FT, and DT perpendicular to DF. Now, repreſenting FD by æ, ?B by æ, and the circular arch æE by, it is plain that : 2FD: FT, and à: ;  FD: DT. All this is very evident, being demonſtrated by the ſame reaſoning as in the caſe of the hyperbola reſerred to its axis or abſciſſa (m). Another limiting ratio, of very frequent occurrence, is the following. Suppoſe two curves AIL and ab (fig. D) round the ſame pole F, from which àre drawn two right limes F A, F B, cutting both lines in A, a, Ii, and b. Let FB, by revolving round F, contmually approach to F A. Let it come, for example, into the ſiuation Fæ C very near to F Aa. Let S and s repreſent the mixtilineal ſpaces AF B u Fb. Then S and / may expreſs the ſpuces A F C and a Fe. It is plin that the limiting ratio of AF C to æa Fe ĩs that of FA to F, and we may ſay thats:  æVA: F. ) The la©t example which ſhall be mentioned is of almoſt continual occurrence in our inveſtigations. Let FHK and fhi (fig. E) be two curves, having the abſciſſæ AE and a e. Let theſe abſciſſæ be divided into an equal number of ſmall equal parts, ſuch as AB, BC, DE and a3, be, d?; and let ordinates be drawn through the points of diviſion. And on theſe ordinates; as baſes, let parallelograms, ſuch as ABLF, BCNG, &c. and a blf, be ng, &e. be inſcribed, and others, ſuch as ABGM, ACHO, and nbgm, acho, &c. be circumſcribed.It is aſſirtmed; i1, that if the ſubdiviſion be carried on without end, the mixtilineal areas AL KF and aæ Ef are, ultimately, in the ratio of equality to the ſum of all the nſcribed, or of all the circumſeribed parallelograms; and, 2dly, that the ratio of the ſpace AEKF to the ſpace aelf Is the limiting ratio of the ſum of all the parallelograms (inſcribed or circumſcribed) in AEXF to the ſum of thoſe in aetf1, Make DS and à5 equal to AF and af, and drawv S R, sr, parallel to AE, ae. It is evident that the pãrallelogram 8 RE Q is equal to the exceſs of all the circumſcribed over all the inferibed parallelograms. Therefore; by continuing the ſubdiviſion of AE without end, this parallelogram may be made ſmaller than any ſpacè that can be aſigned. Therefore the inſcribed and circumſcribed parallelograms. are ultimately in the ratio of equalityor equality is their limiting ratio. The ſpace AEKF is greater than all the inſcribed, and leſ than all the circumſcribed parallelograms, and is nearly the half ſum of both. Therefore, much more accurately is equality the limiting or ultimate ratio of AEKF to either ſum. The ſame muſt be true of the other figure. 2dly, Since each mixtilineal figure is ultimately equal to its parallelograms, it is plain that both have the ſame ratio with the ſums oſ the parallelograms. () Cor. If the ordinates which are drawn through ſimilarly ſituated points of the two abſciſſæ, be in a conſtant ratio, the areas are in the ratio compounded of the ratio of AE to aæ, and that of AF to af, or are as AE xX AF to a e xX a f. This is evident. For, by the ſuppoſition, CN: cn = AF: af.. And, ſince the number of parallelograms is the ſame in both figures, B C and bc are ſimilar parts of AE and aæ; that is, BC: bcæ x af. Since this is true of every correſponding pair of parallelograms, it is true of their fums, and of the mixtilineal ſpaces AE KF and aætf, which are ultimately equal to thoſe ſums. (u) It may be thought that in theſe caſes where the Emiting ratio is not an ultimate ratio actually attained, there remains ſome ſmall error. The foreign mathematicians ſeem to acquieſce in this, and content themſelves with aſſuming d or d5 as infinitely ſmall; inferring from thence that the remaining error is infinitely ſmall, ſo that it will not amount to a ſenſible quantity, though multiplied by any number, however great. But this conceſſion leads them neceſſarily into the ſuppoſition of quantities infinitely ſmaller than quantities already aſſumed as inſinitely ſmall; a ſuppoſition plainly abſurd or unintelligiblee. But no error whatever Iurks in this method of limiting ratios. For it is all founded on the ſollowing unqueſtionahle axiom. (v) If the ratio of a to b be greater than any rotio whatever that is leſs than the ratio of c to 4, but leſs than any ratio whatever which is greater than that of c to d, then a is to b as c ĩs to ã. For if a be not to b as c to ™, let a be to b as m to n. Then if m: n be greater than c: d, a: b is leſs than m: n. If m:n be leſs than æ: 4, then a: b is greater than m: n, both which conſequences are contrary to the conditions aſſumed. Theręſore o: b muſi be c: d The propoſition () may be demonſtrated in this way: The ſpace AEKV is to a fà f m a greater ratio than that of the parallllograms inſcribed in the firſt iò thoſe circumſcribed on the ſecond, but in a leſs ratio than that of the parallelograms circumſcribed on the ſirſt to thoſe mſcribed in the ſecond. We pereeive, by continuing the ſubdivifion of the two abſciſſæ, that this holds true with regard to every ratio that is either grater or leſs than that of AEKF 10 a e ? f. Thus, the propoſition is demusiſtrated without the ſmalleſt room for error. () This doctrine of ſ liniting atios is of e greateũt ſervice in the phyſico-mathematical ſciencęs. Nuture preſents magnitudes in a continual change. The velocity oſ a falling body, and the line of its fall, aro increaſing togetherAs a piece of iron approaches a magnet, jts diſtance, its velocity, and the force by which it ĩs urged, all vary together, and there is an indiſſolublè relation between their reſpective ſimultaneous variations. Theſe variations alſo are the immediate meaſures of their rates of variation. Hence it: ĩs plain that, by knowing theſe rates, we can learn the whole change, and by obſerving the whole changẽè we. can inſer the rate of variation; juſt as the navigator learns his days progręſo by heaving the log every hour, in orde to diſcover the ſp 8 rate of ſailing, and ones ly. EZ1 ul u: aut *) The - F, V,  5  vill e uſed 1oexpræſo Force, Velocity, Time, and othęr magnitudes. Phus, F, A expreſes the ſorce acting in the point A.. F, AB is the force acting along the line AB. 3) A proper notation, and arrangement of the ſymbols, greatly aſſiſt our conceptions in mathematical reaſoning. When ratios are compoundcd (a thing perpetually occurring in our diſquiſitions) it is extremely convenient to recollect that the ratio, which is compounded of many numerical ratios, is the ſame with that of the product of all the antecedents to the product of all the sonſequents. Thus, if a: b=c:d and e: f mg: h and iih=Il:m and n:o=mp :q then a ei n: b fbomcglp: d h mu. IF we uſe lines, we can go no farther without ſubſtitutions than three ſuch compoſitions, becauſe ſpace has but three dimenſions. All our practical uſes of the doctrines muſt be proſecuted by means of arithmetical calculations, although ſome linear ratios, ſuch as that of the diameter of a circle to its circumſerence, or that of the diagonal of a ſquare to its ſide, cannot be accurately expreſſed by numbers. But, as we know perſectly what ſubſtitutions may be made in every caſe where more than three ratios are compounded, ſo as to obtain accurate ratios, no mathematician objects to this method oſ merely expreſſing the compqſition. : . : - Hllt E - i .. . ' il lil - ũ l a li - li i - E . li ti El . lli . l lil . i i El il tl . . .  EE ' li Lã li Ii :i lll li I . . , i .. ——————_—__ INTRODUCTION. I. Max is induced by an inſtinctive principle, implanted in his mind by the Author of Nature, to conſider every change obſerved in the condition of things as an ErrECT, indicating the agency, characteriſing the kind, and meaſuring the degree oſ its CausE. 2. The kind and degree of the cauſe are, thereſore, inferred from the obſerved kind and degree of the chango which we conſider as its eſfect. 3. The appearances in the material world, exhibited in the changes of motion which we obſerve, are called MECHANICAL APPEARANCES, or PHENONEMA, and the cauſes, to the agency of which we aſcribe them, are callad MECHANICAL CausES. 4. MECHANICAL PHILOSOPHY is the ſtudy of the mechanical phenomena of the univerſe, in order to diſcover dinate phenomena, and to improve arts, and thus increa ſæ ã mans power over nature. This definition of the ſtudy points out Motion, vith all its acctions and variettes; as the objects of our ſirſt attention, a knowledge of theſe being indiſpenſably neceſſary for perceiving and appreciating its changes, from which alone we are to derive all our knowledge of their cauſes, the mechanical powers of nature. OF MOTION. ll lli Hil 5. n motion ve obſerve the succiſfve appeaaiice of the thing moved in different ports of ſpace. Thereſore, in gur idea of Motion are involved the ideas or cœnception⸗ of SracE and of TIME. æ U&6. Space is conceived by us as a quantity, that is, ĩt may be concęived as great or little. It is one of that ſmall claſs of quantities of which we have the cleareſt and moſt diſtinct conceptions. We conceive them as magnitudes made up of their own diſtinguiſhable parts, and meaſurable by one of theſe as a unit. We camnot conceive ſo clearly of heat, or preſſure, or many other things which are magnitudes, capable of increaſe and diminution, but not diſtinguiſhable into ſeparate parts. 7. In our ſimpleſt conception of ſpace, it ĩs mere extenſion; we think of nothing but a diſtance between two places. This is the moſt uſual conception of it in mechanical diſquiſitionsthe path along which a thing moves; and we ſay, figuratively, that the thing deſcribes this path. But the geometer conſiders ſpace as having not only length, but alſo breadth, and he then calls it a ſurface; and, in order to have a complete notion of the capaciouſneſs of a portion of ſpace, he confiders not only its length and breadth, but alſo its thickneſs and ſuch ſpace he calls a ſolid ſpace. But, by ſolid, he means nothing but the ſuſceptibility of meaſure in three ways. He calls it extenſion of three dimenſions. But, in pure mechanics, we ſeldom have occaſion to oonſider more than one dimenſion of ſpace. In our inveſtigations, however, we make uſe of geometrical reaſonings, hich include both ſurfaces and ſolids/but our naſoning always terminates in a mechanical theorem, of vhich diſtance alone is the ſubject. 8. The adjoining parts or portions of ſpace are diſtinguiſhed or ſeparated from one another by their mutual boundaries. Contiguous portions of a line are ſeparated by pointcontiguous portions of a ſurface are ſeparated by linesand contiguous portions of a ſolid are ſeparated by ſurfaces. 9 Theſe boundaries are not parts of the contiguous portions of ſpace, but are common to both. They are the places where the one portion of ſpace ends, and the other begins. It is of importance to have very clear rotions of this diſtinction, for great miſtakes have ariſeæ in mechanical diſcuſions by not attending to it. 10. We cannot conceive ſpace as having any bounds, and it is therefore ſaid to be inſmite, or unbounded. 11. A portion of ſpace may be conſidered in relation to its ſituation among other portions. This may be called the RELATIVE PLACE of the Body which occupies this portion of ſpace. It may alſo be called its S;TuATION. Or it may be conſidered as a determinate portion of infinite ſpace, the individuality or identity of which conſiſts entirely in its being rtheree. This is called the ansoLUTE PLACE of the body which occupies this portion of infinite ſpaceIt is plain that in this ſenſe, ſpace is immoveablethat is, we cannot conceive this identical portion of ſpace as removed from where it is, to another placefor whatever be taken from thence, ſpace remains. Yet we always proceed on the contrary ſuppoſition in our actual meaſurements. I we find that three applications of a foot rule to one line completely exhauſt it, and that ſix applications are required for another line, we afſirm that the laſt is double of the firſt. But this really proceeds on another ſuppoſition, viz. that the rule, though it do not always occupy the ſame ſpace, yet, in every ſituation, it occupies an equal ſpace. Granting this, the concluſion is juſt. It will afterwards appear that this remark on the immobility of ſpace is of importance in mechanical diſcuſſions. We do not perceive the abſolute place of any object.A perſon in the cabin of a ſhip does not conſider the table as changing its place while it remains faſtened t0 the ſame plank of the deck. Few perſons think that a mountain changes its place while it is obſerved to retain the ſame ſituation among other objects. On the other hand, moſt men think that the ſtars are continually hanging their places, although we have no proof oſ it, and the contrary is almoſt certain. 13. We acquire our notions of time by our faculty of memory, in obſerving the ſucceſſions of events. 14. Time is conceived by us as unbounded, continuous, homogeneous, unchangeable in the order oſ its parts, and diviſible without end. 15. The boundaries between ſucceſſive portions of time may be called iINsTANTS, and minute portions oſ it may be called moments. 16. Time is conceived as a proper quantity, made up of, and meaſured by, its own parts. In our actual meaſurements, ve employ fome event, which we imagine always to require an equal time ſor its accompliſhment; and this time is employed as a unit of time or duration, in the ſame manner as we employ a foot rule as a unit of extenſion. As oſten as this event is accompliſhed during ſome obſerved operation, ſo often do we imagine that the time oſ the operation contains this unit. It is thus that we aſſirm that the time of a heavy body falling 144 feet, is thrice as great as the time of falling 16 ſeet; becauſe a pendulum 397 inches long makes three vibrations in the ſirſt caſe, and one in the laſt. 17. There is an analogy between the aſfections of ſpace and time ſo obvious, that, in moſt languages, the ſame words are uſed to expreſs the aſfections of both Hence it is that time may be repreſented by lines, and meaſured by motion; for uniform motion is the ſimpleſt ſucceſſion of events that can be conceived. 18. All things are placed in ſpace, in the order of ſituation.All events happen in time, in the order of ſueceſſion. 19. No motion can be conceived as inſtantaneous. For, ſince a oveable, in paſſing from the beginning to the end of its path, paſſes through the intermediate points; to ſuppoſe the motion along the moſt minute portion of the path inſtantaneous, is to ſuppoſe the moveable in every intervening point at the ſame inſtant. This is inconceivable, or abſurd. 20. ABSOLUTE MOTION is the change of abſolute place:. RELATIVE MoTION is the change oſ ſituation among other objects. Theſe may be diſſerent, and even 21. The relative motions of things are the diſferences of their abſolute motions, and cannot, oſ themſelves, tell us what the abſolute motions are. The detection and determination of the abſolute motions, by means of obſervations of the relative motions, are oſten taſks of great diſficulty. 22. Mathematical knowledge is indiſpenſably requiſite for the ſucceſsſul ſtudy oſf mechanical philoſophy. On the other hand, the conſideration oſ motion, in all its varieties oſ ſpace, direction, and time, is purely mathematical, and carries with it, into all ſubjects, the moſt incontrovertible evidence. 23. Motion is ſuſceptible of varieties in reſpect oſ quantity and of direction. 24. That aſfection oſ motion which determines its quantity, is called vELOCITY. Its moſt proper meaſure ĩs the length of the line uniformly deſcribed during ſome given unit of time. Thus, the velocity of a ſhip is aſcertained, when we ſay that ſie ſuils at the rate of ſix miles per hour. 25. The DiRECTION Of a motion is the poſition of the ſtraight line along which it is performed. A motion is ſaid to be in the direction AB (ſig. 1.) when the thing moved paſſes along that line ſrom A towards B. In common wiſe. Thus we ſay a weſterly wind, although it moves eaſtward. 26. In rectilineal motion, the direction remains the ſame, during the whole time of the motion. 27. But if the motion be performed along two contriguous ſtraight lines AB, B C (fig. 2.) in ſucceſſion, the direction is changed in the point B. From Bæ, the prolongation of AB, it is changed to BC. This change may be called DEFLECTION; and this deſlection may be meaſured, either by the angle  BC, or by a line æ C drawn from the point f, to which the moveable would have arrived, had its motion remained unchanged,. to the point C, at which it actually arrives in the ſame time. When a moveable deſcribes the ſides of a polygon, there are repeated deſlections, with undeſlected motions intervening. 28. But if the motion be performed along a curve line, ſuch as ADBE C (fig. 3.) the direction is continually changing. The direction in the point B is that of the tangent BT, that direction alone lying between any pair of polygonal directions, ſuch as B C and B, or BD and BE, however near we take the points A and C, or D and E, to the point B. 29. A curvilineal motion ſuppoſes the deyviation and deſlection to be continual, and a continual deſledtion conſtitutes a curvilineal motion. 1. Of Uniform Motions. 30. In our general conceptions of motion, in which we do not attend to its alterations, the motion is ſuppoſed to be equable and rectilineal; and it is only by the deviations from ſuch motion that we are to obtain the marks and meaſures of all changes, and therefore of all changing cauſes, that is, of the mechanical powers of nature. Let us therefore fix the characters of uniform or unchanged motion. 31. In uniform motions, the velocities are in the proportions of the ſpaces deſcribed in the ſame, or in equal times. For theſe ſpaces are the meaſures of the velocities, and things are in the proportion of their meaſures. Let S and s repreſent the ſpaces deſcribed in the time T, and let V and v repreſent the velocities. We have the analogy V: o /S: 5. This may be expreſſed by the proportional equation v =5. 32. In uniform motions with equal velocities, the times are in the proportion of the ſpaces deſcribed. during their currency. For, in uniform motions, equal ſpaces are deſcribed in equal times. Therefore the ſucceſſ;ve portions of time are equal, in which equal ſpaces are ſucceſſvely deſcribed, and the ſums of the equal times muſt have the ſame proportion as the correſponding ſums of equal ſpaces. Therefore, in all caſes that can be repreſented by numbers, the propoſition is evident. This may be extended to all other caſes, in the ſame way that Euclid demonſtrates that triangles of equal altitude are in the proportion of their baſes. 33. Theſe propoſitions are oſten expreſſcd thus: sc The velocities are proportional to the ſpaces deſcribed in  equal timesThe times are proportional to the ſpaces desſcribed with equal velocities Proportion ſubſiſts only between quantities of the ſame kind.But nothing more is meant by theſe inaccurate expreſſions, than that the proportions of the velocities and times are the ſame with the proportions of the ſpaces. 34. It is on this authority that uniform motion is univerſally employed as a meaſure of time.DBut it ĩs not eaſy to diſcover whether a motion which may be propoſed for the meaſure is really uniformſandęlſs— clepſydraſundialclockrevolution of the ſtarry heavens. 35. In uniform motions, the ſpaces deſcribed are in the ratio compounded of the ratio of the velocities and ihe ratia of the times., Let the ſpace S be deſcribed with the velocity V, in Iocĩty v, ĩn the time 7 Let another ſpace Z be deſcribed in the time T with the velocity v. Then, by art. 31, we have S: Z æV: v And, by art. 32, Z:s æT:t Therefore, by compoſition of ratios (or by VI. 23. Euclj we have 2æV x T: v xt/S x L : x ZL; that is, 5:. 36. This ĩs frequently expreſſed thus:  The ſpaces as deſcribed with a uniform motion are proportional to the ss products of the times and the velocitiesOr thus: 37.  The ſpaces deſcribed with a uniform motion are x proportional io the rectangles of the times and the velocisties Theſe are all equivalent expreſſions, demonſtrated by the ſame compoſition of ratios. By products or rectangles of the times and velocities, is meant the products of numbers, which are as the times, multiplied by numbers, which are as the velocities; or the rectangle, whoſe baſes are as the ſimes, and whoſe heights are as the veIocitiesThere are ſeveral other modes of expreſſing theſe propoſitions, 58. Cor. 1. If the ſpaces deseribed in tao uniform nstions he equal, the velocities are in ibe reciprocal proportion of the times. For, in this caſe, the products VT and v? are equal, and theręfore V; v51:T, Vivæiſ Or, beD cauſe the rectangles AC, DF (fig. 4.) are in this caſe equal, we have (by Eucl. VI. 14.) AB: BF = BD: BC, that is V: )t: T. 39. In uniform motions, the times are as the ſpuces, directly, and as the velocities, inverſely: Tor, by art. 35, S: 5 VT: o therefore Sv:VT and Tit =Sv:V or T=V:2 and i 40. In uniform motions, the velocities are as the ſpaces, direcily, and as the times, inverſely. For, as before, Svt =s VT therefore V:ioSt::T S 5 or V:ivæmm:3 .s 41. It is evident that the abſolute magnitudes of the ſpace and time do not change the values of the reſults of theſe propoſitions, provided both are changed in the ſame 20 feet 6 feet 2 ratio. The value f, or of, is the ſame i 4 12 ; with à oſ a foot per ſecond. Thereſore, if / be taken to expreſs an extremely minute portion of ſpace deſcribed with this velocity in the minute portion of time will have the velocity v accurately expreſſed by the accurate expreſſion of the time ?. 2. Of Variable Motions. 4. It rarely happens that the phenomena of nature preſent to our obſervation motions perfectly uniform: Yet we diſtinctly conceive them, with all their properties; and the deviations from theſe àare the only marks and meaſures of the variations, and; thereſore, of the changing cauſes. Therefore it is plain, that it is of the firſt importance that all theſe deviations be thoroughly underſtood. 43. If a body continue to move uniformly in the ſame direction, its motion, or condition in reſpect to motion, is unchanged. Its condition, therefore, muſt be allowed to be the ſame in any two portions of its path, howeve? diſtant they may be. The diſference of place does not imply any change, becauſe a change of place is involved in the very conception of motion. If, therefore, two bodies be moving with the ſame velocity in this path, or in two lines parallel to it, their condition in reſpect of motion muſt be allowed to be the ſame. They have the ſame direction, and move at the ſame rate: No circumſtance, therefore, ſeoms to enter into our conception of the ſtate of a body, in reſpect of motion, except its velocity and its direction. Changes in onq or both of theſe circumſtances conſtitute all the changes of which this condition is ſuſceptiblee. We ſnhall firſt eonſider changes of velocity. Of Accelerated and Retarded Motions. 44. Every one is ſenſible that a falling ſtone is carried downward with greater rapidity in every ſueceſſive moment of its fall. During the firſt ſecond oſ its fall, we know that it falls 16 feet; during the next, it falls 48; during the third, it falls 80; during the fourth, 1125 and ſo on: fſalling, during every ſecond, 32 feet more than during the preceding. Such æ motion is, with propriety, called an AcCELERATED MOTION. On the contrary, an arrow ſhot perpendicularly upward is obſerved to rife with a motion continually RETARDED. Theſe bodies are therefore conceived to be in different ſtates oſ motion in every ſucceeding inſtant. The velocity of the falling body is conceſved to be greater in a certain inſtant than in any preceding inſtant. Mechanicians ſay that when it has ſallen 144 feet, jits velocity is thrice as great as when it has fallen only 16 feet. But it is plain that this inference eannot be made directly, from a compariſon of the ſpaces deſcribed in the following moments; for in- theſe, it falls 112 and 48 feet: nor from the ſpaces deſcribed in the moments immediately preceding; for in theſe, the body fell 8 and 16 feet. The aſſertion however ſuppoſes that this variable condition, called Velocity, is ſuſl ẽeptible of an accurate meaſure in every inſtant, although in no moment, however ſhort, does the body deſcribe uniformly a ſpace which may be taken as the meaſure of its velocity at the beginning oſ that moment. The ſpace deſcribed in any moment is too great for meaſuring the velocity at the beginning of the moment, and too ſmall for the meaſure oſ the veloeity at the end of it. Yet ts mechanical condition is not known tiſl we obtain ſuch a meaſure. In a motion, like this, continually accelerated, there can be no ſuch meaſure. In an inſtant, no ſpace is deſcribed, for this requires time. But the body has, in that inſtant, what may be called a POTENTIAL VELOCITY, a certain PETERMINATION, however imperfectly conceived by us, which, if not changed, would cauſe it to deſcribe, and would be indicated by its actually deſcribing, a certain ſpace uniſormly, during a certain aſſignable portion of time. At another inſtant, it has another determination, by which, if not changed, another ſpace would be uniformly deſcribed in the ſame, or an equal portion of time. It is in the difference of thoſe two determinations that its diſference of mechanical ſtate conſits. The ſpaces which would thus he uniformly deſcribed, are the marks and meaſures oſ thoſe determinations, and muſt thereſore be ſought for with the moſt ſcrupulous care, as the meaſures oſ thoſe velocities; ard the proportions oſ thoſe ſpaces muſt be taken as the proportions of the velocities. This reſearch is eſſected ly the following propoſition. 435. Let the ſraight line A BD (ſig. 5.) be deſcribed with a motion any how continually varied, and let it be required to determine the proportion of the velocity in the point A to the velocity in any other polnt C. Let the right line a b d repreſent the time of this motion along the path AD, ſo that the points a, b, c, d, may mark the inſtants of the moveable's being in A, B, C, D, and the portions a b, bę, c d, may expreſs the times of deſcribing AL, BC, CD, that is, may be in the proportion of thoſe times. Moreover, let a æ, perpendicular to a d, expreſs the velocity of the moveable at the inſtant a, or in the point A. Let e g h be a line, ſo related to the axis a d, that the areas a b fe, be gf, cd h g, comprehended between the ordinates a è, b f, c ”, d h, all perpendiculuar to a d, may be proportional to the ſpaces A B, B C, CD, deſcribed in the times a b, be, c d, and let this relation obtain in every part of the ſigure. It is then aſirmed that the velocity in A is to the velocity in B, or C, or D, as aæ to bf, or cg”, or d h, &c. In other words, If the abſciſa a d of a curve e gh be proportional 0 the time of any motion, and the areas interrupted by parallel ordinates be proportional to the ſpaces deſcribed, the velocities are proportional to thoſe ordinates. Make bc and c d equal, ſo as to repreſent very ſmall and equal moments of time, and make 4 a equal to one of them, and complete the rectancle 2 a æ 7. This will repreſent the ſpace uniformly deſcribed in the moment 4 a, with the velocity a æ (35.0 Let P A be the portion of the ſpace thus uniformly deſcribed in the moment ꝓ a. Let the lines i m, : n, parallel to a d, make the rectangles bc mi and c d n , reſpectively equal to the areas bc ꝗf and c d hg. If the motions along the ſpaces PA and B C had been uniform, their velocities would have heen proportional to the ſpaces deſcribed (3I:), becauſe the times ꝓ a and b c are equal. That is, the velocity in A would be to the velocity in C, as the rectangle  a ? 7 to the area b c gf, that is, as ꝓ a ? q to b c m i, that is, as the baſe a e to the baſe c m, becauſe the altitudes  a and b c are equal. But the motion along B C is not repreſented here as uniform. For the line ſgh diverges from the axis b 4, the ordinate c g being greater than b ſ Thereſore the ſpaces, which are meaſured by thoſe areas, increaſe faſter than the times, and the figure repreſents an accelerated motion. Therefore the velocity with which B C would be uniformly deſcribed during the moment b c, is leſs than the velocity at the end of that moment, that is, at the inſtant c, or in the point C of the path. It muſt thereſore be repreſented and meaſured by a line greater than  m. We prove, in the ſame manner that c ? repreſents and meaſures the velocity with which CD would be uniformly deſcribed during the moment c  Thereſore, fince the motion along CD is alſo accelerated, the velocity at the beginning of that moment is leſs than the velocity with which it would be uniformly deſcribed in the ſame time, and muſt be repreſented by a line leſs than c h. Therefore the velocity in A ĩs to that in C in a leſi ratio than that of a æ to c m, but in a greater ratio than that of a æ to c E. But, in this example, as long as the inſtant b is prior and à poſterior, to the inſtant , c m is leſs, and c : is greater, than c g2. Thereſore the velocity in A is to that in C in a ratio that is greater than any ratio leſs than that of a æ to c g, but leſs than any ratio greater than that of a æ to ? 2 And, conſequently, the velocity in A is to that in C as a æ to c g. (Symb. (v) Since this can be proved in the ſame manner with reſpect to the velocity in any other point D, the propoſition is demonſtrated. It is plain that the reaſoning would have been preciſely the ſame, had the motion along BCD been retarded, 46. Cor. 1. The velocities in different points of the path AD are in the ultimate ratio of the ſpaces deſcribed in equal ſinall moments of time. Vor, drawing g o parallel to a d, the velocity in the inſtant a is to that in the inſtant as a æ to c g, that is, as the rectangle  æ to the rectangle c o, that is, as ꝓ a æ  to c d h g very nearly. As the moments are diminiſhed, the diſference g2o h between the rectangle c go d and c g h d, diminiſhes, nearly in the duplicate ratio of the moment; ſo that if the duced to &, or 2, or,; The ultimate ratio of c go d to c gh d is plainly the ratio of equality, and the corollary is manifeſt. That is, the velocity in A ĩs to that in C im the ultimate ratio of P A to B C deſcribed in ęqual ſmall moments. 47. It often happens that we cannot aſcertain this ultimate ratio, although we can meaſure the ſpaces deſcribed in very ſmall moments. We are then obliged to take theſe as meaſures of the velocity. The error is reduced almoſt to nothing, if we take the half ſum of the ſpaces BC and CD for the meaſure of the velocity in the point C; or, which is the ſame thing, if we take B C for the meaſure of the velocity in the middle of the moment b c. For the ſpaces B C and CD are meaſured by the areas b f g c and c gh d, which is very nearly equal to the rectangle b t o d Now be gt, or c d o g, is the half oſ it; and it is evident by this propoſition, that the velocity in A is to that in C, as the rectangle 2 a æ q to the rectangle b c gt, or c d o g. 48. Cor. 2. The momentary incremenis of ihe ſpaces deſcribed are in the ratio compounded of the ratio of the velocities and the ultimate ratio of the moments. For the increments PA, CD, are as the rectangles p e and c o ultimately (35.); and theſe are in the ratio compounded of the ratio of the baſe æ æ to the baſe àa o, and the ultimate ratio of the altitude 2 a to the altitude c d. This may he expreſſed by the proportional equation; ⸗. L . The equaV 49. Conſcquently v æ- 3 , and ? æ. tion ; = o ?, væ 5 and F ſeem to be the ſame with thoſe in art. 41. But, in art. 41, the ſmall ſpace 5 was deſcribed uniformly, and the equations were abſolute. In the articles 48. and 49. does not repreſent æ ſpace uniformly deſcribed. But : 7 expreſſes the ultimate ratio of S tos, when they are diminiſhed continually, and vanifh together. The meaning of the equafion; & v ĩ thereſore is, that the ultimate ratio of S' to 7 is the ſame with that of VI to v?50. Thè converſe of this propoſition my be thus expreſſed: If the abſciſſa a d of the line e fh repreſont the time of a moticn along the line AB D, and if the ordinates a e, b f, c g, &e. be as the velocities in the points A, B, C, &c. then the areas are as the ſpaces deſcribed. This moſt expeditiouſly demonſtrated, indirectly, thus: If the ſpaces AB, AD be not proportional to the areas a b fe], a d h æ, they muſt be proportional to ſome other areas a bfe, ad  e, of another line e ſ, paſſimg through e. But, if ſo, them by art. 45, the velocity in A is to that in B as a æ to bf. But the velocity in A was ſtated to that in B as aæ o bf. Thereſore a e⸗ bfæae: bſ, which is abſurd. Therefore, &e.  51. The only immediate obſervation that we can make on theſe væriable motions' is the relation between ſhe ſpace deſcribed and the time which elapſes. The preceding propoſitions teach us how to inſer ſrom this relation the mechanical condition of the body, to which rcondition we have given the name Velocity, which, however, more properly denominates the effect and meaſurę of this condition or determination. The ſame inference may be made in ænother way. Inſtead of taking the uniform motion along a line to repreſent the uniform lapſe of time, Sir Iſaac Newton often repreſents it by the uniform increaſe of an area during the motion along the line taken for the abſciſ=a. The velocities, or determinations to motion in the different points of this line, will be found inverſely proportional t10 the ordinates of the curve which hounds this area. Thus, let a point move along the ſtraight line AD (fig- 6.) with a motion any how continually changed, and let the curve Læ H be ſo related to AD that the area XICB is to the area XH D B as the time of moving along B C 1o rhat of moving along BD; and let this be true in every point of the line AD. Let Cc, Dd be two very ſmall ſpaces deſcribed in equal times, drav the. ordinates i æ, h d, and draw i , h l perpendicular to C, HD. It is evident that the areas ICæi and H D d h are æqual, becauſe they repreſent equal moments of time. It is alſo plain that as the ſpaces Cc and Dd are continually diminiſhed, the ratio of ICi and H Dãb to the rectangles : Ci and /D d h continually approaches to that of equality, and that the ratio oſ equality is the limiting or ultimate ratio. Therefore, ſince the areas ICi and H D à h are equal, the rectangles 2 Ccĩ and / D d h are ultimately in the ratio of equality. Therefore their baſes i c and h d are inverſely as their altitudes C and D, that is, i c: hd = D à: C. But Cæ and D ã heing deſcribed in equal times, are ultimately as the velocities in f and d (46). Therefore i c and b d are inverſely as the velocities in c and d. Becauſe this may be ſimilarly demonſtrated in reſpect of every point of the abſciſa, the propoſition is demonſtrated. 52. It now appears that in all caſes in which we can diſcover by obſervation the relation between the ſpaces deſcribed and the times elapſed during the deſcription, we diſcover the velocities and the mechanical condition of the moveablee To make any practical application of our concluſions, ve muſt always have recourſe to arithmetical calculationss Theſe are indicated by the algebraic ſymbols of our geometrical reaſonings. VWe repreſent any ordinate c g& of fig. 5. by v, and the portion  d oſ the abſciſa by i, and the area cd h5, or rather, its equal, the rectangle cdog, by vi. And ſince this retangle is as the correſponding portion CD oſ the line of motion, and CD is repreſented by 2, we have the equation ; æ v i. We may now aſſume as true, all the mathematical conſequences of theſe repreſentations. Therefore ; , as in art. 41. For the algebraic ſymbols are the repreſentations of arithmetical operations, and they repreſent the operations of geometry more remotely, and only becauſe the area of a rectangle is analogous to the produc of numbers which are proportioned to its ſides. If we uſe the ſymbol ſ  7 to repreſent the ſum of all theſe rectangles, it will expreſs the whole area a dhe, and will alſo expreſs the whole line of motion AD, and we may ſtate the equation s ſ vi. In like manner s i will be equivalent to s i, that is, to 1, and will expreſs the vhole time a d. It is alſo eaſy to ſee that2 repreſents the ordinate D H of the line L KIH of fig. 6 becauſe any portion Dd of its abſciſſa is properly repreſented by;, and the ordinates are reciprocally proportional to the velocities, that is, are proportional to the quotients of ſome conſtant number divided by the velocities, and therefore, to z Now ; being repreſented n the rectangle : Ccĩ, which is alſo repreſented by: : xx we have i æ and ſ 4 , as before. Such ſymbolical repreſentations vill frequently be employed in our future diſcuſions, and will enable us greatly to ſhorten our manner of proceeding. 53. There is one caſe of varied motion, which has very particular and uſeful characters, namely, when the line e fg5 h of fig. 5. is a ſtraight line. Let fig. 7. repreſent this caſe of motion along the line AD, and let ſ be, cd repreſent equal moments of time, in which the moveable deſcribes PA, BC, CD; draw ſm, gn, es parallel to the abſciſs a ã. It is evident that m g and n h are equal, or that equal increments of velocity are acquired in equal times. Alſo æq;, er, es are proportional to ꝗ, r g, 1h, and therefore the increments ꝗf, r 5, 5h, of velocity, are proportional to the times a , a c, a d, in which they are acquired. This motion, may with great propriety be called vNiPORMLY ACCELERATED, in which the velocity increaſe⸗ at the ſame rate with the times, and equal increments are gained in equal times. If the line æ h cut the abſciſſa in ſome point v, ĩt will repreſent a motion uniſormly accelerated from reſt, during the time v d, and ill give us the relations between the ſpaces, velocities and times in ſuch motions. From this manner of expreſſing theſe relations, it follows that, in motions uniformly accelerated from a ſate of ræſt, the acquired veloc ties are proportional to the times from the beginning of the motion. For a è, b f, c g d h, repreſent the velocities acquired during the times v ⸗, vb, vę, vd, and are in the ſame proportion with thoſe lines. 54. Alſo, the momentary increments of velocity are as the moments in which they are ocquired ; or the increments of velocity are as the increments of time. 55. Alſo, the ſpaces deſcribed from the beginning of the motion are as the ſquares of the times. For the ſpaces àte repreſented by the triangles va e, v bf, vc g, &e. and vae vbf mvat:vi' &c. REMARE. l This gives us the oſtenſible character of an uniformly accelerated motion. For all that we can immediately obſerve in a motion, is a ſpace deſcribed, and a time elapſed. Velocity is not an obſervation, but the name of an obſerved relation between the increaſe of the ſpace and that of the time. The ſpace deſcribed in the time vb is obſerved to be to that in the time v d, as v5 to vd'. We can repreſent the proportion of v & and v d by the triangles v b f and v d h, which have the ſame proportion. We then ſee that the points v, f, h are in a ſtraight line, and therefore b f and d h are as vb and v d, that is, when we obſerve a motion ſuch that the ſpaces deſcribed are proportional to the ſquares of the times, we are certain that the velocities are as the times from the beginning of the motion, and that the increments of velocity are as the increments of the times, and therefore the motion is uniformly accelerated. 56. Alſo, the increments of the ſpaces are as the increments of the ſquares of the times (counted from the beginning of the motion), that is, vb fvae: vd vce” vbivva': vdlu. 57. Alſo, the ſpaces deſcribed from the beginning of the motion are as the ſquares of the acquired velocities. For var:vbfaii:bs. 58. Alſo, the momentary increments of the ſpacis are as the momentary increments of the ſjuares of ihe velucities. For begf:icd hg=cgſ :d ?—cg &c. This Iaſt is a corollary of frequent uſe, as it oſten happens that we can only obſerve momentary changes. 59. Alſo, the ſpace deſcribed during any portion of lime, by a motion uniformly accelerated from ręſt; is one half of the ſpace uniforinly deſcribed in the ſame time with the final velocity of the accelerated motion. For the triangle vd b meaſures the ſpace deſcribed in the time » d by the aecelerated motion, and the rectangle v d A H meaſures the ſpace uniformly deſcribed in the time vd with the velocity d h. Here it is to be remarked, that c ghd is only half o the difference between the rectangles v d h H and v] gG. If we make d h =v d, then vd hH and ve g G will be the ſquares of the velocities d h and c g& In this caſe, n h, the increment of velocity, is alſo. equal to g n, and dn x nh is =c g x nh. Employing v and  to expreſs velocity and its momentary increment, v will be the expreſſion of the rectangle c  x nh. Now 2 v5 is the uſual expreſſion of the increment of the ſquare of velocity. As halves are proportional to their wholes, v is always proportional to 2 v⸗, and is generally uſed to expreſs the variation of '. But we muſt keep in mind that it is only the half of it. 60. And the ſpace deſcribed during any portion of the time of the accelerated motion, is equal to that which would  deſcribed in the ſame time with the mean between ite velocities at the beginning and end of this portion of time. For bd hf æba x cg. Theſe properties of uniſormly accelerated motion will be found of very great ſervice in the inveſtigation of all other varied motions, particularly in caſes where an approximation is all that can be effected without very tedious and complicated proceſſes. 61. Acceleration may be conſidered as a meaſureable quantity. A ſtone falling in the vertical line, much ſooner acquires a great velocity, than when rolling down a ſlope, and all are ſenſible that the acceleration is leſs as the declivity is more gentle. If we ſuppoſe the acceleration to be always the ſame, the conception that we have of this conſtancy is, ſurely, that in equal times equal increments of velocity are acquired; and, conſequently, that the augmentations oſ veIocity are proportional to the times of acquiring them. This being ſuppoſed, that acceleration muſt ſurely be accounted double or triple, &e. in which a double or triple melocity is acquired; and, in general, the augmentation of velocity uniformly acquired in a given time, muſt be taken for the meaſure of the acceleration. 62. Cor. Therefore accelerations are proportional to the ſpaces deſcribed in equal times with motions uniformly accelerated from a ſlate of reſi, (in which the velocities gradually increaſe from nothing). For, in this caſe the ſpaces are the halves of what would be uniformly deſcribed in the ſame time with the acquired ſinal velocities, and are therefore proportional to theſe velocities (31), that ĩs, to the accelerations, ſecing that theſe velocities weræ uniſormly acquired in equal times. On the other hand, that acceleration muſt be reckoned double or triple oſ another, in which a given augmentation of velocity is uniformly acquired in one half or one third of the time. For, if a given augmentation of velocity be acquired in half of the time, then, if the ſame acceleration be continued during the remaining half of the given time, another equal augmertation will be acquired, the acceleration being conſtant. The whole augmentation acquired in the ſame time will be double, and therefore the acceleration ĩs double. The ſame thing muſt be granted for any other proportion. 63. Therefore, we muſt ſay that accelerations are proportional to the incremenis of velocity uniformly ocquired, directly, and to the times in which they are acquired, inverſely. Or, we may expreſs it by the proportional equation It is to be romarked here, thæt this relation between the Acceleration, Velocity, and Time, is not con ſined to the caſe of a motion paſſing through all degrees oſ velocity ſrom nothing to the ſinal magnitude v, but ĩs equally true (in uniformly accelerated motions) with reſpect to uny momentary change of velocity. For, ſince the veIocity increaſes at the ſame rate with the time, we have v:v æ2t:  (W and ſ expreſſng the ſimultaneous incre- . om ments of velocity and time). Therefore the ſymbols 7 r v , àd . and v have the ſame value, and thereſore a 7 64. On the other hand, ſince the augmentation of velocity is the meaſure of the acceleration, and is therefore proportiomal to it, and ſince in uniformly accelerated motions, the velocity increaſes at the ſame rate with the times, it follows that the augmentations of velocity are as the accelerations and as the times, jontly. This gives the proportional equation v æF a 1, and v æal. 65. Since all that we can obſerve in a motion is a ſpace deſcribed, and a time elapſed during the deſcription, it is deſireable to have a meaſure of acceleration expreſſed in theſe terms only. This is eaſily obtained. We have ſeen in art. 62. that, when the velocity has uniſormly increaſed from nothing, the ſpaces deſcribed in equal times are very proper meaſures of acceleration. And, in uniformly accelerated motions, the ſpaces are as the ſquares of the times (56). Thereſore, when the acceleration remains a . I . the ſame, the fraction u muſt remain of the ſame value, . . s and a is proportional to i Thereſore, acrelerations are proportional to the Jpaces diſcribed aith a motion unifurmly accelerated from reſty directly, ard io the ſjuares of the times, inverſel;. 66. Farther, ſince a 64) we have a = a but . v vt æs, therefore a ſ This gives us another meaſure of acceleration, viæ. Accelerations are directly as the ſquares of the velucities, and inverſely as the ſpaces along hich the velocities are uniformly augmented. 67. On the other hand, ſince, when the ſpaces are equal, we have a = v; and, in uniformly accelerated motions, that is, when a remains conſtant, if the ſpace is increaſed in any proportion, ' increaſes in the ſame proportion; it follows that æ* increaſes in the proportion, both oſ the acceleration and of the ſpace. Therefore we have, in general, v æ a s Again (as in art. 64, 65 ve ſhall have  = a s, and VV  a 5 as, or æ 8z5, which we may expreſs in this manner vV æ a s. That is, the momentary change of the ſquare of the velocity, in a motion uniformly accelerated, is proportional to the aceeleration and to the ſpace, jointly This will be found a moſt important theorem. ll Thus we ſee that the acceleration continued during à given time t, or ?, produces a certain augmentation of the ſimple velocity; but the acceleration continued along a given ſpace s5, or'S, produces a certain augmentation oſ the ſquare of the velocity. This obſervation will bæ found of very great importance in mechanical philoſophy. 68. Hitherto the acceleration has been conſidered as eonſtantthat is, we have been conſidering only ſuch motions as are uniformly accelerated; but theſe are very rare in the plenomena of nature. Accelerations are as variable as velocities, ſo that it is equally diſicult to ſind an actual meaſure of them. Yet it is only by changes of velocity that we get any information of the changing cauſe, or the mechanical power oſ nature. It is only ſrom the continual acceIeration of a falling body, that we learn that the power which makes it preſs on our hand, alſo preſſẽs the body downward, while it is falling through the air; and it is from our obſerving that it acquires equal increments of velocity in equal times, that we learn that the downward preſſure of gravity on it is the ſame, whatever be the rapidity of its deſcent. No rapidity withdraws it in the ſmalleſt degree from the action of its gravity or weight. This is valuable inſormation; for it is very unlike all our more familiar notions of preſſures. We feel that all ſuch preſſures as we employ, have their accelerating power diminiſed as the body yields to them. A ſtream of water or of wind becomes leſs and leſs effective as the impelled bodies move more rapidly away, and, although they are ſtill in the ſtream, there is a Iimiting velocity which they cannot paſs, nor ever fully attain. tain accurate meaſures oſ acceleration, even when continually varyinz. We may obtin this in the very ſame way that we get meaſures of a velocity which varies continuall. We can conceive a line to increaſe along with our velocity, and to increaſe preciſcly at the ſame rate. It ĩs evident that this rate of inereaſe of the velocity is the very thing that we call Acceleration, juſt as the rate at which the line now mentioned increaſes is the very thing that we call Velocity. We have only therefore to conſider the arens of ſig. 5. or the line A D of that ſigure, as repreſenting a velocity; then it is plain that the ordinates to the line e gh, which we demonſtrated to be proportional to the rate of variation oſ this area, will repreſent, or be proportional to the variation oſ this velocity, that is, to the aceeleration. Hence the following propoſition. 69. If the atſiiſſu a d of a curve line e gh repreſint the time of a motion, and if tho arens abfe, ac ge, adhe, &c. are proportioncd to the velocities at the intants b, e, d, &e. then the ordinates a e, b f, c g, d h, &c. are proportional to the accelerations at the inſtants a, b, c, d, &e. This is demonſtrated preciſely in the ſame manner as in art. 45. and we need not repeat the proceſs. We have only to ſubſtitute the word acceleration ſor the word velocity. l From this propeſition, ve may deduce ſome corollaries which are of continual uſe in every mechanical no. The momentary increments of velocity ore as the accelerations, and as the moments, jointly. For, the inerement of velocity in the moment  d (for example) is accurately repreſented by the area c d h ę, or by the rectanctle e d n b; and  d aceurately repreſents the moment. Alſo, the ultimate ratio of c2 to ſuch another ordinate bi, is the ratio of c5 to bf (45); that is, the ratio oſ the acceleration in the inſtant  to the acceleration in the inſtant b. Thereſore the increment of velocity during the moment ꝓ a is to that during the moment cd as pa X a e to cd X d 5We muy expreſs this by the proportional equation v = ai. 71. Converſely. The acceleration a is proportional . o, agreeably to what was ſhown when the motion is 1 uniformly accelerated (63)Vhen, ſrom the circumſtances of the eaſe, we can meaſure the area of this ſigure, as it is analogos to the ſum of all the inſcribed rectangles, we may expreſq it by ſat; and thus we obtain.the whole velocity acquired during the time AP, and we ſay v = ſa i. It frequently happens that we know the intenſities ſor at leaſt their proportions) of the accelerating powers of nature in the diſferent points of the puth, and we want to learn the velocities in thoſe points. This is obtained by means of the following propoſition: 272. If ile abſciſſa AE of a line ace (ſig. 8.) te itæ ſpace along which a body is moving aith a notion continually naried, and if the ordinates Aa, Bb, Cf, &e. be proportional to the accœlerations in the points A, B, C, &c. then, the areas ABba, ADda, AE ea, &e. are proportional to the avgmentations of the ſquare of the velicity in A at the reints B, D, E, &e. Let BC, CD, be two very ſmall portions of the line AE, and draw bf; cg, parallel to AE. Then, if we ſuppoſe that the acceleration BA continues through the ſpace BC, the rectangle Bb7C will expræſo the augmentation made on the ſquare of the velocity in B (67). In Iike manner, C gD vill expreſs the increment of the Tquare of the velocity in C; and, in lie manner, the rectangles inſcribed in the remainder of the figure will ſeverally expreſs the inerements of the ſquares oſ the velocity acquired in moving over the correſponding portions of the abſciſſ=a. The whole angmentation therefore of the ſquare of the velocity in A ſif there be any yelocity in that point) during the paſiige from A to B, is the aggrogate of theſe partũl augmentations The ſame muſt be aſirmed of the motion from I to E. Now, when the ſubdiviſion oſ AE is carried on without end, it is cvident that the ultimate ratio of the area AEea to the aggregate of inſcribed rectangles, is that of equality; that is, when the aceeleraetion varĩes, not by ſtarts, but continually, the area ABba will expreſs the augmentation made on the ſquare of the initial veIocity in A, during the motion along AB. The ſame muſt be aſſirmed of the motion along B ETherefore portional to the changes made on the ſquares of the veIocity in A, B, and D. 73. Cor. 1. If the moveable had no velocity in A, the areas ABb a, AD da, &c. are proportional to the ſquares oſ velocity acquired in B, D, c. 73. Cor. 2. The momentary change on the ſquare of the velocity is as the acceleration and increment of the ſpace jointly, or, we have v v= as; and thus we ſind that what we demonſtrated ſtrictly in uniformly accelerated motions (67) is equally true when the acceleration continually changes. 75. Cor. 3. Since we found v à equal to half the increment of the ſquare of the velocity (59), it follows that the area AE æa, or the ſfluent ſaſ is only equal to v:i E ſuppoſing v and V to be the velocities in A and E. 76. All that has been ſaid of the acceleration of motion is equally applicable to motions that are retarded, vhether uniformly or unequably; the momentary variations being decrements of velocity inſtead of increments. A moveable, uniformly retarded till it is brought to reſt, will continue in motion during a time proportional to the initial velocity; and it will deſcribe a ſpace proportionall t0 the ſquare of this velocity; and the ſpace ſo deſcribed is one half of what it would have deſcribed in the ſame time with the initial velocity undiminiſhed, &e. &c. &c. Having now obtained proper marks and meaſures of all variations of velocity, it remains to obtain the ſame for all changes of direction. Thus we ſhall obtain a knowledge of the greateſt part of thoſe motions which the ſpontaneous phenomena of nature exhibit to our view. It is very doubtful whether we have ever ſeen a motion ſtrictly rectilineal. 38. O Compound Motivns. 79. In our endeavours to obtain a general mark or characteriſtic of any change of motion, it is evident that when the change is ſuppoſed to be the ſame in any two or more inſtances, the oſtenſible marks muſt be the ſame, whatever have been the previous conditions of the two moveables. There muſt be obſerved, in all the caſes of change, ſome circumſtance in the diſference between the former motions and the new motions, which is preciſely the ſame, both in reſpect of kind and of quantity, that is, in reſpect of direction and of velocity. We may therefore ſuppoſe one of the bodies to have been previouſly at reſt. In this caſe, the whole change produced on it is unqueſtionably the very motion which we ſee it acquire, or the determination to this motion. Therefore, in the firſt place, a change of motion is, itſelf, a motion, or determination to motion. In the caſe nov mentioned, it is the new motion, and that only. But it is by no means the new motion in every other caſe. For, if the previous condition of the body has been diſferent ſrom that of a body at reſt, and if the ſame change has been produced on it, the new condition muſt alſo be different from the new condition of the other, and therefore the new condition cannot be the change, becauſe this is ſuppoſed to be the ſame in both caſes. But, farther, when the ſame change is made in any previous motion, we muſt ſee, in the difference between the former motion and the new motion, ſomething that is equivalent to, or the ſame with, this motion produced in the body that was previouſly at reſt, and which has received the ſame change. And alſo, the difference between the new motions of theſe two bodies muſt be ſuch as ſhall indicate the difference between theſe previous conditions of each. Aſſuming therefore as a principle, that the change of motion is itſel? a motion, let us endeavour to find out a motion, which alone ſhall produce that difference from the former motion which is really obſerved in the new motion, in all caſes whatever. This, undoubtedly, is the proper mark and meaſure of the change. Something very analogous to theſe indiſpenſable conditions may be obſerved in the following motions. Suppoſe the ſtraight line EI (fig. 9.) lying eaſt and weſt, croſſed by the line E K from north to ſouth. Let the line EX (which we ſuppoſe to be material, ſuch as a rod or wire) be carried along the line EI in a minute, keęping always parallel to its firſt poſition, that is, alG ways lying north and ſouth. At the end of 20 ĩt witè have the poſition G g, its end E having moved uniſormly along à of EI; at the end of 40/ it will have the pofition HA 54, E having deſcribed ; of II; and at the end of the minute it will have the poſition Ii. In the mean time, let the line EI (alſo ſuppoſed material) move uniformly from north to ſouth, keeping always parallel to its firſt poſition EI. At the end of 20 it will have the poſition m gn, its end E having moved along à of EX. At the end of 40 it has the poſition o hꝓ, and Eo is à of EX. And at the end of the minute, it has the poſition Kæ xi. It is plain that the common interſection of thefe two lines will always he found in the diagonal Ei of the parallelogram EKi Il; for E m g G is a parallelogram ſimilar to EKiI, becauſe EG: EIZE m: EX. In like manner Eo hH is a parallelogram ſimilar to E Ki I. Theſe parallelograms are thereſore about a common diameter Ei. Further, the motion of the pomt of interſection of theſe lines is uniſorm; becauſe EG: EIæE⸗: Ei, and EH: EIæEh: Ei, &.; and thereſore the ſpaces Eg, Eh, Ei are proportional to the times. And thus it appears that the interſection oſ two lines, each of which moves uniformly in the direction of the other, moves uniformly in the direction of the diagonal of the parallelogram formed by the lines in their firſt or laſt poſition, and that the velocity of the interſection iæ 1o the velocity of each of the motions of the lines as the diagonal is to the ſide in whoſe direction the motions are performed. This motion of the interſection may, with great propriety of language, be ſaid to be conſtituted by, or compounded of, the two motions in the direction of the ſides. For the point g of the line G 4 is, at the inſtant, moving eaſtward, and the ſame point g& of the line m gn is moving ſouthward. Thereſore, if the point 4 be conſidered as a point of both lines (as if it were a ring embracing both) it partakes, in every inſtant, of both motions. It is alſo evident that the point g ſeparates from G in the ſame direction, and with the ſame velocity, as if EK had remained at reſt, and the ring had moved to m. Alſo it ſeparates from the point o at the ſame rate, and in the ſame direction as if it had moved from E to G. The motion along E i therefore contains both of the motions along E I and along EK, and is really identical with a motion compounded of thoſe motions, plainly indicating both, or the determination to both. Accordingly, we ſay that in every ſituation of the point of interſection, its velocity is compounded of the velocity E I and the veloeity E . If therefore ET has been a previous motion, that is, if a body was moving ſo that, had its motion continued unchanged, it would have deſcribed E I uniformly in a minute, but we obſerve that aſter coming to E, it turns aſide, and deſcribes E i uniformly in a minute, ve ſhould ſay that the change which it ſuſtains in the point E, is a motion EEX. For, if the body had been previouſly at reſt in E, and we obſerve it deſcribe EK in a minute, then the motion E K is, unqueſtionably, the change which it has ſuſtainedl. The motion Ei is not the change; for had EL been the primitive motion, the ſame motion Ei would have reſulted from compounding the motion EM ith it. Nov, ſince E L is different from EI, it is impoſſible that the ſame change can make the new conditions the ſame. Moreover, there is no other motion, which, by compounding it with E I, will produce the motion E i. And laſtly, the motion EK is the only circumſtance oſ ſameneſs between changing the motion EI into the motion E i, and giving the motion EK to a body previouſly at reſt. Aſter a mature conſideration of all theſe conditions, we may ſay, that A change of motion is that motion which, by compoſition with the former ſtate of motion, produces the new motion. 80. This compoſition of motion is uſually preſenteà to the mind in a way ſomewhat diſferent. A body is ſuppoſed to move uniſormly in the direction EI, while the ſpace in which this motion is perſormed is carried uniformly in the direction EX. But we cannot conceive a portion of ſpace to be moved out of its placee. We can conceive the compoſition very diſtinctly by ſuppoſing a man walking along a line EI dravn on a field of ice, while the ice is ſloating in the direction E X. This vill produce the very motion E i, and affords the cleareſt OF COMPOUND MOTIONS. 55 notion of the compoſition. If one man ſtands ſtill, and another walks in the direction and with the velocity EI, and a third in the direction and with the velocity E L, while the ice ſloats in the direction and with the velocity EK, then the new condition of the ſirſt man will be the motion EE, that of the ſecond will be E i, and that of the third will be EQ. There can be no doubt of theſe three men having ſuſtained the very ſame change of motion. Now, the only circumſtance of ſameneſs in theſe three new conditions is the compoſition of their former condition with a motion E K. The reſlecting reader will percelve, however, that this way of illuſtrating the ſubject, by the motion on moving ice, is not preciſely a compoſition of two determinations to motion. This is completed in the firſt inſtant. As ſoon as the motion in the direction and with the velocity E i begins, there is no need of further exertion; the motion will continue, and Ei will be deſcribed. But it ſerves very well to exhibit to the mind the mathematical compoſition of ravo motions, which is all we want at preſent. We have ſhewn that, in the reſult of this combination, all the characteriſtics of the two determinations are tę be found, becauſe the point of interſection, whether we conſider it as a material exiſtęnce, or as a mere mathematical conception, partakes of hoth motions. There is a phyſical queſtion which will come under conſideration afterwards, that is very different from the preſent, namely; Whether two natural powers, which are known to be productive, ſeparately, of two determinations of a body to two diſtinct motions, will, by their joint action, produce a determination to that motion which is compounded of thoſe which they would produce ſeparately ?2This is a queſtion of very diſficult ſolution; but we truſt that the notions already acquired will enable us to give an anſwer with conſidence81. Thus then have we obtained a general mark or characteriſtid of a change of motion, perſectly conſonant with our mark and meaſure of every moving cauſe, namely, the very motion which we conceive it to produce. Nay, perhaps what we have juſt now eſtabliſhed is the foundation even of our former meaſures. For every acceleration, or retardation, or deſlection, may be conſidered as a new motion, compounded with the former. This is not a mere ſubſtitution, to aid the imagination; for it is, almoſt always, the very fact. For what we take for the beginning of motion, in all our actions on bodies, and all our obſervations of the bodies which ſurround us, is in ſact only a change induced on a motion already exiſting, and exceedingly rapid. This reſults ſrom the motion of rotation, by which we are carried round the axis oſ the earth, and even this is compounded with the motion of revolution round the ſun. What we conſider as changes of motion, and thereſore as the proper meaſures and marks oſ the changing cauſes, the powers of mechanical nature, are indeed changes, and the very changes that we imagine. But they are by no means changes of the motions that we imagine, We mall ſoon learn, that if we meaſure or eſtimate the changes of motion in the way now propoſed, all our deductions will be perfectly conformable to the appearances of nature, and the inferences of their cauſes perfectly conſiſtent and legitimate, giving us accurate knowledge of thoſe cauſes. And we ſhall find that no orher way of eſtimating and meaſuring the changes of motion will have theſe qualities. Thus we demonſtrate the juſtneſs of our principle, and that it gives a ſuſficient ground for mechanical ſcience. 82. Since the actual compoſition of motion is ſo general in the phenomena of the univerſe, that it obtains in every motion and change of motion that we can produce or obſerve, and ſince the characteriſtic which we have aſſumed of a change of motion is the ſame, whatever the previous motion may have been, and therefore is equally applicable to motions which are really ſimple, and ſuch as we obſerve them, it is plain that a knowledge of the general reſults of this compoſition of motion muſt greatly promote our knowledge oſ mechanical nature. We ſhall therefore conſider them in order. 83. The general theorem, to which all others may be reduced, is the following. Two uniform motions, having the directions and velocities repreſented by ihe ſides EI, EX, of a parallelogram, compoſe a uniſorm motion in iZe diagonal. This is already demonſtratedl. For the motion of the point of interſecH tion of theſe two lines, while each moves uniformly in all its points, in the direction of the other, is, in every inſtant, compoſed of theſe two motions, and is the ſamo as if a point deſcribed ETI uniformly, while EI is uniformly carried in the direction EX. And this motion. is along the diagonal E i, and is uniform, as has been already ſiewn. Alſo, becauſe EI and E i are deſcribed in the ſame time, the velocities of the motions along EI, EK, and E i, are proportional to thoſe lines. 84. Cor. 1. The coMPOUND MOTION Ei is in the ſame plane with the two CONSTITUENT or SIMPLE MO71088 EI and EK. For a parallelogram lies all in one plane. 85. Cor. 2. The motion E i may ariſe from the compoſition of any to uniſorm motions, which have the direction and velocities repreſented by the ſides of any parallelogram EL i M, or EIiK, of which Ei is the diagonal. Caſes frequently occur, where we know the directions of the two ſimple motions which compoſe an obſerved motion, but do not know the proportion of their velocities. The velocity is aſcertained by this propoſition, becauſe the direction of the three motions, viZ. the two ſimple and the compound motions, determines the ſpecies of parallelogram, and the ratio of the ſides. Sometimes we have the direction and the velocity of one oſ the ſimple motions, and thereſore its proportion to that of the obſerved compound motion. The direction and velocity of the other is alſo found by this propoſition, becauſe theſe data alſo determine the parallelogram. The motion in the diagonal is evidently equivalent to the motions in the ſides combined. Thus, if the moveable ſirſt deſcribe E I, and then Iĩi (or EX), it will be in the ſame point i as if it had deſcribed E i. Therefore E i is frequently called the EQUIVALENT motion, the RESULTING motion. It frequently gives great aſſiſtance in our inveſtigations, if we ſubſtitute for an obſerved motion ſuch motions as will produce it by compoſition. This is called the RESOLUTION OF MOTIONS. It is in this way that the navigator generally computes the ſhip's change of ſituation at the end of a day, in which ſhe has perhaps ſailed in many diſſferent courſes. He conſiders how much he has gone to the eaſtward, or weſtward, and how much to the northward or ſouthward, on each courſe; and he then adds together all his eaſtings, and all his ſouthings, and then ſuppoſes that the ſhip has ſailed for the whole day on that unvaried courſe which would be produced by the ſame eaſting and ſouthing combined. In like manner, it is very uieful for the mechanician to conſider how much his obſerved motion has advanced the body in ſome particular direction, EF, for example: (ſig. 10). To do this, he conſiders the motion AB as compoſed of a motion A C parallel to the given line ET, and another motion AD perpendicular to EF, A B fſorming the diagonal of a parallelogram A CBD, of which one ſide A C is parallel, and the other AD is perpendicular to EF. It is plain that the motion AD neither promotes nor obſtructs the progreſs in the direction EF, and that the body has advanced in the direction of EF, juſt as much as if it had moved from a to b, nſtead of moving from A to B. This proceeding is called ESTIMATING a motion in a given direction, or REDUCING it to that direction. In like manner, the mechanician is ſaid to eſtimate a motion AB (ſig. 11.) in a given plane E F GH, when he conſiders it as compoſed of a motion AD perpendicular to that plane, and A C parallel to it. The lines DA, BC being drawn perpendicular to the plane, cut it in two points a and b, and A C iĩs parallel to a b. 86. Any number of motions AB, AC, AD, AE (fig. 12.) may be thus compounded, forming a motion AF. The method for aſcertaining the motion reſulting from this compoſition is as follows. AB, compounded with AC, produces the motion AG. This, compounded with AD, produces AH; and this, compounded vith AE, produces AF. i The ſame ſinal ſituation F will be found by ſuppoſing all the motions AB, AC, AD, AE, to be performed in ſucceſion. Thus the moveable deſcribes AB; then B G, equal and parallel to AC; then G H, equal and parallel to AD; and then, HF, equal and parallel to AE. a Noræ.It is not neceſſary that all theſe motions be in one plane. 87. Three motions A B, AC, A D (ſig. 13.) which have the direction and proportions of the ſides of a parallelopiped, compoſe a motion in the diagonal AT of that parallelopiped; for AB and A C compoſe AE, and AE and AD compoſe AF. The mine-ſurveyor proceeds in this way. Like the navigator, he ſets down any gallery of the mine, not directly by its real poſition, but enters his table with its eaſting or weſting, and with its northing or ſouthing. But he alſo keeps an account of its riſe or dip. He refers all his meaſures to three lines, one running eaſt and weſt, one running north and ſouth, and one running perpendicularly up and down. Theſe three lines are evidently like the three angular houndaries A B, A C and A D of a rectangular box. This is now the conſtant procedure of the mechanician, in his more elaborate inveſtigations. It was firſt practiſed (we think) by MLaurin, in the excellent phyſico-mathematical ſpeculations which are to be found in his Treatiſe on Fluxion. The mechanician refers all motions to three c-ordinate lines A B, AC, AD, which are perpendicular to each other, and his ultimate reſult is the diagonal AF of ſome parallelopiped. 88. Hitherto we have conſidered the compoſition of pounded, as we may eaſily conceive, by ſuppoſing a man to walk on a ſicld of ice along any crooked path, while the ice ſloats down a crooked ſtream. Thus, a uniform motion in the direction AB (fig. 14.) may be compounded with a uniſormly accelerated motion in the direction AC. Such a motion is obſerved when we ſee a ſtone fall from the maſt-head of a ſip ſailing ſteadily forward in the direction AB; for this ſtone will be obſerved to fall down parallel to a plummet hung from the maſt-head. The real motion of the ſtone will therefore be a parabolic arch Abſg, vhich AD touches in A; for while the maſt-head deſceribes the equal lines AB, BF, F G, the ſtone has fallen to  and ę and 4, and the line ACA has got into the poſitions BB, FF, GG, ſo that Aę is four times Aã; and A 4 is nine times A 2. Therefore Aꝶ, A 9, A, are as the ſquares oſ è b, 9 f, and 45, and the line Abſę is a parabola. It is in this way that a mil in the ſole of a cartwheel deſcribes a eycloid, while the cart moves along a ſmooth plane. This is the compoſition of a progreſſive motion with an equal circular motion. The geometrical Iectures of Dr Barrow contain many beautiſul examples of ſuch compoſitions of motion; and it was by introducing this proceſs into mathematical reaſoning, that this celebrated geometer gave a new department to the ſcience, which quickly extended it far beyond the pale of the ancient geometry of the Greeks, and ſuggeſted to Sir Iſaac Newton his doctrine of Fluxions. 89. When two motions, however variable, are compounded, we diſcover the direction and velocity of the compound motions in any inſtant, i? we know the direction and velocities of each of the ſimple motions at that inſlant. For we may ſuppoſe, that, at that inſtant, each motion proceeds unchanged. Then we conſtruct a parallelogram, the ſides of which have the directions and proportions of the velocities of the ſimple motions. The diagonal of this parallelogram will expreſs the direction and velocity oſ the compound motion. 90. On the other hand, knowing the direction and velocity of the compound motion, and the directions of each of the ſimple motions, we diſcover their velocities. 91. When a curvilineal motion ADV (ſig. 15.) reſults from the compoſition of two motions, whoſe directions we know to be A C and AF, we learn the velocities of the three motions in any point D, by drawing the tangent D I, and the ordinate Db parallel to one of the ſimple motions, and from any point L in that ordinate, drawing LI parallel to the other motion, cutting the tangent in I. The three velocities are in the proportion of the three lines IL, LD, and ID. This is of very frequent uſe. Since the phenomena are our only marks and meaſures of their ſuppoſed cauſes, it is plain that every miſtake with reſpect to a change of motion, is accompanied takes are avoided with great diſiculty, becauſe the motions which we obſerve are, at all times, extremely different from what we take them to be. A book lying on the table ſeems to be at reſt; but ĩt is really moving vith a prodigious ſpeed, and is deſcribing a figure very like the ſigure deſcribed by a nail in the nave oſ a coachwheel while the carriage is going over the ſummit of a gentle riſing. We imagine that we are at reſt, and we judge of the motion of another body merely by its change of diſtance and direction from ourſelves. Thus, if a ſhip is becalmed at B (ſig. 16.) in a part oſ the ocean where there is an unknown current in the direction BD; and if the light of another ſhip is ſeen at A, and if A really ſuils to C while B ſloats to D, A will not appear to have ſailed along AC, but along AEK; for when B is at D, and A at C, A appears at C, having the bearing and diſtance D C. Therefore, iſ AK be made equal and parallel to DC, it will have the ſame bearing by the compaſs, and the ſame diſtance from B that C has ſrom D; and therefore the ſpectator in B, not knowing that he has moved from B to D, but believing himſelf ſtill at B, muſt ſorm this opinion of the motion of A.In the ſame manner it muſt follow, that our notions of the planetary motions muſt be extremely different from the motions themſelves, if it be true that this earth is moving to the eaſtward at the rate of nearly twenty miles in every ſecond. It would ſeem a deſperate attempt therefore for us to ſpeculate concerning the powers of nature by which theſe motions are regulated. And, accordingly, nothing can be concelved more fantaſtical and incongruous than the opinions formerly entertained on this ſubject. But Mathematics affords à cluo by which we are conducted rhrough this labyrinth. 92. The motion of a body A relative to, or as ſeen from, another body B, which is alſo in motion, is compoundi ed of the real motion of A, and ibe oppoſite 1o the real motion of B. (Fig. 16.) Join AB, and drav AE equal and parallel t6 B D, und complete the parallelogram A CFE, and join ED and DC. Alſo produce EA till AL is equãl to AE or BD, and complete the parallelogram L A CK, and drav AX and BEX. Had A moved along AE while B moves along B D, they would have been at E and D at the ſame time, and would have the ſame bearing and diſtance as before. If the ſpectator in B ĩs inſenſible of his own motion, A will appear not to have changed its place. It is well known that two ſhips, becalmed in an unknown current, appear to the crews to remain at reſt. It is plain, therefore, that the real poſition and diſtance DC are the ſame with BE, and that if the ſpectator in B imagines himſelf at reſt, the line AK ill be conſidered as the motion of A. This is evidently compoſed of the motion AC, which is the real motion of A, and the motion AL, which is equal and oppoſite to the motion B D. &3. In like manner, i BH be drawn equal and oppoſite to AC, and the parallelogram B H G D be comI pleted, and BG and AG be drawn, the diagonal BG will be the motion of B relative to A. (92.) Nov, it is plain that KA GB is a parallelogram. The relutive poſition and diſtances of A and B at the end oſ the motion are the ſame as in the former caſe. B appears to have moved along BG, which is equal and oppoſite to AK. Therefore, the apparent or relative motions of tavo odies ore equal and oppoſite, whatever the real motions of both may he, and thereſore give no immediate information concerning the real motions. 94. It needs no farther diſcuſſion to prove the ſame propoſitions concerning every change of motion, viz. that the relative change oſ motion in A ĩs compoſed of the real change in A, and of the oppoſite to the motion, or change of motion in B. Suppoſe the motion BD to be changed into. Bò. This has ariſen from a compoſition of the motion BD with another Dà; draw Cæ equal and oppoſite to DJ, and complete the parallelogram E C æi. The diagonal E x is the apparent or relative change of motion. For the bearing and diſtance à C is evidently the ſame with Dæ, becauſe the lines  C and D æ which join equal and parallel Iines are equal and parallel 95. Therefore, if no change happen to A, but if the motion of B be changed, the motion of A will appear to be equally changed in the oppoſite direction. Hence we draw a very fortunate concluſion, that the obſerved or relative changes of motion are ęqual to the real changes. But we remain ignorant of its direction, becauſe we may not know in which body the change has happened. E: is the apparent chunge of motion of the body A, becauſe E C was the apparent motion before the change into E x. Complete the parallelogram A Cxæu. The diagonal A would have been the motion of A, had its motion A C ſuſtained the compoſition or change A æ. It is plain that either the motion D3, compounded with BD, or the motion A æ compounded with AC, will produce the ſame apparent or relative change of motion. Still, however, it is important to learn that the apparent and real changes are the ſame in magnitude; becauſe they give the ſame indication of the magnitude of the changing cauſe. 96. It is evident that if we know the real motion of B, we can diſcover the real motion of A, by conſidering its apparent motion EC as the diagonal of a parallelogram of which one ſide E A is equal and oppoſite to the known motion BD. It muſt therefore be AC. 97. In like manner, if any other circumſtances have aſſured the ſpectator in B, that AC is the true motion of A, which had appeared to him to move along AK, he muſt conſider AK as the diagonal of a parallelogram ALKC, and then he learns that B has moved over a line BD, equal and oppoſite to AL. It was in this manner that Kepler, by obſervations on the planet Mars, diſcovered the true form of the eart's orbit round the Sun. ' 98. If equal and parallel motions be compounded vith all and each of the motions of any number of bodies, moving in any manner of way, their relative motions are not changed by this ſuperinduction. For, by compounding it with the motion of any one of the bodies, which we may call A, the real motion of A is indeed changed. But its motion relative to another body B, or its apparent motion as ſeen from B, is compounded of the real change (94.), and oſ the oppoſite to the real change in B, that is, oppoſite to the real change in A, and thereſore deſtroys that change, and the relative motion of A remains the ſame as beſore.In this manner, the motions and evolutions oſf a ſleet of ſhips in a current which equally aſfects them all, are not changed, or are the ſame as if made in ſtill water. The motions n the cabin of a ſhip are not affected by the ſhips progreſſive motion; nor are the relative motions on the ſurface of this globe ſenſibly aſfected by ĩts revolution round the ſun. We ſhould remain for ever ignorant of all ſuch common motions, if we did not ſee other bodies which are not aſſected by them. To theſe we refer, as to ſo many fixed points. /; 4. OF Motions continually Defiecied. 99. A curvilineal motion is a caſe of continual deflection. It is ſuſceptible of inſinite varieties, and its modiſications and chief properties are of diſſicult inveſrigation. , The The ſimpleſt caſe of curvilineal motion is that of uniform motion in a circular arch. Here, the deſlections in equal times from rectilineal motion are equal. But, ſhould the velocity be augmented, it is plain that the momentary deflection is alſo augmented, becauſe a greater arch will be deſcribed, and the end of this greater arch deviates farther from the tangent; but it is not eaſy to aſcertain in what proportion it is increaſled. When one uniform rectilineal motion A B (fig. 17.) is deflected into another BC, we aſcertain the linear deſlection by drawing a line from the point c, at which the body would have arrived without deflection, to the point C, to which it really does arrivee. And it is the ſame thing whether we draw d D, or c C, in this manner, becauſe theſe lines, being proportioml to B d, Bæ, will always give the ſame meaſure of the velocities (41.), and the lines of deſlection are all parallel, and therefore aſſure us of the direction of the deſlection in the point B. But it is otherwiſe in any curvilineal motion. We never have d D: cC =Bd: Bc; moreover, it is very rarely that d D,  C, &c. are paralle. We know not therefore which of theſe lines to ſelect for an indication of the direction of the defſlection at B, or for a meaſure of its magnitude. Not only does a greater velocity in the ſame curve cauſe a greater deſlection, but alſo, if the path be more incurvated, an arch of the ſame length deſcribed with the ſame velocity, deviates farther from the tangent. Therefore, if a body move uniformly in a curve of variable curvature, the deſlection will be greater where the curvature is greaur. We may learn from theſe general remarks, that the directions and the meaſures of the deſlections by which a body deviates continually into a curvilineal path, can be aſcertained, only by inveſtigating the ultimate poſitions and ratios of the lines which join the points of the curve with the ſimultaneous points of the tangent, as the points  and C are taken nearer and nearer to B. Some rare, but important caſes occur, in which the lines joining the ſimultaneous points c and C,  and ), &c. are parallel. In ſuch caſes, the deſlection in B is certainly parallel to them, and they are caſes of the compoſition of a motion in the direction of the tangent with a motion in the direction of the lines  C, d B, &c. But, in moſt caſes, ve muſt diſcover the direction of the deſlection in B, by obſerving what direction the lines d 3, c C, &e. taken on both ſides of B, continually approximate to. The following general propoſition, diſcovered by the illuſtrious Newton, will greatly facilitate this reſearch. 100. If a body deſcribe a curve line ABCDEF (fig. 18.) which is all in one plane, and if there be a point S in this plane, ſo ſituated, tlat the lines S A, S B, S C, &e. drawn to the curve, cut off areas AS B, ASC, ASD, &c. proportional to the times of deſcribing the arches AB, AC, AD, &c. then are the defections alavays directed to this point S. Let us firſt ſuppoſe that the body deſcribes the polygon ABCDEV, formed of the chords oſ this curve, eted only in the angles B, C, D, &e. Let us alſo (for the greater ſimplicity of argument) ſuppoſe that the ſides of this polygon are deſcribed in equal times, ſo that (by the hypotheſis) the triangles AS B, BSC, CSD, Xe. are all equal. Continue the chords AB, B C, &c. beyond the arches, making B equal to AB, and Cd equal to BC, and ſo on. Join è C, àd D, &c. and drav cS, à S, &c.; alſo draw Cb parallel to  B or BA, cutting BS in b, and join b A, and draw CA, cutting Bb in o. Laſtly, make a ſimilar conſtruction at E. Then, becauſe c B is equal to BA, the triangles AS B and BS, are equal, and therefore BS  is equal to BSC; but they are on the ſame baſe S B. Therefore they are between the ſame parallels; that is,  C is parallel to BS, and BC is the diagonal of a parallelogram B b C. The motion B C thereſore is compounded of the motions Bæ and B, and B is the deſlection, by vhich the motion B c is changed into the motion BC; therefore the deſlection in B is directed to S.By ſimilar reaſoning F, or E i, is the deſlection at E, and is likewiſe directed to S; and the ſame may be proved concerning every angle of the polygon. Let the ſides of this polygon be diminiſhed, and their number increaſed without end. The demonſtration remains the ſame, and continues, when the polygon exhauſts or coaleſces with the curvilineal area, and its ſides with the curvilineal arch. Now, when the whole areas are proportional to the times, equal areas are deſcribed in equal times; and therefore, in ſuch motion, the deſlections are always directed to S. This point S8 may he called the centre of deſlection. 101. If the defiection by hich a curve line ADF is deſeribed, be continually directed to a fixed point, the figure ill be in one plane, and areas will be deſcribed round thar point proportional to the times. For B C is the diagonal of a parallelogram, and is in the plane of 5B and B⸗ (84.); and / C is parallel to BS, and the triangles S B C, S B⸗, and SB A, are equal. Equal areas are deſęribed in equal times; and therefore areas are deſcribed proportional to the times, &c. &c. 102. Cor. 3. The velocities in different points of the eurve are inverſely proportional to the perpendiculars S r ond 8 t (fig. 19.) draun from 8 on the tangents Ar, E t in thoſe points of the curve. For, becauſe the elementary triangles AS B, ESF, are equal, their baſes AB, EF, are inverſely as their altitudes 8 7, 8 . Theſe baſes, being deſcribed in equal times, are as the velocities, and they ultimately coincide with the tangents at A and E. Therefore the velocity in A is to that in E as  ? to S r103. Cor. 2. The angular velocities round S are inverſely as the ſquares of the diſtances, For, if we deſcribo round the centre S the ſmall arches B æ, F), they may be conſidered as perpendiculars on S A and S E; alſo vith the diſtance S Fæleſcribe the arch 2h. It is evident that g h is to F à as the angle AS B to the angle ESTF. Nov, ſince the arcas AS B, ESF, are equal, ve have Bæ: F? SIL: S A. But gh: BamS E: SA therefore gh: F; = S E: S Aand ASB:ES FæS E: S A104. We now proceed to determine the magnitude of the deflection, or, at leaſt, to compare its magnitude in B, for example, with its magnitude in E. In the polygonal motion (fig. 18.) the deſlection in B is to that in E as the line BS to the line Ei; for Bb and Ei are the motions, which, by compoſition with the motions B and Ef, make the body deſcribe BC and EF. Therefore, when the ſides of the polygon are diminiſhed vithout end, the ultimate ratio of Bb to Ei is the ratio of the deſlection at B to the deſlection at E. In order to obtain a convenient expreſſion of this ultimate ratio, let ABCXZ Y be a circle paſſing through the points A, B, C, and draw B S Z through the point S, and draw CZ, AZ. j The triangles B C, and AZ C are ſimilar; for Cà was drawn parallel to c B or BA. Therefore the angle Ch B is equal to the ultimate angle  BA or Z BA, vhich is equal to the angle Z CA, being ſubtended by the ſame chord Z A; alſo CBS, or CBZ, is equal to CAZ, ſtanding on the ſame chord CZ. Therefore, the remaining angles b CB and CZ A are equal, and the triangle; are ſimilar; thereſore Bb: CA=æDC: AZ. Now, ſince, by continually diminiſing the ſides of the polygon, the points A and C continually approach to B, and CA continually approaches to c A or to 2B, or 2 CB, and is ultimately equal to it; alſo AZ is ultimately equal to BZ. Therefore, ultimately, Bb: 2BC  3C BZ In like munner, at the point E, we ſhall have Ei ultimately equal to 25 E æ being that chord of the cirele through D, E, and F, which paſies through i. . 2BC 2 EF Therefore Bb: Ei 7 E The ultimate circle, when the three points A, B, C, =BC: BZ, and Bb X BDZ æ2BC, and BI æ coaleſce, is called the CIRCLE OF EQOUAL CURVATURE, Or the EQUICURVE CIRCLE, coaleſcing with the curve in B in the moſt cloſe manner. The chord BZ of this circle, which has the direction of the deſlection in B, may be called its DEFLECTIVE CHORD. Since B C and E F are deſcribed in equal times, they are proportional to the velocities in B and E. Therefore, ve may expreſs this propoſition in the following words: In curvilineal motions, the deſlections in different points of the curve are proportional to the ſquare of the velocities in thoſe points, directly, and to ihe deflective chords of the equicurve circles in thoſe points, inverſely. It muſt be here remarked, that this theorem is not ſimited to curvilineal motions, in which the deſlections are always directed to one ſixed point, but extends to all curvilineal motions whatever. For it may evidently be expreſſed in this manner; The deſlecting forces are ultimately proportional to the ſquares of the arches deſcribed in equal times, directly, and to the deſective chords of the pquicurve cirele, inverſely. The equable deſcription of areas only enabled. us to ſee that the lines BC and EF were deſcribed in equal times, and therefore are as the velocities. It will be convenient to have a ſymbolical expreſſion oſ this theorem. Therefore, let the deſlective chord of the equicurve circle be repreſented by f, and the deſlection by d, the theorem may be expreſſcd by i a o aæ2r⸗ c c 1053. REMARK.The line Bà is the linear deſlection, by which the uniform motion in the chord AB is changed into a uniform motion in the chord BC, or it is the deviation c C from the point where the moveable would have arrived, had it not been deſlected at B. But, in the preſent caſe of curvilineal motion, the lines Bà and B? expreſs the meaſures of the velocities oſ theſe motions, or the meaſures of the determinations to them. Be is to Bb as the velocity of the progreſſive motion is to the velocity of the deflection, generated during the deſcription of the arch BC. But, becauſe the deſlection in the arch has been continual, and becauſe it is to be meaſured, like acceleration, by the velocity which is generated uniformly during a given moment oſ time, it may be meaſured by the velocity generated during the deſcription of the arch BC. Its meaſure thereſore will be double of the ſpace through which the body is actually deſlected in that time from the tungent in B. The ſpace deſcribed will be only one hulf of BS, or it will be B'ò. Nov, ihis ĩs really the caſe; for the tangent is ultimately parallel to OC, und biſects ? C; ſo that although the deſlection ſrom the tangent to the curve is only half of the deſlection from the produced chord to the curve; yet the velocity gradually generated is that which will produce the deſlection from the produced chord, or is that which conſtitutes the polygonal motion in the chords. It is perſectly legitimate, thereſore, to reaſon from the ſubſultory deſlections oſ a polygonal motion to the continual deſlections in a curvilineal motion; for the deſlections in the angles of the polygon have the ſame ratio to one another with the deſlections in the ſame points of the curve. But we muſt be careful not to conſound the deſlections from the tungent with thoſe from the chords. This has been done by eminent mathematicians. For the employment of algebraical expreſions of the increments of the abſciſſe and ordinates of curves, always gives the true expreſſion oſ the deſtections in a polygonml motion. But, when we turn our thoughts to the figures, and to the curvilineal motions themſclves, we naturally think of the deſlections ſſuch as we ſee them) from the tangent to the curve. We then make geometrical inferences, vilineal motionss. We are apt to mix and confound theſe inferences with the reſults of the fluxionary calculus, which always refer to the polygon. By thus mixing quantiſies that are incongruous, ſome celebrated mathematicians have committed very groſs miſtakes. It is; in general, moſt convenient, and ſurely moſt natural, to uſe the nltimate ratio of the actual deſlee; BC ; ; tions from the tangent, or; and this even gives us DBZ its meaſure in feet or inches, when we know the dimenſions of the ſigure deſcribed Thus we know that, in one minute, the Moon, when at her mean diſtance, deflects 193 inches from the tangent to her orbit round the Earth, and that the earth deviates 424 inches in the ſame time from the tangent of her orbit round the Sun. 1066. The velocity in any point of a curvilineal motion is that which would be generated by the deſlection in that point, if continued through  of the deſlective chord of the equicurve circlee Let æ be the ſpace along which the body muſt be accelerated in order to acquire the velocity B C. We have Bb?, or BO: BCDBO: æ (57) and B C x BO BC BC 5O = 3O and 4-=zꝗ BO: BCDBC: 4. But BO: BCæBC: BZ. Thereſore x æ4 BZ. therefore x RECAPITULATION. Thus have we obtained marks and meaſures oſ all the principal aſſections of motion. i E T 5 The acceleration a is è (11) or vv (;72) or (65) t s r? The momentary variation of velocity v=ai (;) The momentary variation of the ſquare of velocity 2009285 (72) : arc. The momentary deſlection d10 y chord (r05) The deſlective velocity i (104) But, in order to apply the doctrines already eſtabliſhied with the accuracy of which phyſico-mathematical ſubjects are ſuſceptible, it is neceſſary to ſelect ſome point in any body of ſenſible magnitude, or in any ſyſtem of bodies, by the poſition or motion of which we may form a juſt notion of the poſition and motion of the body or ſyſtem. It is evident that the condition which aſcertains the propriety of our choice, is, that rbe poſition, diſtance, or motion of this point ſball be a medium or average of the prſitions, diſtances, and motions of every portiele of matter in the rſſemblage. 107. This will be the caſe, if the point be ſo ſituated that, if a plane be made to paſs through it in any direction whatever, and if perpendiculars be dravn to this plane from every particle of matter in this aſſemblage, the ſum of all the perpendiculars on one ſide of this plane is equal to the ſum of all the perpendiculars on the other. That there may be found in every body ſuch a point, is demonſtrated (after Boſcovich) in the Encycl. Britan. Art. Poſition (Centre of). Let P (fig. 20.) be a point ſo ſituated, and let QR be a plane (or rather the ſection of a plane, perpendicular to the plane of the paper) at any diſtance from the body. The diſtance Pp of P from this plane, is the average of all the diſtances of each particlee. For, Iet the plane AP B paſs through this point, parallel to the plane QR. The diſtance CS of a parallel C from this plane is DSDC, or P~—DC,; and the diſtance GT of a particle G is HT + GH, or Pꝓ + G H. Let n be the number of particles between QR and AP; and let æ be the number on the other ſide of AP; and let m be the number of particles in the whole body, that is, let mæn + o. It is evident that the ſum oſ all the diſtances, ſuch as CS is n x Pꝓ minus the ſum of all the diſtances, ſuch as CD. Alſo o X Pp, plus the ſum of the diſtances GH, is the ſum of all the diſtances GT. Now, the ſum of the lines CD is equal to that of all the lines GH, and thereſore nF o x P ꝓ4, or m X Pꝑ, is equal to the ſum of all the lines CS and GT, and P⸗ is the m' part of this ſum, or the average diſtance. Now, ſuppoſe the body to have approached to the plane QR (ſig. 21), and that P is now at æ. It ĩs plain that the diſtance æꝓ is again the average diſtance, and m xX æꝓ is the ſum of all the new diſtances. The diſference from the former ſum is m xX P æ, and conſcquently m xX P æ is the ſum of the approaches of every particle; and P æ is the m'? part of this ſum, or is the average oſ them all. The diſtance, poſition, and motion of this point is therefore the average poſition, diſtance, and motion of the whole body. The ſame demonſtration will apply to any ſyſtem of bodies. The point P is therefore properly choſen. 108. Since the point P is the ſame, in whatever direction the plane APB is made to paſs through it, it follows that the laſt propoſition is true, although the body may have turned round ſome centre or axis, or though the bodies of which the ſyſtem conſiſts may have changed their mutual poſitions. 109. The point P, thus ſelected, may, with great propriety, be called the CENTRE OF POSITION Of the body or ſyſtem. 11o. If A and B (fig. 22.) be the centres of poſition of two bodies A and B, and if a and b expreſs the numbers of equal particles in A and B, or their quantities of matter, the common centre C of this ſyſtem of two bodies lies in the ſtraight line AB joining their reſpective centres, and AC: CB æb: a. This is evident. 111. If a third body D, whoſe quantity of matter is d, be added, the common centre of poſition of this ſyſtem of theſe three bodies lis in the ſtraight line D C, Joining D with the centre of the other two, and DE: EC =a+ b: d. In like manner, if a fourth body be added, the common centre of poſition is in the line joining it ith the centre of the other three, and the diſtance of the fourth from this common centre, ĩs to the diſtance of that ſfrom the common centre of the thræ], as the matter of all the three ro the matter of the fourthAnd the ſame thing is true for every addition. 112. If the particles or bodies of any ſyſtem be moving uniformly in ſtraight lines, with any velocities und directions whatever, the centre of the ſyſtem is either at reſt, or it moves uniſormly in a ſtraight line. For, let one of the bodies D move uniformly from D to F. Join F with the centre C of the remaining bodies, and make Cf to F4 as the matter in F is to that in the remaining bodies. It is plain that E 7 is parallel to DF, and that DF: E f æ A + B: D. In like manner, may the motion of the centre be found that is produced by that of each oſ the other bodies. But theſe motions oſ the centre F are all uniform and rectilinea. Therefore, the motion compounded of them all is uniform and rectilineal It may happen that the motion reſulting ſrom this compoſition may be nothing, by reaſon of the contrariety of ſome individual motions. In this caſe, the centræ will remain in the ſame point. This obtains alſo, if the centres of any number oſ bodies move uniformly in right lines, whatever may have been the motion of each body, hy rotation or otherwiſe. The motion of the common centre will ſtill be uniſorm and rectilineal. . 1;3 Cor. 1. The quantity of motion of ſuch a ſyſtem, is the ſum of the quantities of motion of each body reduced (85.) to the direction oſ the centre's motion, and iĩt is had by multiplying the quantity of matter in the whole ſyſtem by the velocity oſ the centre. 114. Cor. 2. This velocity of the centre is had by reducing the motion of each particle to the direction of the centre motion, and diveſting the ſum of the reduced motions by the quantity of matter in the ſyſtem. 115. If equal and oppoſite quantities of motion be any how impreſſcd on any two bodies of ſuch an aſſemblage, the motion of the centre of the whole is not aſfected by it. For the motion of the centre, ariſing Arom the motion of one of the bodies, being compounded with the equal and oppoſite motion of the other, the diagonal of the parallelogram becomes a point, or theſe motions deſtroy one another, and no change is induced thereby in the motion of the centree. The ſame thing muſt be ſaid of equal and oppoſite quantities of motion being impreſſed on any other pair of the bodies, and, in Ahort, on every pair that can be ſormed in the aſſemblage. Thereſore the propoſition is ſtill true. P A RT I. SECTION I. OF MATTER. 1I6. Thæ term MATTER expreſſes that ſubſtance of which all things which we perceive by means of our ſenſes are conceived to conſiſt. It is almoſt ſynonymous, in our language, with BODY*. MATERIAL and CORPOREAL ſeem alſo ſynonymous epithets. 117. Senſible bodies are uſually conceived as conſiſting of a number of equal PARTICLES or AToMs of this ſubſtance. Theſe atoms may alſo be ſuppoſed ſimilar in all their qualities, each poſieſſing ſuch qualities as diſtinuiſh them from every thing not material. y g 118. But we are entirely ighorant oſ the eſſuntial qualities of matter, and eannot aſllrm any thing concerning it, except what we have learned ſrom obſervation. To us, matter is a mere phonomenon. but we muſt aſL2 certain with preciſion the propertios which we ſelect as diſtinctive of matter from all other things119. All men ſcem agreed in calling that alone matter, which excludes all other ſubſtances of the ſame kind, or prevents them from occupying the ſame place, and which requires the exertion of what we call ſorce to remove it from its place, or anyhow change its motion. Theſe two properties have been generally called soLIDITY Or IMPENETRAEILITY, and INFR TIA or MOBILITY. Mere mobility, however, is not, perhaps, peculiar to matter; for the mind accompanies the body in all iĩts chunges of ſituation. When mobility is aſcribed to matter, as a diſtinguiſhing quality, we always conceive ſorce to be required. We are conſcious of exerting force in moving even our own limbs. In like manner, extenſion, and figure, and diviſibility, although primary qualities of matter, are common to it with empty ſpace. 120. Mobility in conſequence of the exertion of force may be uſed as a characteriſtic oſ matter, or of an atom of matter. All poſſeſs iand probably all poſſeſs it alike, their ſenſible differences being the conſequence of a difference in the combinations oſ atoms to ſorm a particle. 121. A particle oſ matter under the influence of a moving force, is the object of purely mechanical contemplation, and the conſideration of the changes of mol tion which reſult from its condition as thus deſcribed may be called the uECHANISM of the phenomenon. 122. Perhaps all changes of material nature are caſes of local motion (though unperceived by us) by the influence of moving forces. Perhaps they cannot be ſaid to be completely underſtood, till it can be ſiewn how the atoms of matter have changed their ſituations. Perhaps the ſolution of a bit of ſilver in aqua fortis is not completely explined, till we ſew, as the mechanician can ſhew with reſpect to the ſatellites of Jupiter, how an individual atom of ſilver is made to quit its connexion with the reſt, and by what path, and with what velocity in every imſtant of its motion, it gets to its final ſtate of reſt, in a diſtant part of the veſſel. But theſe motions are not conſidered by the judicious chemiſt. He conſiders the phenomenon as fully explained, when he has diſcovered all the caſes in which the ſolution takes place, and has deſcribed, with accurate fidelity, all the circumſtances of the operation. 123. We have derived our notions of soLIDITY or IMPENETRABILITY chieſly from our ſenſe of touch. The fenſations gor in this way ſeem to have induced all men to afcribe this property of tangible matter to the mutual contact of the particleand to ſuppoſe that no diſtance is interpoſed between them. 124. But the compreſſibility and elaſticity of all amples of chemical union, in which the ingredients occupy leſs room when mixed, than one of them did before mixture, ſeem incompatible with this conſtitution of tangible matter. Did air conſiſt of particles, elaſtic in the ſame manner that blown bladders are, it would not be fluid when compreſſed into half of its uſual bulk, becauſe, in this caſe, each ſpherule would be compreſſed into a cube, touching the adjoining ſix particles in the whole of its ſurſaces. No liquid, in a ſtate of ſenſible compreſſion, could be fluid ; yet the water at the bottom of the deepeſt ſea is as ſluid as at the ſurface. Some optical phenomena alſo ſhew incontrovertibly that very ſtrong preſſure may be exerted by two bodies in pbyſical or ſenſible contact, although a meaſurable diſtance is ſtill interpoſcd between them. On the whole, it ſeems more probable that the ultimate atoms of tangible matter are not in mathematical contact. 125. Bodies are penetrated by other matter in conſequence of their poroſity. Therefore the ſame bulk may contain different quantities of matter. 126. DENSITY is a term, which, in ſtrict Ianguage, expreſſes vicinity of particles. But, when uſed by the mechanicion as a term of compariſon, it expreſſes the proportion of the number of equal particles, or the quantity of matter, in one body, to the number oſ equal partieles in the ſane bulk of another body. PART I. SECTION II. DYNAMICS. 128. Drames is that department of phyſicomathematical ſcience which contains the alſtract doctrines of moving forces; that is, the neceſſary reſults of the relations of our thoughts concerning motion and the cauſes of its production and changes. 129. Changes of motion are the only indications of the agency, the only marks of the kind, and the only meaſures of the intenſity oſ thoſe cauſes. 130. We cannot think of motion, in abſtracto, as a ihing, properly ſo called, that can ſubſiſt ſeparately, but as a quality, or rather as a condition, of ſome other thing. Therefore we conſider this condition as permanent, like the ſituation, figure or colour of the thing, unleſs ſome cauſe of change exert its influence on it. 131. Looking round us, we cannot fail of obſerving that the changes in the ſtate or condition of a body in reſpect of motion, have a diſtinct and conſtant relation to the ſituation and diſtance oſ ſume other bodies. Thus, the motions of the Moon, or of a ſtone projected through the air, have an evident and invariable relation to the Earth. A magnet has the ſame to ironan electriſied body to any body near ita billiard ball to another billiard ball, &c. &c. Such ſeeming dependences may be called the mechanical relatisns of bodies. They are, unqueſtionably, indications of properties, that is, of diſtinguiſhing qualities. Theſe accompany the hodies wherever they are, and are commonly conceived as inherent in them; and they certainly aſcertain and determine what we call their mechanical naturee The mechanician will deſcribe a magnet, by ſaying that it attracts iron. The chemiſt will deſcribe it, by ſaying that it contains the martial oxyd in a particular proportion of metal and oxygen. 132. Philoſophers are not uniſorm, however, in their reſerence of the qualities indicated by thoſe obſerved relations. Magnetiſm is a term expreſſing a certain claſs of phenomena, which are relations ſubſiſting between magnets and iton; but many reckon it a property of the magnet, by which it attracts iron; others imagine it a property of the iron, by which it tends to the magnetThis difference generally ariſes from the intereſt we take in the phenomenon; both hodies are probably affected alike, and the property is diſtinctive of both: For, in all caſes that have yet been obſerved, we find that the indicating phenomenon is obſerved in both bodies;thmagnet approaches the iron, and the electriſied body ap proaches the other. The property therefore is equally inherent in both, or perhaps in neither; for there are fome philoſophers, who maintain that there are no ſuch mutual tendencies, and that the obſerved approaches, or, in many caſes, mutual ſeparations, are effected by the extraneous impulſion of an æthereal ſluid, or of certain miniſtering ſpirits, intrinſic or extrinſic. 133. Theſe mechanical aſections of matter have been very generally called PoWERS or FORCES; and the body conceived to poſſeſs them is ſaid to acT on the related body. This is ſigurative or metaphorical language. Power, and force, and action, eannot be predicated, in their original ſtrict ſenſe, of any thing but the exertions of animated heings; nay, ĩt is perhaps only the exerted influence of the mind on the body which we ought to call action. But language began among ſimple men; they gave theſe denominations to their own exertions with the utmoſt propriety. To move a body, they found themſelves obliged to exert their ſſirength, or force, or power, and to ac?. When ſpeeulative men afterwards attended to the changes of motion obſerved in tlhe meetings or vicinity of bodies, and remarked that the phenomena very much reſembled the reſults of exerting their own ſtrength or force; and when they would expreſs this occurrence of nature, it was eaſier to make uſe ſ an old term, than to make a new one for things ahich ſo much reſembled; becauſe there are always ſuch differences in other circumſtances of the caſe, that there is little danger of confounding them. We are not to imagine that they thought that inanimate bodies exerted ſtrength, as they themſelves did. This was reſerved for much later times of refinement.In the progreſs of this reſinement, the word power or force was employed to æexpreſs any efficiency whatever; and we now ſay, the power of aqua fortis to diſſolve ſilver—the force of argument the action of motives, &e. &c. To this notion of conveniency we muſt aſcribe, not only the employment of the words power and force, to expreſs æfficiency in generãl, but alſo of the terms ortraction, repulſion, impulſion, preſſure, &. all. of which are metaphorical, unleſs when applied to the actions of animals. But they are uſed as terms of diſtinction, on account of the reſemblance between the phenomena and thoſe which we obſerve when we pull a thing toward us, puſh it ſrom us, kick it away, or forcibly compreſs xt. 134. Much confuſion has ariſen from the unguarded uſe of this ſigurative language. Very ſlight analogies have made ſome animate all matter with a ſort of mind, a d/æ vuxn while other reſemblances have made other ſpeculatiſts materialize intellect itſelſ. The very names which we give to thoſe powers which we fancy to be inherent in bodies, lhew that we know nothing about them. Theſe names either, like magnetiſm, expreſs a relation to the particular ſubſtances which we imagine poſſeſs the power, or they expreſæ ſomething of the efſect which ſuggeſted their exiſtence. Of this lat kind are coheſion, gravity, &e. They are almoſt all verbal derivatives, and ſhould be conſidered by us merely as abbreviated deſcriptions or hints of the phenomena, or as abbreviated reſerences to certain bodies, but by no means as any explanation of their nature. The terms are the worſe by having ſome meaning. For this has ſfrequently miſſed us into falſe notions of the manner of acting. Perhaps the only ſtrict application of the term acTioN is to the eſfect produced by our exertions in moving our own limbs. But we think that we move other bodies, becauſe our own body, which is the immediate inſtrument of the mind, is overlooked, like the plane in the hand of the carpenter, attending to the plank which he dreſſes. 135. Forces have been divided into IMPULSIONS and PRESSURES. Impulſions are thoſe which produce the changes of motion by the colliſion of moving bodies. Preſſure is a very ſamiliar idẽa, and perhaps enters into every clear conception that we can form of a moving force, when we endeavour to fix our attention on it. We know that preſſure is a moving force; for, by preſſing round the handle of a kitchen jack, we can urge the ſly into any rapidity of motion. Even when one hall puts another in motion by hitting it, e think that ſome' thing preciſely ſike our own preſfure is the immediate producer of the motion; for if the hall is compreſſible, we ſee it dimpled by the blow. Gravity, or elaſticity, and the like, are called preſſing powers; becauſe a hall, lying on a maſs of ſoſt clay, makes a pit in it, and, if lying on our hand, it excites the ſame feeling that another man would do by preſſing on our hand. There are ſome indeed who call ſuch powers, as gravity, magnetiſm, and electricity, soLICrrATIONS to motion. We ſhall ſoon ſee that this claſſiſication of forces is of no uſe. 136. Preſſure and impulſion are thought to be eſſentially diſtinguified by this circumſtance, that, in order to produee a finite velocity in a body by preſſure, it muſt be continued for ſome timeas when we urge the fly of a jack into ſwift motion by preſſing on the handle; whereas impulſion produces it in an inſtantThey are alſo diſtinguiſhed by another circumſtance The impelling body loſes as much motion as the impelled body has gained ſo that there ſeems ſomething like the transfufion of motion from the one to the other. Accordingly, it is called the coMMUNICATION Of motion. But we ſhall find that neĩther the inſtantaneous production of motion by impulſe, nor the transfuſion of it into the body, are true. 137. Some again think that impulſion is the only pauſe of motion, ſaying,  Nihil movetur niſi a contigus  et moto;- and they have ſuppoſed ſtreams of æther, which urge heavy bodies downwardwhich impel the iron and magnet toward each other, &c. 138. But a third ſect of mechanicians ſay that forces, acting at a diſtance, as we ſee in the phenomena of gruvitation, magnetiſm, and electricity, are the ſole cauſes oſ motion; and they aſært that ſuch forces are exhibited, even in the phenomena of ſenſible contact, preſſure, and impulſion. l 139. The only ſafe procedure is to conſider all the forces which we obſcrve in action as mere phenomena. The conſtitution of our mind makes us infer the agency of a cauſe, whenever we obſerve a change. But, whether the exertion of force Thall produce motion or heat, we know not, except by experience, that is, by obſervation of the phenomena. Nor will ſpeculations about the intimate nature oſ theſe forces, and their manner of acting, contribute much to our uſrul knowledge oſ mechanical naturee. We gain all that is poſſible concerning the nature of thoſe faculties which accompany matter, or are ſuppoſed to be its inherent properties, by noticing the Laws according to which their exertions proceed. Without a knowledge of theſe laws, the other knowledge is of no value. 140. It is alſo from the change oſ motion alone that we learn the direction of any force. Thus, by obſerving that an arrow is retarded during its aſcent through the air, but accelerated during its fall, we infer, or learn, that the force of gravity acts downwards. 141. When a force is known to be in action, and yet its characteriſtic motion does not follow, we ſu;poſe that it is oppoſed by a force acting in the oppoſite direction. Thus the agency of that other force is detected, and its intenſity may be meaſuredl. Thus, the force with which the parts of a ſtring cohere, or with which a ſpringey body unbends, are detected by their ſupporting a weightand the magnitude of the weight is the meaſure of the coheſion of the ſtring, or of the elaſticity of the ſpring. 142. But the body in which this oppoſing force is thus detected, is alſo ſaid to ræſiſt the force to which it is oppoſed. This is figurative language, and, as uſed in mechanical philoſophy, it is generally improper. In wreſtling, vhen my antagoniſt exerts his ſtrength, to prevent his being thrown down, I am ſenſible of his exertion, and I thus learn that he reſiſtss But ſhould I feel no more exertion neceſſary than if he were a maſs of lifeleſs matter, I ſhould not think that he reſiſted. In the mechanical operations of nature, a force of any kind always produces its full eſſect, agreeably to the circumſtances of the caſe, and can do no more. The force is indeed expended in producing its effect, becauſe mater is not moved without force. The weight lying on a ſpring, and keeping it in a ſtate of tenſion, is as completely meaſured by the degree of tenſion which ſupports it, as this tenſion is meaſured by the ſupported weight ; neither can, with propriety, be ſaid to reſiſt. Silver is ſaid to reſiſt the diſſolving power of aqua regia, but not that of aqua fortis; yet the diſſolving power oſ aqua fortis is expended, and that of aqua regia is not. All this is very inaccurate employment of words, and thia inaccuracy has done much harm in natural philoſophy. The word INERTIA, which had been employed by Kepler and Newton, to expreſs the indiſference of matter as to motion or reſt, or jts tendency to retain ĩts preſent ſtate, has got other notions annexed to it by ſubſequent writers, and has been called a force, vis inerti2zz. Mr Rutherfurth, in his Syſtem of Natural Philoſophy, lectures which he read in the Univerſity of Cambridge with great applauſe, is at pains to ſhew that matter is not merely indifferent, but RESISTS every change of motion, by exerting what he calls the force of inactivity, by which it preſerves its condition unchanged. But, ſurely, this is as incongruous as to ſpeak of a ſquare circlee Yet is inertia conſidered as a real exiſtence, and is ſaid to be proportional to the quantity of matter in a bodj. When we find that we muſt employ twice as much force to move A with a certain velocity as to move B, we ſay that A contains twice as much matter, becauſe we ſee that it has twice as much inertia. Is it not enough to ſay that we judge A to have twice as much matter, becauſe all matter requires force to move it ?7thia ĩs its characteriſtic. Should we ſind that we can move a thing by a very wiſ, or a command, we ſhould not think it matter. Inertia, taken in this ſenſe, as expreſſing the neceſſity of what we call force, in order to change the motion of matter, is juſt one of thoſe general phenomena by which it is known to us. Whether this force be, in every caſe, external to the material atom, or whether ſome of the obſerved powers of body may not be inherent in it, is a queſtion of Metaphyſics, and is probably beyond the reach of our faculties. But naturaliſts have generally ſuppoſcd that the atom is purely paſſive and indiſferent, and that all its powers are ſuperadded to the mere miterial atom. Theſe doubts and diſſiculties in the ſudy have all ariſen from the introduction of the notion of r/ſiſlance, or force exerted by matter, in order to remnin as it is. It would have been infinitely better to have employed the term REACTION, becauſe this is the expreſſion of the very fact; for, in all the phenomena of changed motion, there is obſerved an equal change in oppoſite directions in the two acting bodies. Iron approaches to the magnet the magnet to the iron. In the colliſion of bodies, the impelling and impelied are obſerved to ſuſtain equal and oppoſite changes. But in moſt, and probably in all, we diſcover that thoſe ehanges are bronght about by forces famillrly known to us in other ways; and no method LEas been diſcovered, by which we may learn whether the nvhole of the change is owing to thoſe mutual ſorces, or whether ſome part is to be aſeribed to inertia. il 143 When the body B is always obſerved to approach to A, and no intermediate cauſe can be aſſigned, A is ſaid to attract B. Thus a magnet is ſaid to attract a piece of common iron. But if B is always obſerved to ſnun A, or to ſeparate from it, A is ſaid to repel B. Thus one electriſied body repels another. 144. Mechunical forces are conſidered as meaſurable magnitudes. But, ſince they are not objects of our perception, but only inferences from the phenomena, it is plain that we can neither meaſure nor compare their magnitudes directly. Having no knowledge of their agency, nor any mark of their kind, except the change of motion which we conſider as their eſfect, it is only in this change of motion that we muſt look for any meaſure of their magnitude or intenſity ,this is alſo the only mean of compariſon. Now, change of motion, involving no ideas but of ſpace and time, affords the moſt perfect meaſurement. We cannot find a better meaſure; nay, it is improper to employ any other; and the moſt eminent philoſophers, by employing other meaſures, founded on their fancied knowledge of the intimate nature of mechanical force, have advanced moſt incongruous opinions, which have ſpoĩled the beauty of the ſcience. We ſhall thereſore adhere ſtrictly to the meaſure ſuggeſted by this reaſoning, and ſhall call that a double or triple force, which, by its ſimilar action, during the ſame time, produces a double or triple change of motion, whether it accelerates, or retards, or deflects a uotion already going on. We expreſi this notion in the moſt ſimple manner by ſaying, that we conſider force merely as ſomething that is proportional to the change of velecity. Of the Laws of Motion. 145. Such being our notions of motion, and of the cauſes of its production and changes, there are certain reſults, which, by the conſtitution of our minds, neceſſarily ariſe from the relations of theſe ideas. Theſe are laws of human judgement, independent of all experience of external nature, juſt as it reſults from the laws of judgement that the three angles of a right lined triangle are equal to two right angles, although there ſhould not be a triangle in the univerſe. Some of theſe laws may be intuitive, and may be called axioms; others, equally neceſſary truths, may not be ſo obvious, and may require ſteps of argument. There are three ſuch laws, firſt propoſed in preciſe terms by Sir Iſaac Newton, which ſeem to give a ſuſicient foundation for all the doctrines of Dynamics, and to which, as to firſt principles, e may appeal for the explanation of ęvery mechanical phenomenon of nature. ſ Firſt Law of Motion. 146. Every body continues at reſt, or in uniform rectilineal motion, unleſs affected by ſome mechanical force. If we adhiere to our inſerence of the agency of force only from an obſerved change oſf motion, and to this inference from every ſuch change, and if we grant that we have no notion of a ſorce independent oſ a change oſ motion, this law ſeems little more than a tautological propoſition. For, unleſs we ſuppoſe the agency of a mechanical ſorce, we do not ſuppoſe a change of motion, that is, the abſence of mechanical agency is the abſence of a change of motion, and the body continues in its former ſtate of reſt or motion. But philoſophers have attempted to demonſtrate this law in various ways. 147. Some conſider it as a neceſſary truth, in the nature of the thing. A hody, they ſay, can neither accelerate, nor retard, nor deſlect, becauſe the event is but one, and there is no cauſe of determination whether it ſhall accelerate, or retard, or deſlect, nor whether to the right or to the left, or which determines any one degree of any of thoſe changes. This ſort of prooſ is obſcure and unſatisfactory. 148. Others chooſe to conſider it as a phyſical Iaw, as an univerſal fact, for which, perhaps, we can give no reaſon. They oſfer numerous proofs by induction. Thus, a coach being ſuddenly accelerated, or checked in its progreſs, or turned out of its courſe, the ſitters are thrown towards the back, or the front of the coach, or to one ſide, ſhewing, in all caſes, a tendency to continue in their former condition in reſpect of motion. Numberl leſs examples may be given of the ſame marks of this tendency to continue in the former ſtate. 149. But it may be objected, that it is very far from being a matter of univerſal experience. Whoever grants the truth of the Copernican deſcription of the planetary motions, will alſo grant that we perhaps never ſaw one inſtance, either of reſt or of uniform rectilineal motion. Our moſt familiar obſervations ſhew an evident tendency to reſt, a ſort of ſluggiſineſs in all matter. For it is a fact, that all motions gradually diminiſh, and, in a ſhort time, terminate in reſt. No force ſeems neceſſary for maintaining a ſtate of reſt. But motion, they ſay, is a violent ſtate, the continual production of an effect, and therefore requiring a continuation of the cauſe. Motion therefore requires the continual exertion of the cauſe. They ſay that a body in motion continues in it, only by the continual agency of a force infuſed into it in giving it the motion, and inherent in it while in motion. They call ĩt the inherent forcevis inſita corpori moto. 150. But this is contrary to our cleareſt experience, and to any diſtinct notions that we can form of motion as an effect of forcee. We are not conſcious of any exertion, in order to continue our motion in ſliding or ſating on ſmooth ice; and when any obſtruction comes in our way, we feel diſtincily our natural tendency to continue ourſpeed undiminihedwe feel that we muſt reſiſt a tendency to fſall forwardswe ſeel all obſtructions as checks on our ſpeed, and think that if the ice were perfectly ſmooth, we ſhould go on for ever. It is equally contrary to our notions of a moving ſorce. By its inſtantaneous action, it produces motion, that is, a ſucceſſive change of place, otherwiſe it produces nothing. Or if, in any inſtant of its action, it do not produce a continuing motion, it cannot produce it hy continuing to act. Continuation of motion is implied in our very idea of motion. In any inſtant, the body does not move over any ſpace; but it is in a certain condition (however imperfectly underſtood by us) or has a certain determination, which we call velocity, by which, if not hindered, a certain length of path is paſſed over in a ſecond. This muſt be eſfected by the inſtantaneous action of the moving cauſe, otherwiſe it is not a cauſe of motion. In ſhort, motion is a ſſate or condition, into which a body may be put, by various cauſes, but by no means a thing which can be infuſed into ? body, or taken out of it. Should it be ſaid that we have full evidence of a force reſiding in a moving body, by obſerving its impulſive power, which is not to be found in the ſame body at reſt, ve may anſwer, that there are forces reſiding in moving bodies, but that they are equally inherent in them when at reſt, but that motion is neceſary, in order that theſe forces may be able to exert their action on the other body long enough to produce a ſenſible effect. Motion in the impelling body is not the cauſe of that oſ the body impelled by it, but only an occaſion or opportunity for the forces to act eſfectually, and without which the other body would withdraw itſelf from the action. The bow-ſtring muſt continue preſſing the arrow forwardsthe hammer muſt follow the nail, that it may drive it to the head by one blow. This will be clearly ſhevn as we proceed. The gradual diminution and final ceſſation of all motions mentioned above is granted, but is eaſily explained by ſtating the obſtructions The diminution is obſerved to be preciſely what ſhould ariſe from thoſe obſtructions, on the ſuppoſition that if there were no obſtruction, there would be no diminution. For example, where we can ſhew that the obſtruction is only half, the diminution of motion is only one half. This would not be, if there were any diminution where there is no obſtruction. A pendulum is ſoon brought to reſt when vibrating in water; it vibrates much longer in air; and ſtill longer in the exhauſted receiver of an air-pump. The planets have continued for many ages without rhe ſmalleſt perceptible diminution of their motions. 158. Another ſect of philoſophers deny this law altogether, and aſfirm that matter is eſſentially prone to motion. Every body, when at liberty, begins to move, and continually accelerates this ſpontaneous motion. Bodies are ſo far from being ſluggiſh, that they are perpetually active. 152. All theſe diſferences of opinion may be completely ſettled, by adhering to the principle, that ⸗ every  change is an eſfect. It is a matter oſ fact, that the human mind always conſiders it as ſuch. Therefore, the law is ſtrictly deduced from our ideas of motion and its cauſes; for, even iſ it were eſſential to matter gradually to diminiſh its motion, and, at laſt, come to reſt, this would not invalidate the law, becauſe our underſtanding would conſider this diminution as the indication of an eſſential, or, at leaſt, a univerſal property of matter. We ſhould aſcribe it to a natural retarding force, in the ſame way that we give this name to the weight of an arrow diſcharged ſtraight upwards. The nature oſ exiſting matter would be conſidered as the cauſe, and we ſhould eſtimate the law of its action as we have done in the caſe of grvity; and, as in that caſe, we ſhould ſtill ſuppoſe that were it not for this particular property, the material atom would continue its motion for ever undiminiſhed. This is quite ſuſſicient for all the purpoſes of mechanical philoſophy. Nay, if we aſſumed any thing elſe in this caſe, ve ſhould be led into continual blunders. Should we ſay that a body maintains its motion undiminiſhed ſolely by the action of an inherent force, we ſhould be obliged to adopt the opinion, that when one body in motion impels another, part of this force is transfuſed from the impelling into the impelled body, and all the abſurditics which are neceſſarily attached to this opinion. Therefore, to conclude on this ſubject, let us conſiqer motion merely as a ſtate or condition, into which matter may be brought by various cauſes, and which, like its whiteneſs or roundneſs, will remain, till ſome efficient cauſe ſhall change it. This we have called the mechanical condition of the body, and have ſettled the meaning of the term with ſuſſicient preciſion. It conſiſts in its velocity and direction, and in no other circumſtance. In the next place, let us conſider the change which may be induced on it as conſiſting ſolely in a change in theſe circumſtances, and this change as the only indication, the only mark, and the only proper meaſure of the changing cauſe, that is, of the force (for we are conſidering mechanical cauſes only). It is evident that, as far as this procedure will carry us, we acquire certain knowledge, ſuſceptible of mathematical treatment. In order to make our taſk uſeſul, we muſt endeavour to learn whether the deviations from uniform motion follow re-gular lavshat the laws areand to what bodies they refer. 154. The deviations from uniform motion are diſcoverable only by a compariſon with uniform motions. But we cannot tell whether a propoſed motion be uniform, unleſs we have an accurate meaſure of time. For it is to be learned only by obſerving the proportions of the ſpaces, and thoſe of the times, and by obſerving that thoſe proportions are the ſame. To obtain a meaſure of time, various contrivances have been employed. They are all to this purpoſleAn event is ſelected, in which we have no reaſon to think that any variation occurs ir the operation of thoſe cauſes which eſfectuate its accompliſhment. It is then preſumed that it will always be accompliſhed in equal times. The rotation of the heavens, in twenty-three hours and fifty-ſix minutes and four ſeconds, has been agreed on as the ſtandard to which all other contrivances are referred or compared, and their accuracy is eſtimated by their agreement with this ſtandard. Second Law of Motion. 155. Every change of motion is proportional to the ſorce impreſſed, and is made in the direclion of that force. This alſo is little more than a tautological propoſition. If a force is to be meaſured only by the change which it makes in the motion oſf a body, the propoſition is only a repetition oſ this meaſure in diſferent terms; for, ſurely, quantities are proportional to their accurate meaſures. Indeed, this would have been a ſuſficient demonſtration, had not philoſophers attempted it in another way, which has given riſe to a great ſchiſm in the eſtimation of forces. They have attempted to demonſtrate it as an application of the undoubted maxim, that effecis aore proportional to their cauſes. But ĩt ĩs eaſy to ſee that this application cannot be made; for it preſuppoſes that we know the proportion of the forces, and that of their cauſes, and that we perceive thoſe proportions to be the fame.Now, in moſt caſes, this is impoſſible; for the Horces are not objects of our obſervation. We know nothing of their proportions. When Newton ſays that gravity at the ſurface of the earth is 3600 times greater than at the moon, he proves it by ſhewing that the deflection cauſed by it in a ſecond, at the earth's furface, is 3600 times greater than that of the moon. But this is begging the queſtion, or aſſuming this propoſition as true, unleſs this law of motion be admitted as an axiom. There are very ſew caſes indeed, where we can ſhew that forces are proportional to the changes of motion produced by them; yvet ſuch caſes are not altogether wanting. Thus, a ſpring ſtilyard can be made, the rod of which is divided by hanging on, in ſucceſſion, a number of perfectly equal weights. The elaſticity of the ſpring, in its diſferent ſtates of tenfion, is proportional to the preſſures of gravity which it balancesShould we find that, at Quito in Peru, a lump of lead draws out the rod to the mark 312, and that, at Spitzbergen, it draws it to 313, we ſeem entitled to ſay that the preſſure of gravity at Quito ĩs to its preſſure at Spitzbergen as 312 to 313, on the authority of effects being proportional to their cauſes. But ſuch caſes are extremely rare, becauſe it is ſeldom that a natural power, accurately meaſured in ſome other way, is wholly employed in producing the obſerved motion. Part of it is generally expended in ſome other way, and therefore we frequently ſee that the motions are not in the ſame proportion with the ſuppoſed forces. But even though this could be ſtrictly done, this would only be the proof of a general law or fact, whereas tha pretenſions oſ the philoſophers aim at a proof of it æ priori, of an abſtract trurh, 156. Sir Iſaac Newton ſeems to conſider it only as a phyſical law. In this ſenſe, we are not without very good arguments. I. Ahall moving with a doubie, triple, or quadruple velocity, generates in another, by impulſe, a double, or triple, or quadruple velocity, or the ſame velocity in a double, &e, quantity of matter, and the ball loſes the ſame proportions of its own velocity. II. Two bodies, meeting with equal quantities of motion, mutually ſtop each other. III. Two forces, which, by acting ſimilarly during equal times, would produce equal velocities in ſome third body, will, by acting together during the same time, produce a double velocity. IV. If any preſſure, acting for a ſecond, produce a certain velocity, a double preſſure, acting during a ſecond, will produce a double velocity in the ſame body. V. A force, which we know to act equably, produces equal increments of velocity in equal times, whatever theſe velocities may be. In all theſe examples, we ſee the forces in the ſame proportion with the change of motion ſimilarly produced by them. 157. Bit, about the middle of the 17th century, don, diſcovered a vaſt collection of facts, in which the forces ſeemed to be in a very diſferent proportion. 1. In the production of motion. Four ſprings, equal in ſtrength, and bent to the ſame degree, generated only a double velocity in the ball which they impelled; nine ſprings produced only a triple velocity, &c. 2. In the extinction of motion. A ball moving with a double velocity will penetrate four times as deep into a uniformly reſiſting maſs; a triple velocity will make it penetrate nine times as far, &e. Theſe are but two inſtances of an immenſe collection of facts to the ſame purpoſe, and they are cloſely connected with the moſt important applications of dynamical ſcience. 158. Mr Leibnitz eagerly availed himſelf of theſe facts, as authority for declaring himſelſ the diſcoverer oſ the real nature and meafure of mechanical action and ſorce, which he ſaid had hitherto been totally miſtaken by philoſophers ; and he aſfirmed that the inherent force of a body in motion was in the proportion, not of the velocity, but of the ſquare of the velocity. John Bernoulli, his Zealous champion, warmly ſupported him in this argument, adducing a variety of the moſt ſimple facts, all confirming this relation between the inherent force of a body in motion and its velocity. They farther ſupported it by many metaphyſical conſiderations, relating to the procedure of nature in generating this force and velocity, and the way in which it may be extinguiſhed. The moſt cogent argument oſfered by Leib- nitz is, that the force inherent in a moving body is to be eſtimated by all that it is able to do before its motion is completely extinguiſliedl. When, thereſore, it penetrates four times as far, it ſnould be conſidered as having produced a quadruple eſfect. The mechanicians of Europe were divided in their opinions; the Germans adhering to that of Leibnitz, and the Britiſh and French to that of Des Cartes, who firſt aſirmed the relation which we have adopted as a ſecond law of motion. We ſhall ſee preſently, that, in the Leibuitzian meaſure, many things are gratuitouſly aſſumed, many contradictions are incurred, and, finally, that it is only becauſe forces ore aſſumed as proportional to the velocities which they generate, that the facts obſerved by Hooke, and employed by Leibnitu, come 10 he proportional to the ſquares of the ſame velocities. It ſhall only be noticed at preſent, that when Leibnitæ aſſumes the quadruple penetration as the prooſ of the quadruple force of a body having twice the velocity, he does not conſider that a double time is employed in this penetration. Now, a double force acting equably during a double time, ſould produce a quadruple effect. This circumſtance is neglected in one and all of the ſacts adduced by Mr Leibnitz. It may be added, that his followers, as well a5 himſelſ, agree with us in every conſequence which we draw ſrom the meaſure adopted by us. They grant that a force which produces a uniformly accelerated motion is a conſtant ſorce, and they agree with the Carteſians in all the valuutions of accelerating and ous and ſucceſqful cultivators of the Newtonian philoſophy, which proceeds entirely on the meaſure of moving forces by the velocity which they generate. 159. We muſt here obſerve that we are conſidering nothing but moving forces. When a ball has had a certain velocity given it, whether impelled by the air in a pop-gun, or by a ſpring, or ſtruck oſf by a blow, or urged forward by a ſtream of wind or water, or has acquired it by falling, we conceive that in all theſe caſes it has ſuſtained the ſame action of moving forcee. Perhaps preſſure is the only diſtinct notion we can form oſ force; but it is experience only that has informed us that preſſure produces motion, but does not produce heat or ſweetneſs. Production of motion is a circumſtance in which all mechanical forces may agree, while they may differ in many others. By, or in, this circumſtance of reſemblance, they may be compared, and get a name expreſſing this compariſon; namely, moving force. Therefore this porticular faculty of preſſure, elaſticity, &c. may be meaſured by the change of motion which preſſure produces. And whatever may be the proportions of preſſure on the quieſcent body, we may take it for granted that the preſſure actually exerted in the production of motion may be meaſured by the magnitude of the change oſ motion. This is really the only change of mechanical condition effected by the preſſure in the body moved by it; therefore it may be meaſured by the velocity. Accordingly, city is produced by preſſure on a ſoſt clay ball, the ſame preſſure has really been exerted, whether the velocity has been augmented from 99 to 100, or diminiſhed from 4 to 3. For the ſame dimple will be obſerved in both caſes. Nay, all our actions on the ſurſace of this globe are prooſs of this. A ball ſuſtains the ſame dimple whether we impel it, at noon-day, to the weſtward or to the eaſtward, north or ſouth, or though this ſiould be done at midnight; yet the real velocities at noon and midnight diſſer by nearly twice the velocity of a cannon ball battering in breach. This could not be, if the changes of motion were not proportional to the exerted preſſures. 160. The ſame concluſion may be deduced from our notions of a conſtant or invariable force. It is ſurely a force which produces equal eſfects, or changes of motion, in equal times. Now, equal augmentations of motion are ſurely equal augmentations of velocity. We find this notion of an invariable accelerating force conſirmed by what we obſerve in the caſe of a falling body. This receives equal additions of velocity in equal times; and we have no reaſon to think that this force is variable. We ſhould therefore inſer, that whatever force it imparts in one ſecond, it will impart four times as much in four ſeconds So it does, i we allow a quadruple velocity to indicate a quadruple force; but in no other eſtimation of force. To all this may be added, that although four ſprings, applied to an ounce ball, impel it only twice as faſt as one ſpring will do, yet they will give the ſame velocity to a four ounce ball which one ſpring gives to an ounce bal. And we can demonſtrate, to the ſatisfaction of Mr Leibnitz, that, in this laſt caſe, the four ſprings act during the ſame time with the ſingle ſpring. 161. Therefore, finally, a change of motion, in all its circumſtances of velocity and direction, is the proper meaſure of a changing force. But it is alſo the proper meaſure of a moving force. For bodies in different ſtates of motion may ſuſtain one and the ſame change of motionn. Now, ſuppoſe one of theſe bodies to be previouſly at reſt, the change which it ſuſtains is the ſame thing with the motion which it acquires. Therefore the force which produces any change of motion in a body already moving, is the ſame with the force which produces a motion equivalent to this change, in a body previouſly at reſt, in which caſe it is, ſimply, a moving force. It ſeemed neceſſary to be thus particular in the account of this conteſt about the meaſure of forces, becauſe Mr Leibnitæ's opinion has inſluenced the ſentiments of many writers of reputation; and ſome of them, particularly Graveſande and Muſchenbroek, have mixed it a good deal with their practical deductions. There could not have been any diſpute, had not philoſophers allowed themſelves to conſider force as ſomething exiſting in body, whereas the term is never uſed to expreſs any reaſity except the phenomenon which they conceived to bè its full effect and adequate meaſure. It is quite aſlowable to meaſure aſcenſional, or penetrating force, by the aſcenſion and the penetration, and to remark that theſe are as the fquare of the velocity. But this muſt not be conſidered as the general, or the beſt, meaſure of force, and particularly of moving force. This muſt be meaſured by the ſimple change of motion which is produced by it. And this meaſure has the advantage of being equally applicable to the phenomena of aſcenſion and penetration, as we ſhall ſee very ſoon. We may now enounce it in a diſferent ſorm, adapted to the characteriſtic and meaſure of a change of motion, which was ſhown in art. 79. to be the moſt proper. Law of the Changes of Motion. 162. In every ehange of a motion from AB (fig. 23.) to AD, the new motion AD is compounded of the former motion AB, and of the motion AC, ahich the changing force produces in a body at reſl. For it was ſhewn in art. 79. that the change in any motion is that motion which, when compounded with the former motion, produces the new motion; and, in art. 81, that the new motion is that compounded of the former motion and the changing motion. Now, ſince the change of motion is the characteriſtic and the meaſure of the changing force (i61.), determining both its direction and its intenſity, or the velocity produced by it, the propoſition follows of courſe. 183. It was remarked in art. 80, that the compoſition of motions, and the fimilar compoſition of forces, are two very diſferent things. The firſt is a truth, purely mathematical, and as certain as any theorem in geometry. The ſecond is a phyſical queſtion entirely, depending on the nature of the mechanical forces which exiſt in the univerſlee We do not olearly ſee that two forces, each of which will ſeparately produce motions having the directions and velocities expreſſcd by the ſides of a parallelogram, will, by their joint action, produce a motion in the diagonal. The demonſtrations given of this propoſition by almoſt all the writers of Elements are altogether inconcluſive, being all ſimilar to the caſe of a man walking on a field of ice, while the ice floats down a ſtream. This is only the compoſition of motions. Other writers, endeavouring 10 accommodate their reaſonings to phyſical principles, have aſſumed poſtulates that appear gratuitous. The firſt legitimate demonſtration was given by Dan. Bernoulli, in the Comment. Petropol. Vol. I. But it employs a ſeries of many propoſitions, ſome of which are very abſtruſe. Mr D' Alembert greatly ſimplified and improved this demonſtration, in a Memoire of the Acad. des Sciences 1769. But this alſo requires many propoſitions. Fonſenex and Riccati, in vol. III. of the Memoires oſf the Academy of Turin, have given another very ingenious one. D Alembert has alſo improved this demonſtration, and has given another, in the ſame Memoires, and one in his Dynamique. The firſt is rery refined and obſcure, and the ſecond does not ſeem very concluſive. An attempt is made in the Encyclop. Britan. Suppl.  DYNAMICS, to combine Bernoulli's, D Alembert's, and one by F. Friſi, which is more expeditious than either of the two firſt, and appears legitimate,. The demonſtration given in this place is undoubtedly complete, if the reaſoning be complete that is employed in art. 79, to prove that the motion which, when compounded with the former motion, produces the new motion, is the true change of motionn. We apprehend it to be ſo. 164. We have moſt abundant proof of this law of motion, if we conſider it merely as a phyſical law, or univerſal fact. I. Nothing is more familiar than the joint action of different forces. Thus, we frequently ſee a lighter dragged in different directions by two track-ropes, on different ſides of the canal, and the lighter moves in an intermediate direcCtion, in the ſame manner as if it were dragged by one rope in that direction.In like manner, we may obſerve that if a ball, moving in a particular direction, receive a ſtroke athwart this direction, it takes a direction which lies between that of the primitive motion and that of the tranſverſe ſtroke. 165. 2. If a point or particle of matter A (ſig. 23.) be urged at once by two preſſures, in the directions AB and A C, and if AB and AC are proportional to the intenſities of thoſe preſſures, the joint action of theſe two preſſures is equivalent to the action oſ a third preſſure, in the direction of the diagonal AD, having its intenſity in the proportion of AD. This is completely proved, by obſerving that the point A will be withheld from moving, by a preſſure AE, equal and oppoſite to AD. Now, we know that preſſures are moving forces, and produce velocities (hen acting ſimilarly during equal times) proportional to their intenſities. Therefore, the propoſition is true with reſpect to preſſures conſidered merely as preſſures, and alſo with reſpect to the motions produceable by their compoſition, 166. 3. A hall ſuſpended by a thread, and drawn aſide from its quieſcent poſition, is urged downwards by its weight, and is ſupported obliquely by the thread. We can ſay preciſely what are the directions and intenſities of the forces which incite it to motion in any poſition, and what velocities will reſult from them, upon the ſuppoſition of the truth of this propoſition.. And we can tell what number of oſcillations it will make in a day. It is a fact, that, when every thing is executed with care, the number of vibrations will not differ frõm our computation by one unit in a hundred thouſand. 4. Laſtly, the planetary motions, computed on the ſame principles of the compoſition of forces, exhibit no ſenſible deviation from our calculations, after thouſands of years. li i There is nothing therefore that we can reſt on vith greater confidence, than the perfect agreement between the compoſition of motions and the compoſition of the forces which would, ſeparately, produce thoſe motions, and are meaſured by the velocities which they generate. It particularly deſerves remark, that if we meaſure moving forces by the ſquares oſ the velocities which they generate, the compoſition is impoſſible; that is, two forces repreſented by the ſides of a parallelogram made proportional to the ſquares of the velocities, will not compoſe a force which can be repreſented by the diagonal. Yet nature ſhiews the exact compoſition of forces, on the ſuppoſition that they are as the velocities. Therefore, finally, whether we conſider this propoſition as an abſtract truth, or as a phyſical law, it may be conſidered as fully eſtabliſhed. Its converſe is the following. 267. The force which changes the motion AB into AD, is that which would produce in a quieſcent body the motion AC, which, when compounded with AB, produces the motion obſerved AD. 168. A force which will produce in a quieſcent body a motion having ihe direction and velocity repreſented by AC, if applied to a hody moving with the velocity and in the direction AB, will change its motion into the motion AD, the diagonal of the parallelogram ABD C. For the new motion muſt be that compounded of AB and AC (80.), that is, muſt be AD (83.) From theſe two propoſitions combined ariſes a third, which is the moſt general; viz. 169. If a body A be urged at once by two forces, which would, ſeparately, cauſe it to deſcribe AB and AC, fsides of a parallelogram ABDC, the body will, by their joint action, deſcribe the diagonal AD in the ſame time. For, had the body been already moving with the velocity and in the direction AB, and had iĩt been acted on in A by the force AC, it would deſcribe AD in the ſame time (168.)c Now, it is immaterial at what time it got the determination by which it would deſcribe AB. Let it therefore be at the inſtant that the force A C is applied to it. It muſt deſcribe AD, becauſe its mechanical condition in A, having the determination to the motion AB, is the ſame as in any other point of that line. 170. Cor. Two forces, acting on a body in the ſame, or in oppoſite directions, will cauſe it to move vith a velocity equal to the ſum, or to the difference, of the velocities which it would have received from the forces ſeparately. For, if AC approach continually to AB, by diminiſhing the angle BAC, the points C and D will at laſt fall on c and 4, and then AD is equal to the ſum of AB and AC. But if the angle BAC increaſe continually, the points C and D will, at Iaſt, fall on æ and 3, and then A) becomes equal to the difference of AB and AC. In the laſt caſe, it is evident that if A C be equal to AB, the point D or à will coincide with A, and there will be no motion, the two forces being equal, and acting in oppoſite directions. 171. In ſuch a caſe, the equal and oppoſite forces AC and AB are ſaid to BALANCE each other, and, in general, thoſe forces which, by their joint operation, produce no change of motion, are ſaid, in like manner, to balance each other; and they are accounted equal and oppoſite, becauſe each produces on the body a change of motion equal to what it would produce on a body at reſt, and at the ſamo time equal to the motion produced by the other force on a body at reſt Theſe two motions are therefore equal and oppoſite, and therefore the forces are ſo. 172. We may now apply to the motions produced by the combined action of forces all that was demonſtrated concerning the affections of compound motions, in the articles 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, & 90. But, in making this transference, ve muſt carefully attend to the eſſential difference between the compoſition of motions and the compoſition of forces. In this Iaſt, the compoſition is complete, as ſoon as the body has gotten the determination to move in the diagonal with the proper velocity, and after this there is no more compoſition. The body then moves uniformly, till ſome force change its condition. But, in the compoſition of two or more motions, the two conſtituent motions are ſuppoſed 70und motion exiſt. If any force can generate a finite velocity by its inſtantaneous action (which does not appear poſſible), two ſuch forces generate the determination in the diagonal in an inſtant. But if the action muſt continue ſor ſome time, in order to generate the velocities AB or AC, the joint action muſt continue during the ſame time, in order to produce the velocity AD. Alſo, it is neceſſary that, during the whole time of their joint action, the moving powers of the two forces muſt retain the ſame proportion to each other, although they may perhaps vary in their intenſity during that time. From not attending to this circumſtance, many experiments, which have been made in order to compare this doctrine with the phenomena, have exhibited reſults vhich deviate greatly from it. The experiments madè by the combination of preſſures, ſuch as weights pulling a body by means of threads, agree with this doctrine with the utmoſt preciſion, it being always found that two weights pulling in the directions AB, A C, and proportional to thoſe lines, are exactly balanced by a third weight in the proportion of AD, and pulling in the direction AE. By theſe, the compoſition of preſſures is moſt unexceptionably proved ; and, ſeeing that we have ſcarcely any other clear conception of a moving force, theſe experiments may be conſidered as ſuſficient. But we need not ſtop here; for we have the moſt diſtin& proof, by experiment, that preſſures produce motions in proportion to their intenſities by their ſimilar action durjng equal times. The planetary motions, in which the To theſe two laws oſf motion, which we have at tempted to ſiew to be neceſſary conſequences of ihe reIations of thoſe conceptions which we ſorm of motion and of mechanical force, and alſo to be univerſal facts or phyſũcal laws, Sir Iſaac Newton has added another, or Third Law of Motion. 182. The actions of bedies on one another are alavays mutual, equal, and in contrary directions It is uſually expreſſed thusZ~Reaction is always equal and contrary to action. This is indeed a fact, obſerved without exception, in all the caſes which we can examine with accuracy. Sir Iſaac Newton, in the general ſcholium or remark on the laws of motion, ſeems to conſider this equality of action and reaction as an axiom deduced from the relations of ideass. But this ſeems doubtful. Becauſe a magnet cauſes the iron to approach towards it, it does not appear that we neceſſarily ſuppoſe that iron alſo attracts the magnet. The fact is, that although many obſervations are to be found in the writings of the ancients concerning the attractive power of the magnet, not one of them has mentioned the attractive power of the iron. It is a modern diſcovery, and Dr Gilbert is, I think, the earlieſt writer, in whoſe works we meet with it. He aſirms that this mutual attraction is obſerved between the magnet and iron, and between all electrical ſubſtances and the light bodies attracted by them. Kepler noticed this mutual influence between the Earth and the Moon. Wallis, Wren, and Huyghens, ſirſt diſtinctly aſirmed the mutual, equal, and contrary action of ſolid bodies in theĩr colliſions; and it Ius been conſirmed by innumerable obſervations. Nay, ſince that time, 5ir Iſaac Newton himſelſ only preſumed that, becauſe the Sun attracted the planets, theſe alſo attracted the Sun; and he is at much pains to point out phenomena to aſtronomers, by which this may be proved, when the art of obſervation ſhall be ſuſiciently improvedl. Theſe muſt be put on the ſame footing with the phenomena by which the mutual actions of the planets are proved. No, this laſt action vas altogether a preſumption, although the proof was by far the moſt eaſy. The diſcovery and complete demonſtration of this, as a phyſical law, is certainly the moſt illuſtrious ſpecimen of Newton's genius and nice judgement. We muſt receive it thereſore as a law of motion, vith reſpect to all bodies on which we can make experiment, or obſervation fit for deciding the queſtion. 183. As it is an univerſal law, we cannot rid ourſelves of the perſuaſion that it depends on ſome general principle, which influences all the matter in the univerſe. It powerfully induces us to believe that the ultimate atoms of matter are all perſectly alikethat a certain collection of properties belong, in the ſame degree, to every atomand that all the ſenſible diſferences of ſubſtance vhich we obſerve ariſe from a diſferent combination of primary atoms in the ſorination of a particle of thoſe ſubſtances. A very ſlight conſideration may ſiew us that this is perfectly poſſiblee. Now, if ſuch be the conſtitution of every primary atom, there can be no action of any kind oſ paiticle, or collection of particles, on another, which will not be accompanied by an equal reaction in the oppoſite dircction. Nothing can be clearer than this. This thercſore is, in all probability, the origin of this Third Law of Motion. 184. The aim of the Newtonian philoſophy, which we profeſs to follow, is to inveſtigate the laws obſerved in the production of natural efſects, and to comprehend any propoſed phenomenon in one or other of thoſe laws. We then account it as explained. Theſe general, but ſtill ſubordinate, laws are to be eſtabliſned only by obſervation and experiment; but when ſo eſtabliſhed as far as obſervation extends, it is only by means of ſome obſerved analogy that we can uſe them as explanations of many other phenomena. With this ve muſt reſt ſatisſied, becauſe it ſeems impoſſible for our faculties to diſcover the eſſicient cauſes of thoſe general laws, ſo as to be able to demonſtrate that '5 muſt be ſuch as we obſerve. But in the eſtabliſnmellt of them as mere matters of fact, we may obſerve them to be of various extent, and that fome are ſubdiviſions of others. In this ſubordination, we can diſ. a cern much order, harmony and beauty, and our minds are leſt deeply impreſſed with admiration of the wiſdom and ſkill of the contrivance, by which this magniſicent fabric is fitted for the accompliſhment of a great and beneficent purpoſe. 185. The three axioms, and, indeed, the two ſirſt, ſeem to include the whole ſirſt principles of Dynamics, and enable us, without other help, to accompliſh every purpoſe of the ſcience. Some authors of eminence have thought that there were other principles, which influenced every natural operation, and that theſe operations could not be fully underſtood, nor an explanation properly deduced, without employing thoſe principles. Of this kind is the principle of OECONOMY OF ACTION, Or SMALLEST ACTION, aſſirmed by Mr Maupertuis to be purſued in all the operations of nature. This philoſopher ſays, that the perfect wiſdom of Deity muſt cauſe him to accompliſh every change by the ſmalleſt poſſible expenditure of power of every kind; and he gives a theorem which he ſays expreſſes this œconomy in all caſes of mechanical action. He then aſſerts that, in order to ſew in what manner ſuch and ſuch bodies, ſo and ſo ſituated, ſhall change each others condition, ve muſt find what change in each will agree with th's value of the ſmalleſt action. He applies this to the ſolution of many problems, ſome of which are intricate, and gives ſolutions perfectly agreeable to the phenomena. But the fact is, that the theorem was ſuggeſted by the phenomena, and is only an induction of particulars. It is a law, oſ a certain extent, but by no means a ſirſt principle; for the law is comprehended in, and is ſubordinate, by many degrecs, to the three laws of motion now eſtabliſied. It is no juſt expreſſion of a minimum of action; and he has obtained ſolutions, by its means, of problems, in which its elements are altlogether ſuppoſititious, which is prooſ ſuſſicient of its nullity and impropriety. 186. Mr D'Alembert and Mr De la Grange have alſo given general theorems, which they call ſirſt principles, and which they think highly neceſſary in dynamical diſquiſitions. Theſe, too, are nothing but general, but very ſubordinate laws, moſt ingeniouſly employed by their authors in the ſolution of intricate problems, where they are really of immenſe ſervice. But ſtill they are not principles; and a perſon may underſtand the mechaniqu⸗ analytique of De la Grange, by ſtudying it with care, and yet be very ignorant of the real natural principles of mechaniſm. All theſe theorems are only ingenious combinations of the ſecond and third Newtonian Laws of Motion. =u 187. The application or employment of theſe laws is to a twofold purpoſe. 1. To diſcover thoſe mechanical powers of natural ſubſtances which fit them for being parts of a permanent univerſTe. We accompliſh this by obſerving what changes pany thoſe ſubſtances, wherever they are. Theſe changes are the only characteriſties of the powers. It is thus that we diſcover and deſcribe the power oſ magnetiſm, gravity, &e. 2. Having obtained the mechanical character of any ſubſtance, we aſcertain what will be the reſult of iĩts being in the vicinity of the bodies mechanically alliæd to it, or ve ãſcertain what charnge will be induced on the condition of the neighbouring bodies. To ſave us a great labour, which muſt be repeated ſor every queſtion, if we make immediate application oſ the laws of motion to the phenomenon, it will be extremely convenient to have in readineſs a few general rules, accommodated to the more frequent caſes of natural operations. The mechanical powers of bodies occaſionally accelerate, retard, and deflect the motions of other bodies. Thereſore it is proper to premiſe the principal theorems relating to the action of accelerating, retarding, or deſlecting forces. They have got theſe names, becauſe we know nothing of their nature, or oſ the manner in which they are eſfective, and therefore name them, as we meaſure them, by the phenomena which we conſider as their eſfects. Of Aecelerating and Retarding Forces. 188. Since we have adopted the changes of motion ns the marks and meaſures of the forces, it is evident that every thing already ſaid of accelerations and retardaR tions is equally deſcriptive of the eſects oſ accelerating and retarding forces. Therefore, If the alſciſſa ad (ſig. s.) repreſent the time of any motion, and if the areas abfe, ac ge, &e. are as the velocities at the inſtants b, c, &c. the ordinates a e, bf, c g, &c. are as the accelerating forces at thoſe inſlants (69)189. Cor. . The momentary change of velocity is as the force ſ and the time ? jointly, which may be thus expreſſed (7I.) v, or1, = fi. Alſo, the accelerating or retarding force is proportional to the momentary variation of the velocity, directly, and to the moment of time in which it is generated, inverſely (71.) : Indeed, all that we know oſ force is that it is ſome. thing which is always proportional to t 190. Cor. 2. Uniformly accelerated or retarded motion is the indication of a conſiant or invariable accelerating force. For, in this caſe, the areos a bfe, a c ge, &e. increaſe at the ſame rate with the times æa b, a c, &c. and therefore the ordinates a e, bf, c g&, &e. muſt all be equal; thereſore the forces repreſented by them are the ſame, or the accelerating force does not change its intenſity, Rances mentioned in articles 54, 55, 56, 5 58, 59, 60, 61, are obſerved in any motion, the force is conſtant. And if the force is known to be conſtant, thoſe propoſitions are true reſpecting the motions. 191. Cor. 3. No finite change of veluit; is generated in an inſtant by any accelerating or retarding force. For the increment or decrement of velocity is always expreſſed by an area, or by a produt ſr, one ſide or factor of which is a portion of time. As no ſinite ſpace can be deſcribed in an inſtant, and the moveable muſt paſs in ſucceſſion through every point of the path, ſo it muſt acquire all the intermediate degrees of velocity. It muſt be continually accelerated or retarded. 192. Cor. 4.. The change of velocity produced in a body in any time, by a force varying in any manner, is the proper meaſure of the accumulated or whole action of the force during this time. For, ſince the momentary change of velocity is expreſſed by ſi, the aggregate of all theſe momentary changes, that is, the whole change of velocity, muſt be expreſſed by the ſum of all the quantities 77. This is equivalent to the area of the figure employed in art. 188, and may be expreſſed by ſ Ji. 193. If ihe abſcisa AE (fig. 8.) of the line a ce be 1he path along which a body is urged by the action of a force, varying in any manner, and if the ordinates A a, Bb, Cæ, &c. be proporticial to the intenſities of the force in the different points of ibe path, the iutercpted areas will be proportional to the changes made on the ſquare of ihe velocity during the motion along the correſponding portions of the path. l For, by art. 72, the arcas are in this proportion when the ordinates are as the accelerations. But the accelerations are the meaſures of, and are thereſore proportional to, the accelerating forces. Thereſore the propoſition is manifeſt. 194. Cor. 1. The momentary change on the ſquare of the velocity is as the force, and as the ſmall portion oſ ſpace along which it acts, jointly; and l s,. lllE 195. It deſerves remark here, that as the momentary change of the ſimple velocity by any force ſ depends only on the time of its action, it being æ ſſ (189.), ſo the change on the ſquare of the velocity depends on the ſpace, it being = fs. It is the ſame, whatever is the velocity thus changed, or even though the body he at reſt when the force begins to act on it. Thus, in every ſecond of the falling of a heavy body, the velocity is augmented 32 feet per ſecond, and in every ſoot of the fall, the ſquare of the velocity increaſes by 64. 195. The whole rr expreſſed by ſr 5 expreſſes the whole change made on the ſquare of the velocity which the body had in A, whatever this velocity may have beenn. We may therefore ſuppoſe the body to have been at reſt in A. The area then meaſures the ſquare of the velocity which the body has acquired in the point E of its path. It is plain that the change on v' js quite independent on the time of action, and therefore a body, in paſſing through the ſpace AE with any initial velocity whatever, ſuſtains the ſame change of the ſquare of that velocity, if under the influence oſ the ſame force. 197. This propoſition is the ſame with the 39th of the Firſt Book of Newton's Principia, and is perhaps the moſt generally uſeful of all the theorems in Dynamics, in the ſolution of practical queſtions. It is to be ſound, without demonſtration, in his earlieſt writings, the Optical Lectures, which he delivered in 1669 and following years. 198. One important uſe may be made of it at preſent. It gives a complete ſolution of all the facts which were obſerved by Dr Hooke, and adduced by Leibnitæ with ſuch pertinacity in ſupport of his meaſure of the force of moving bodies. All of them are of preciſely the ſame nature with the one mentioned in art. 157, or with the fact,  that a ball projected directly upwards  with a double velocity, will riſe to a quadruple height,  and that a body, moving twice as faſt, will penetrate  four times as far into a uniformly tenacious maſs. The uniſorm force of gravity, or the uniform tenacity of the penetrated hody, makes a uniform oppoſition to the motion, and may thereſore be conſidered as a uniform retarding force. It will therefore be repreſented, in fig. 8, by an ordinate always of the ſame length, and the areas which meaſure the ſquare of the velocity loſt will be portions of a rectangle AE : a. If thereſore AE be the penetration neceſſary for extinguiſhing the velocity 2, the ſpace AB, neceſſary for extinguiſhing the velocity 1, muſt be , of AE, becauſe the ſquare of I is 4 of the ſquare oſ a. 199. What particularly deſerves remark here, is, that this propoſition is true, only on the ſuppoſition that forces are proportional to the velocities generated by them in equal times. For the demonſtration of this propoſition proceeds entirely on the previouſly eſtabliſhed meaſure of acceleration. We had v f?; thereſore v ò  fi v. But ? v - 7; therefore v v= f i, which is preciſely this propoſition. 200. Thoſe may be called ſimilar points of ſpace, and ſimilar inſtants of time, which divide given portions of ſpace or time in the ſame ratioo. Thus, the beginning of the 5th inch, and of the 2d foot, are ſimilar points of a foot, and of a yard. The beginning of the 21st minute, and of the 9th hour, are ſimilar inſtants of an hour, and of a day. Forces may be ſaid to act ſimilarly when, in ſimilar inſtants of time, or ſimilar points of the path, their intenſities are in a conſtant ratio. 201. Lemma. IF two bodies be ſimilarly accelerated during given times a c and ht (ſig. 24.), they are alſo ſimilarly accelerated along their reſpective paths AC and H K. Let a, b, c be inſtants of the time a c, ſimilar to the inſtants 4, i, ? of the time b 2l. Then, by the ſimilar accelerations, we have the force a e: h1 æbf: i m. This being the caſe throughout, the area a ſ is to the area h m as the area a g& to the area h n (Symhols (?))) Theſe areas are as the velocities in the two motions 1.) Therefore the velocities in ſimilar inſtants are in a conſtant ratio, that is, the velocity in the inſtant b is to that in the inſtant i, as the velocity in the inſtant c to that in the inſtant ⸗. The figures may now be taken to repreſent the times of the motion by their abſciſſæ, and the velocities by their ordinates, as in art. 45. The ſpaces deſcribed are now repreſented by the areas. Theſe being in a conſtant ratio, as already ſiewn, we have A, B, C, and H, I, X, ſimilar points of the paths. And therefore, in ſimilar inſtants of time, the bodies are in ſimilar points of the paths. But in theſe inſtants, they are ſimilarly accelerated, that is, the accelerations and the ſorces are in a conſtant ratio. They are thereſore in a conſtant ratio in ſimilar points of the paths, and the bodies are ſimilarly accelerated along their reſpective puths (200.). 202. If to particles of matter are ſimilarly urged by accelerating or retording forces during given times, the whole changes of velocity ure as the forces nnd times jointly; or væſt. For the abſciſſæ a c and h : will repreſent the times, and the ordinates a ? and hſ will repreſent the forces, and then the areas will repreſent the changes of velovity, by art. 70. And theſe areas are as ac X a e to hl x hl, (by Symbols u. Cor.) v v H t æ -. ence ꝶ ad ſæ 203. If two partides of matter are ſimilarly impelled or oppoſed through given ſpaces, the changes in the ſquares of velocity are as the forces and ſpaces jointly; or =fs. This follows, by ſimilar reaſoning, from art. 72. It is evident that this propoſition applies directly to the argument ſo confidently urged for the propriety of the Leibnitzian meaſure of forces, namely, that four ſprings of equal ſtrength, and bent to the ſame degree, generate, or extinguiſh, only a double velocity. 204. If tuo particles of matter are ſimilarly impelled through given ſpaces, the ſpaces are as the forces and the ſquares of the times jointly. For the moveables are ſimilarly urged during the times of their motion (converſe of 201.) Thereſore v æf1, and v' f't'; but (203.) v' =fs Therefore fsæ ſt, and s  fr. Cor. ? æ 7 and f 3 That is, the ſquares of the times are as the ſpaces, directly, and as the forces, inverſely; and the forces are as the ſpaces, directly, and as the ſquares of the times, inverſely. 205. The quantity of motion in a body is the ſum of the motions of all its particles. Therefore, if all are moving in one direction, and with one velocity v, and if m be the number of particles, or quantity of matter, m vill expreſs the quantity of motion q, or  m v. 206. In like manner, ve may conceive the accelerating forces ſ, which have produced this velocity in each particle, as added into one ſum, or as combined on one particle, by article 170. They will thus compoſe a force, which, for diſtinction's ſake, it is convenient to mark by a particular name. We ſhall call it the MOTIVE FORCE, and expreſs it by the ſymbol . It will then be conſidered as the aggregate of the number m of equal accelerating forces ſ, each of which produces the velocity v on one particle. It will produce the velocity m v, and the ſame quantity of motion 4. 207. Let there be another body, conſiſting of n particles, moving with one velocity u. Let the moving force be repreſented by æ. It is meaſured in like maimer by n u. Thereſore we have, : æ=mv: nu, andv: u m ? n . /: ; that is, m n The velocities avhich may be produced by ithe ſmilar action of different motive forces, in the ſame time, are directly as thoſe forces, and inverſely as the quantities of mutter to which they are applied. 7r In general, v= And ſ being =, st t mt REMARE. 208. In the application of the theorems concerning accelerating or retarding forces, it is neceſſry to attend careſully to the diſtinction between an accelerative and a motive force. The caution neceſſary here has been generally overlooked by the writers of Elements, and this has given occaſion to very inadequate and erroneous notions of the action of accelerating powers. Thus, if a leaden ball hangs by a thread, which paſſes over a pulley, and is attached to an equal ball, moveable along a horizontal plane, without ?the ſinalleſt obſtruction, it is known that, in one ſecond, it will deſcend 8 feet, dragging the other 8 feet along the plane, with a uniformly accelerated motion, and will generate in it the velocity 16 feet per ſecond. Let the thread be attached to three ſuch balls. We know that it will deſcand 4 feet in a ſecond, and generate the velocity 8 ſeet per ſecond. Moſt readers are diſpoſed to think that it ſould generate no greater velocity than 55 feet per ſecond, or ĩ of 16, becauſe it is applied to three times as much matter (207.) The error lies in conſidering the motive force as the ſame in both caſes, and in not attending to the quantity of matter to which it is applied. Neither of theſe conjectures ĩs right. The motive force changes as the motion accelerates, and in the firſt caſe, it moves tvo bulls, and in the ſecond it moves four. The motive force decreaſes ſimilarly in both motions. When theſe things are conſidered, we learn by articles 202 and 207, that the motions will be preciſely what we obſcrve. Of Deſlecting Forces, in general. 209. It was obſerved, in art. 99, that a curvilineal motion is a caſe of continual deſlection. Therefore, when ſuch motions are obſerved, we know that the body is under the continual inſluence of ſome natural force, acting in a direction which croſſes that of the motion in every point. We muſt infer the magnitude and direction of this deſlecting force by the magnitude and direction of the obſerved deſlection. Therefore, all that is aſſirmed concerning deflections in the 99th and ſubſequent articles of the Introduction, may be aſſirmed concerning deſlecting forces. It follows, from what has been æſtabliſhed concerning the action of accelerating forces, that no force can produce a ſinite change oſ velocity in an inſtant. Now, a deflection is u conpoſition of a motion already exiſting with a motion accelerated from reſt by inſenſible degrees. Suppoſing the deſlecting force of invariable direction and intenſity, the deſlection is the compoſition of a motion having a finite velocity with a motion uniformly accelerated from reſt. Therefore the linear deflection from the rectilineal motion muſt increaſe by inſenſible degrees. The curvilineal path, therefore, muſt have the line oſf undeſlected motion for its tangent. To ſuppoſe any finite angle contained between them would be to ſuppoſe a polygonal motion, and a ſubſultory deflection. Therefore no finite change of direction can be produced by a deflecting force in an inſtant. 210. The moſt general and uſeful propoſition on this ſubject is the following, founded on art. 104. The forces by which bodies are deflected from the tangents in the different points of their curvilineal paths are proportional to the ſquares of the velocities in thoſe points, directly, and inverſely to the deflective chords of the equicurve circles in the ſame points. We may ſtill expreſs the propoſition by the ſame ſymbol a . v EH c where ſ means the intenſity oſ the deſlecting force. 21. We may alſo retain the meaning of the propoſition tual linear deſlection from the tangent is the third proportional to the deſlective chord and the arch deſcribed in a very ſmall moment. For it was demonſtrated in that article (ſee fig. 18.) that BZ: BCæBC: BO. We ſee alſo that B b, the double of B O, is the meaſure of the velocity, generated by the uniform action of the deflecting force, during the motion in the arch BC of the curve. 212. The art. 106. alſo furniſhes a propoſition of frequent and important uſe, viz. The velocity in any point of a curvilinear motion is that which the deflecting force in that point would generate in the hody by uniformly impelling it along the fourth part of the deflective chord of the equicurve circle. REMARX. 213. The propoſitions now given proceed on the ſuppoſition that, when the points A and C of fig. 18, aſter continually approaching to B, at laſt coaleſce with it, the laſt circle which is deſcribed through theſe three points has the ſame curvature which the path has in B. It is proper to render this mode of ſolving theſe queſtions more plain and palpable. IF ABCD (fig. 25.) be a material curve or mould, and a thread be made faſt to it at D, this thread may be lapped on the convexity oſ this curve, till its extremity meets it in A Let the thread be now unlapped or EVOLVED from the curve; keeping it always tight. It is plain that its extremity A will deſcribe another curve line Abe. All curves, in which the curvature is neither inſinitely great nor inſinitely ſmall, may be thus deſcribed by a thread evolved from a proper curve. The propertĩes of the curve Abc being known, Mr Huyghens (the author of this way of generating curve lines) has ſhewn how to conſtruct the evolved curve AB C which will produce it. TFrom this geneſis of curves we may infer, 151, that the detached portion of the thread is always a tangent to the curve ABC; 2dly, that when this is in any ſituation I 1, it is perpendicular to the tangent of the curve Abæ in the point b, and that it is, at the ſame time, deſcribing an element of that curve, and an element of a circle æ b x, whoſe momentary centre is B, and which has B6 for its radius. 3dly, That the part b A of the curve, being deſcribed with radii growing continually ſhorter, is more incurvated than the circle b æ, which has Bb for its conſtant radius. For ſimilar reaſons the arch bæ of the curve Abc is leſs incurvated than the circle æ b æ.. 41hly, That the circle æ b  has the ſame curvature that the curve has in b, or is an equicurve circlee. Bb is the radius, and B the centre of curvature in the point à. ABC is the CURVA EVOLUTA or the EVOLUTE. Abc is ſometimes called the INVOLUTE of ABC, and ſometimes its EVOLUTRIE. 214. By this way of deſcribing curve lines, we ſee clearly that a body, when paſſing through the point b of the curve Abc may be conſidered as in the ſame ſtate, in that inſtant, as in paſſing through the ſame point  of the circle æ bæ; and the ultimate ratio of the deflections in both is that of equality, and they may be uſed indiſcriminately. The chief diſficulty in the application of the preceding theorems to the curvilineal motions which are obſerved in the ſpontaneous phenomena of nature, is in aſcertaining the direction of the deflection in every point of a curvilineal motion. Fortunately, however, the moſt important caſes, namely thoſe motions, where the deſlecting forces are always directed to a fixed point, afford a very accurate method. Such forces are called by the general name of Central Forces. 215. If bodies deſcribe circles with a uniform motion, the deflecting forces are always directed to the centres of the dircles, and are proportional to the ſquare of the velocities, directly, and to their diſtances from ihe centre, inverſel;. For, ſince their motion in the circumference is uniform, the areas formed by lines drawn from the centre are as the times, and therefore (100) the deſlections, and the deſlecting forces (209) are directed to the centre. Therefore, the deflective chord is, in this caſe, the diameter of the circle, or twice the diſtance of the body from the centre. Therefore, if we call the diſtance from the centre d, we have ſ e 216. Theſe forces are alſo as the diſiances, directly, and as the ſquare of the time of a revolution, inverſely. For the time of a revolution (Which may be called the PERIODIC TIME) is as the circumference, and therefore as the diſtance, directly, and as the velocity, ind a verſely. Thereſore 1 g and v 7 and * æ d and Fi r 217. Theſe forces are alſo as the diſtances, and the square of the angular velocity, jointly. For, in every uniform circular motion, the angular velocity is inverſely as the periodic time. Therefore, calling the angular velocity a, a æ æ , and . =d a*, and thereſore f  d a. 218. The periodic time is to the time of falling along half the radius by the uniform action of the centripetal force in the circumference, as ihe circumference of a circle is to the radius. For, in the time of falling through half the radius, the body would deſcribe an arch equal to the radius (59), becauſe the velocity acquired by this fall is equal to the velocity in the circumference (2 12.) The periodic time is to the time of deſcribing that arch as the circumference to the arch, that is, as the circumference is to the radius. 219. When a body deſcribes a curve which is all in one plane, and a point is ſo ſituated in thot plone, that a line drawn from it to the body deſrribes round that point areai proportional lo the times, the deſlecting force is always directed 1o ihat point (00.) 220. Converſely. If a lody is deſlected by a force always directed to a fixed point, it will deſcribe a curve line lying in one plane which paſſis through ihat point, and the line joining it avith the centre of forces will deſcribe areas proportional to the times (101.) The line joining the body with the centre is called the RaDius VECTOR. The deſlecting force is called CENTRIPETAL, Or ATTRACTIVE, if its direction be always toward that centre. It is called REPULSIVE, or CENTRIFUGAL, iſf it be directed outwards from the centre. In the firſt caſe, the curve will have its concavity toward the centre, but, in the ſecond caſe, it will be onvex toward the centre. The foree which urges a piece of iron towards a magnet is centripetal, and that which cauſes two electrical bodies to ſeparate is centrifugal. 221. The force by avhich a body may be made to deſcribe circles round the centre of forces, with the angular velocities which it has in the different points of ils curvilineal path, are inverſely as the cubes of its diſtances srom the centre of forces. For the centripetal force in circular motions is proportional to da* (217.) But when the deſlections (and conſcquently the forces) are directed . I . I to a contre, we have a r (193.) and a' / 7 therefore d a? æd x ) +H thereſore ſ  JT This force is oſten called centriſugal, rhe centrifug? force of cireular motion, and it ĩs conceived as always acting in every caſe of curvilineal motion, and to act in oppoſition to the centripetal force which produces that motion. But this is inaccurate. We ſuppoſe this force, merely becauſe we muſt employ a centripetal force, juſt as we fuppoſe a ræſſſling vis inertiæ, becauſe we muſt employ force to move a body. 222. If a body deſcribe a curve line ABC by means of a centripetal (ſig. 26.) force directed to S, and varying according to ſime proportion of the diſlances from it, and if another body be impelled toard S in the ſtraight line ab S by the ſume force, and if the tuvo bodies have the ſame veloeity in any points A and a ahich ore equidiſtant from S, they aill have equal velocities in any other tavo points C and e, which are alſo equidiſtant ſrom S. Deſcribe round S, with the diſtance S A4, the circular arch Aa, which will paſs through the equidiſtant point a. Deſcribe another arch B, cutting o a ſmall are A B of the curve, and alſo cutting AS in D. Drav D E perpendicular to the curve. The diſtances AS and a S being equal, the centripetal forces are alſo equal, and may be repreſented by the equal lines AD and ab. The velocities at A and æ being equal, the times oſ deſcribing AB and a b will be as the ſpaces (”31) The force a b is wholly employed in accelerating the rectilineal motion along a S. But the force AD, being tranſverſe or oblique to the motion along AB, is not wholly employed in thus accelerating the motion. It ĩs equivalent (173) to the two forces AE and ED, of which ED, being perpendicular to A, neither promotes nor oppoſes it, but incurvates the motion. The accelerating force in A therefore is AE. It was ſhewn, in art. 71, that the change oſ velocity is as the force and as the time jointly, and thereſore it is as AE xX AB. Tor the ſame reaſon, the change of the velocity at a is as a b X a b, or ab2. Bui, as the angle ADDB is a right angle, as alſo AED, we have AE: AD =AD: AB, and AIL XxX AB=AD,, ma b?.. Therefore, the increments of velocĩty acquired along AB and ab are equal. Dut the velocities at A and a were equal. Therefore the velocities at b and b are alſo equal. The ſame thing may be ſald of every ſubſequent increaſe of velocity, while moving along B C and bc; and thereſore the velocities at C and æ are equal. The ſame thing holds, when the defſecting force is directed in lines parallel to a S, as if to a point S inſinitely diſtant, the one body deſeribing the curve line VAPE, while the other deſcribes the ſtraight line VS. 223. The propoſitions in art 102. and 103. are alſo true in curvilineal motions by means of central forces. When the path of the motion is a line returning into itſelf, Iike a circle or oval, it is called æan orRBIT; Ootherwiſe it is called a TRAJECTORY. The time of a complete revolution round an orbit is called the PERIODIC TIME. 224. The formula ſæ A ſerves ſor diſcovering the law of variation of the central ſorce by which a body deſcribes the diſſerent portions oſ ĩits curvilineal path; and the ſormula æ ſerves ſor comparing the forces by which diſſcrent bodiĩes deſcribe their reſpective orbits. 225. It muſt always be remembered, in conformity to art. 105, that  & - or F m expreſſes the linear deſlection from the tangent, which may be taken for a meaſure of the deſlecting force, and that f= to or ſ æ expreſſes the velocity generated by this force, during the deſcription of the are, or the velocity which may be compared directly with the velocity of the motion in the arc. The laſt ĩs the moſ© æccurate, becauſe the velocity generated ĩs the real change of condition. 226. A body may oſerite, bly the action of a centripetal force, the direction of avhich paſſes through C (ig. 27.) a sigure VI8, avhich ſficure revolves (in its own plane) round the centre of forces C, in the ſume manner as it diſcribes the quicſcent figure, provided rhat the angular motion of the hody in ihe orbit be to ihat of the orbit itſelf in any conſtant ratio, ſuch as that of m #o n. For, iſ the direction oſ the orbit's motion be the ſame with that of the body moving in it, the angular motion of the body in every point of its motion is increaſed in the ratio of m to n +m, and it will be in the ſame ratio in the different parts of the orbit as beſore, that is, it will be inverſely as the ſquare oſ the diſtance ſrom 8 (i1o3). Morcover, as the diſtances ſrom the centre in the ſimultaneous poſitions oſ the body, in the quieſcent and in the revolving orbit, are the ſame, the momentary increments of the area are as the momentary increments oſ the angle at the centre; and therefore, in both motions, the areas increaſe in the conſtant ratio of m to m+ s (103). Therefore the areas of the abſolute path, produced by the compoſition of the two motions, will ſtill be proportional to the times; and therefore (o1) the deſlecting force muſt be directed to the centre S; or, a force ſo directed will produce this compound motion. 227. The differences betaeen ihe forces by ahich a hody may be made to move in the quieſcent and in the moveable orbit are in the inverſe triplicate ratio of the diſlances from the centre of forces. Let VEKSBV (ſig. 27.) be the ſixed orbit, and uphb u the ſame orbit moved into another poſition; and let V2n No N2QV be the orbit deſcribed by the body in abſolute ſpace by the compoſition of its motion in the orbit with the motion of the orbit itſelf. If the body be ſuppoſed to deſcribe the arch VP of the ſixed orbit while the axis VC moves into the ſituation u C, and if the arch up be made equal to VP, then ꝓ will be the place of the body in the moveable orbit, and in the compound path Vꝓ. If the angular motion in the ſixed orbit he to the motion of the moving orbit as m to n, ĩt is plain that the angle VCP is to VC»- as m to m+n. Let P and ꝓE be two equal and very ſmull arches of the fixed and moving orbits. PC and ꝓc are equal, as are alſo XC and :C, and a circle deſceribed round C with the radius CK will paſs through 2If we now make VCK to VCn as m to m4 n: the point n of the cirele Kæin will be the point oſf the compound path, at which the body in the moving orbit arrives when the body in the ſixed orbit arrives at X, and 2n is the arch oſ the abſolute path deſeribed while PX is deſcribed in the ſixed path. In order to judge of the diſſerence between the force which produces the motion PI in the ſixed orbit and that which produces ꝓ n in the abſolute path, it muſt be obſerved that, in both caſes, the body is made to approach the centre by the diſerence between CP and CK, This happens, becauſe the centripetal forces, in both eaſes, are greater than what would emble the body to deſcribe circles round C, at the diſtance CP, and with the ſame angular velocities that obtain in the two paths, viz. the ſixed orbit and the abſolute path. We ſhall call the one pair of forces the circulur ſorces, and the other the erbital. Let C and  repreſent the forces which would produce circles, with the angulur velocities which obtain in the ſixed and moving orbits, and Iet O and o be the forces which produce the orbital motions in theſe two paths. : Theſe things being premiſed, iĩt is plain that o is equal to O—C, becauſe the hodies are equally brought toward the centre by the diſference between O and C and by that between o and 7. Therefore o O is equal to cC. The diſference, thereſore, of the forces which produce the motions in the fixed and moving orbits is always equal to the diſſerence of the forces which would produce a circular motion at the ſame diſtances, and with the ſame angular velocity. But the forces which produce circular motions, with the angular motion that obtains in an orbit at diſſerent diſtances ſrom the centre of forces, are as the cubes of the diſtances inverſely (221)) And the two angular motions at the ſame diſtance are in the conſtant ratio of m to m + n. Therefore the forces are in a conſtant ratio to each other, and their differences are in a conſtant ratio to either of the forces. But the circular force at diſſerent diſtances is inverſely as the cube of the diſtance (221). Therefore the difſerence of them in the ſixed and moveable orbits is in the ſame proportion. But the diſſerence of the orbital forces C O c o A—7MDVM—AvMæ For let Ao, AO, Ac, AC repreſent the four forces n, O, c, and C. BY what has been ſaid, we ſind that o O C. To each of theſe add Oc, and then it is plain that 0 O =©cC, that is, that the difference of the cireular forces and C is equal to that of the orbital forces o and O. forces is equal to that of the cireular. Thereſore, ſinally, the diſſerence of the centripetal forces by which a body may be retained in a ſixed orbit, and in the ſame orbit moving as determincd in article 226, is always in the inverſe triplicate ratio oſ the diſtances from the contre of forces. In this example, the motion oſ the body in the orbit is in the ſame direction with that of the orbit, and the force to be joined with that in the fixed orbit is always additive. Tſad the orbit moved in the oppoſite direction, the force to be joined would have been ſubtractive, unleſs the retrograde motion of the orbit exeeeded twice the angular motion of the body. But in all caſs, the reaſoning is ſimilar. 228. Thus we have conſidered the motions of bodies influenced by forces directed to a ſixed point. But we cannot conceive a mere mathematical point of ſpace as the cauſe or occaſion of any ſuch exertion of forces. Such relations are obſerved only between exiſting bodies or maſſes of matter. The propoſitions which have been demonſtrated may be true in relation to budies placed in thoſe fixed points. That continual tendency towards a centre, which produces an equable deſcription of arcas round it, becomes intelligible, i? we ſuppoſe ſome body placed in the centre of ſorees, attracting the revolving body. Accordingly, we ſee very remarkable examples of ſuch tendencies towards a central body in the motions oſ the planets rund the Sun, and of the ſatellites round the primary planet. But, ſince it is a univerſal fact that all the relations between bodies are mutual, we are obliged to ſuppoſe that whatever force inclines the revolving body towards the body placed in the certre of forces, an equal ſorce from whatever ſource it is derived) inclines the central body toward the revolving body, and therefore it cannot remain at reſt, but muſt move towards it. The notion of a fixed centre of forces is thus taken away again, and we ſeem to have demonſtrated propoſitions inapplicable to any thing in nature. But more attentive conſideration will ſnew us that our propoſitions are moſt ſtrictly applicable to the phenomena of nature. 229. For, in the ſirſt place, the motion of the common centre of poſition of two, or of any number of bodies, is not aſfected by their mutual actions. Theſe, being equal and oppoſite, produce equal and oppoſite motions, or changes of motion. In this caſe, it follows from art. 115. that the ſtate of the common centre is not affected by them. 230. Now, ſuppoſe two bodies S and P, ſituated at the extremities oſ the line ST (ſig. 28.) Their centre oſ poſition is in a point C, dividing their diſtance in ſuch a manner that S C is to CP as the number of material atoms in P to the number in S (110.) orSC: PCæP:S. Suppoſe the mutual forces to be centripeta. Then, being equal, exerted between every atom of the one, and every particle of the other, the vis motrix may be exU preſſed by P xX S. This muſt produce equal quantities of motion in each of the bodies, and thereſore muſt produce velocities inverſely as the quantities oſ matter (127) In any given portion of time, thereſore, the bodies will move towards each other, to s and ꝓ, and S5 will be to Pꝓ as ? to S, that is as S C to P C. Thercſore we ſhall ſtill have s C:  Cæ5C: PC. Their diſtunces from C will always be in the ſame proportion. Alſo we ſhall have SC:S PæP: S P, and sC: ) C/P:S +P; and thereſore S C: S PæsC: P. Conſequently, in whatever manner the mutuul forces vary by a variation of diſtance from each other, they will vary in the ſame manner by the ſame variation oſ diſtance from C. And, converſely, in whatever manner the forces vary by a change of diſtance ſrom C, they vary in the ſame manner by the ſame change oſ diſtance from each othe:. Let us now ſuppoſe that when the bodies are at and P, equal moving forces are applied to each in the oppoſite directions S A and P B. Did they not attract each other at all, they would, at the end of ſome ſmall portion of time, be found in the points A and B of a ftraight line drawn through C, becauſe they will move with equal quantities of motion, or with velocities S A and PB inverſely as their quantities of matter. Therefore SA:PB=S C: PC, and A, C, and B are in a ſtraight line. But let them now attract, when impelled from S and P. Being equally attracted toward each other, they will deſcribe curve lines S a and P6, ſo that their deſlections Aa and Bb are as S C and PC; and we ſhall have aC: 5CæS C: PC. As this is true of every part of the curve, it follows that they deſcribe ſimilar curves round C, which remains in its original place. Laſily, If the motion of ? be conſidered by an obſerver placed in S, unconſcious of its motion, ſince he judges of the motion of P only by its change of direction and of diſtance, ve may make a ſigure which ill perſectly repreſent this motion. Draw the line EF equal and parallel to PS, and E G equal and parallel to a b. Do this for every point of the curve S a and P,. We ſhall then form a curve F G ſimilar to the curves S a and P, having the homologous lines equal to the ſum of the homologous lines of theſe two curves. Thus the bodies will deſcribe round each other curve lines which are ſimilar and equal (lineally) to the lines which they deſcribe round their common centre by the ſame forces. They may appear to deſcribe areas proportional to the times round each other; and they really deſcribe areas proportional to the times round their common centre of poſition, and the forces, which really relate to the body which is ſupvoſed to be central, have the ſame mathematical relation to their common centre. Thus it appears that the mechanical inferences, drawn from a ſuppoſed relation to a mere point of ſpace, are true in the real relations to the ſuppoſed central body, although it is not fixed in one place. 235. The time of deſcribing any arch F G of the curve deſcribed round the other body at reſt in a centre oſ forces (where we may ſuppoſe it ſorcibly withheld fromæ moving) is to the time of deſeribing the ſimilar arch Pã round the common centre of poſition in the ſubduplicate ratio of 8 4 P to S, that is, in the ratio of YS  P to VS. For the ſorces being the ſame in both motions, the ſpaces deſcribed by their ſimilar actions, that is, their deſtections from the tangent are as the ſquares of the times T and ? (24). That is, HG: BbæT?: ?7, and T:t=G:V55, mVS7P: VS. Hence it follows that the two bodies S and P are moved in the ſame way as if they did not act on each other, but were both acted upon by a third body, placed in their common centre C, and acting with the ſame forces on each; and the Law of variation of the forces by a change of diſtance from each other, and from this third body, is the ſame. 232. If a body P (ſig. 29.) revolve around another body S, by the action of a central ſorce, while S moves in any path AS B, P will continue to deſcribe areas proportional to the times round S, if every particle m P be affected by the ſame accelerating force that acts, in that inſtant, on every particle in S. For, ſuch action will compound the ſame motions Pꝓ and S5 with the motions of S and P, whatever they are; and it was ſiown in art. (98.) that ſuch compoſition does not aſfect their relative motions. This is another way of making a body deſcribe the ſame orbit in motion which it deſcribes while P ART II THE MECHANICAL HISTORY OF NATURE. INTRODUCTION. 233. V. have now conſidered in ſuſficient detail thoſe general Conſequences which reſult from the reIations of the Ideas that we have of Matter and Motion, and of the Cauſes of its changes. Theſe conſequences are the metaphyſical or abſtract doctrines o Mechanical Philoſophy. They are, in reality, deſcriptions, not of external nature, but of the proceedings of the human mind in contemplating or ſtudying it. Being independent of all experience oſ any thing beyond our own thoughts, they form a body of demonſtrative truths. If this has been made ſuſficiently complete, that is, if all the poſſible mechanical changes are comprehended in the three propoſitions which we called the Laws of Motion, we ſhould now be in a condition to conſider every change of motion, and every changing cauſe, which nature preſents to our view, vhether in order to inveſtigate and diſcover natural Forces hitherto unknown, and to give an account of the Laws by which their action is regulated, or to explain complicated phenomena, by referring them to the operation of ſome known ſorces. 234. Both of theſe purpoſes are to be attained by a careful obſervation of the phenomena. All circumſtances of coincidence or reſemblance among them are to be taken notice of, and conſidered as indications of a ſimilarity in their Cauſes. The more extenſive the obſerved coincidence of appearances is, the more general muſt the aſfection of matter be which is the cauſe of this reſemblance. If any ſimilarity is univerſally obſerved, it muſt be conſidered as the indication of a mechanical quality that is competent to all matter. 235. This conſideration points out to us a principle for arranging the mechanical phenomena of the univerſe. Thoſe ſiould be firſt conſidered that are moſt general. Thus are ve made acquainted with the moſt general mechanical properties of Bodies, which extend their inſluence to phenomena in all the ſubordinate claſſes, and modify even that circumſtance which forms the particular claſs. Our previous acquaintance with thoſe general properties will enable us to free the more particular phenomena from part of that complication which makes the ſtudy of them more diſicult; and then to conſider apart thoſe circumſtances of the phenomena which ãàre indications of qualities leſs general. 236. The moſt general phenomenon that we obſerve is the curvilineal motion of bodies in free ſpace. The Globe which we inhabit, the Sun, and all his attending Planets and Comets, are continually moving in curve-lined paths. And theſe curvilineal motions are compounded with all the other motions that are performed on the ſurface of this Globe. When a cannon bullet is diſcharged in a ſoutherly direction with the velocity of 1500 feet in a ſecond, it is at the ſame time carried eaſtward, nearly at the ſame rate, by the rotation of the Earth; and by its revolution in a year round the Sun, it is moving eaſtward, more than ſixty times as faſt. Such being the condition of the viſible univerſe, it appears that the defſlecting forces, by which all theſe bodies are kept in their curvilineal paths, muſt be acknowledged to have the moſt extenſive inſluence. The phenomena which are the indications of theſe forces, claim the firſt place in the Mechanical hiſtory of Nature. Theſe are obſerved in the celeſtial motions, and Aſtronomy is therefore the firſt department of that hiſtory to which we ſhall turn our attention, 237. This order of ſtudy has other advantages beſides this ſcientific propriety. It is that part of the ſtudy of material nature in which the underſtanding of man has been moſt ſucceſsful. It is perhaps owing to the unexceptionable proofs, which Aſtronomy alone aſfords of the perſect conformity of our abſtract doctrines with the real ſtate of the world, that thoſe doctrines have been admitted as a juſt expoſition of the elements of Univerſal Mechanics, and thus have given us a groundwork, on which we can proceed with conſidence in explaining the mechanical phenomena of this ſublunary world. Aſtronomy is alſo the department of natural ſcience that is the moſt eaſily comprehended with the diſtinctneſs and accuracy that deſerve the name of ſcience. Here we have a clear and adequate idea of the ſubject, and a diſinct feeling of the validity of the evidence by which any propoſtion is ſupported. In the ſimpleſt propoſition of common Mechanics, or Hydraulics, the ſubject under conſideration has a degree of complication not to be found in the moſt abſtruſe propoſition in Aſtronomy. Accordingly, the knowledge which we can acquire in Aſtronomy 2pproaches near to the certainty of firſt principles; while in thoſe other departments it is only a ſuperficial knowledge of ſome very general property that we are able to acquire. Aſtronomy is thereſore recommended to our firſt notice, by the univerſality oſ the powers of nature that are indicated by the planetary motionsby the ſucceſsſulneſs of the inveſtigationand by the eaſy acceſs which it gives us to the elementary principles of all Mechanical ſcience. OF NATURE. 5ECT. . ASTRONOMY. 238. Acrroromr was firſt ſtudied as an art, ſubſervient to the purpoſes of ſocial life. Some knowledge of the celeſtial motions was neceſſary, in every ſtate of ſociety, that we might mark the progreſs of the ſeaſons, which regulate the labours of the cultivator, and the migrations oſ the ſiepherd. It is neceſſary for the record of paſt events, and for the appointment of national meetings. While the motions of the heavenly bodies aſford us the means of attaining theſe uſeful ends, they alſo preſent to the curious philoſopher a ſeries of magniſicent phenomena, the operation of the greateſt powers of material nature; and thus they powerſully excite his curioſity with reſpect to their cauſes. This circumſtance alone makes the celeſtial motions the proper objects of attention to a ſtudent of Mechanical Philoſophy, and he has leſs concern in the beautiſul regularity and ſubordination which have made then: ſo ſubſervient to the purpoſes of Navigation, of Chronology, and the occupations of rural liſe. But the purpoſes of the Mechanical philoſopher canmot be attained without attending to that beauty, regularity, and ſubordination. Theſe features are exhibited in every circumſtance of the celeſtial motions that renders them ſuſceptible of ſcientiſic arrangement and inveſtigation; and a philoſophical view cannot be tauken, without the ſame accurate knowledge of the motions that is wanted for the arts of life. It muſt be added, that ſociety never would have derived the beneſits which it has received ſrom Aſtronomy, without the labours of the philoſopher: For, had not Newton, or ſome ſuch exalted genius as Newton, ſpeculated about the deflecting forces which regulate the motions of the Solar ſyſtem, we never ſhould have acquired that exquiſite knowledge oſ the mere phenomena that is abſolutely neceſſury for ſome of the moſt important applications of them to the arts. It was theſe ſpeculations alone that have enabled our nuvigators to proceed with boldneſs through untried ſcas, and in a few years have almoſt completed the ſurvey of this globe. And thus do we experience the moſt beneſicial alliance of Philoſophy and Art. Since the motions of bodies are the only indications, characteriſtics, and meaſures of moving forces, it is plain that the celeſtial motions muſt be accurately aſcertained, that we may obtain the data wanted for the purpoſe of philoſophical inference. To aſcertain theſe is a taſk of great diſſiculty; and it has required the continual eſforts of many ages to acquire juſt notions of the motions exhibited to our view in the heavens. For the ſame general appearances may be exhibited, and the ſame perceptions obtained, and the ſame opinions will be formed, by means of motions very diſferent; and it is frequently very diſſicult to ſelect thoſe motions which alone can exhibit every obſerved appearance. IF a perſon who is in motion, imagines that he is at reſt, and aſſumes this principle in his reaſonings about the eſfects of the motions which he perceives, he miſtakes the concluſions which he draws ſor real perceptions; and calls that a deception of ſenſe, which is really an error in judgement. Errors in our opinions concerning the motions of the heavenly bodies, are neceſſarily accompanied by ſalſe judgements concerning their cauſes. Therefore, an accurate examination of the motions which really obtain in the heavens, muſt precede every attempt to inveſtigate their cauſes. The moſt probable plan for acquiring a juſt and ſatisfactory knowledge of theſe particulars, is to follow the ſteps of our predeceſſors in this ſtudy, and firſt to conſider the more general and obvious phenomena. From theſe we muſt deduce the opinions which moſt obviouſly ſuggeſt themſelves, to be corrected aſterwards, by comparing them with other phenomena, which may happen to be irreconcileable with them. Aſlronomical Phenomena. 239. To an obſerver, whoſe view on all ſides is bounded ouly by the ſca, the heavens appear a concave ſphere, of which the eye is the centre, ſtudded with a great number of luminous bodies, oſ which the Sun and Moon are the moſt remarkablee. This ſphere is called the SP]HERE OF THE STARRY HEAVENS. The only diſtances in the heavens which are the immediate objects of our obſervation, are arches of great circles paſſing through the diſferent points of the ſtarry heavens. Therefore, all aſtronomical computations and meaſurements are performed by the rules oſ ſpherical trigonometry. 240. We ſee only the haif of the heavens at a time, the other half being hid by the earth, on which we are placed. The great cirele H B OD (ſig. 30.), which ſeparates the viſible hemiſphere H Z O from the inviſible hemiſphere H N O, is called the norRIZoN. This is marked out on the ſtarry heavens by the fartheſt edge of the ſea. The point Z immediately over the head of the obſerver is called the zENITH; and the point N, diametrically oppoſite to it, ĩs called the NADIR. 241. The zenith and nadir are poles of the horiZon. 242. IF an obſerver looks at the heavens, while a plummet is ſuſpended beſore liis eye, the ;lumb line will mark out on the heavens a quadrant of a circle, whoſe plane is perpendicular to the horiZzon, and which therefore paſſes through the Zenith and nadir, and through two oppoſite points of the horizon. ZONH and Z BND are ſuch circles. They are called vERTICAL CIRCLES and AZIMUTH CIRCLES. 243. The aLTI7UDE of any celeſtial phenomenon ſuch as a ſtar A, is the angle A CB, formed in the plane of the vertical circle Z AN, by the horizontal line CB and the line CA. This name is alſo given to the arch AB of the vertical cirele which meuſures this angle. The arch ZA is called ZENITH DISTANCE of the phenomenon, 244. The azMuTH of the phenomenon is the angle OCB, or OZ B, formed between the plane of the vertical circle Z A B paſſing through the phenomenon, and the plane of ſome other noted vertical Z ON. The arch CB of the horizon, which meaſures this angle, is alſo frequently called the Azimuth. 245. The ſtarry heavens appear to turn round the earth, which ſeems pendulous in the centre oſ the ſphere; and by this motion, the heavenly bodies come into view in the eaſt, or RISE; they attain the greateſt altitude, or CULMINATE, and diſappear in the weſt, or sE?z. This is cãlled the FIRST MOTION. 2456. This motion is performed round an axis NS (fig. 31.), paſing through two points N, S, calied the poles of the world. In conſequence of this motion, a celeſtial object A deſcribes a circle AD BVF, through the centre C of which the axis NS paſſes, perpendicuIarly to its plane. This motion moy be very diſtinctly perceived as ſollows. Let a point, or ſight, be ſixed in the inſide of a ſcy-light fronting the north, and inclined ſouthwards from the perpendiculur at an angle equal to the Iatitude of the place. An eye placed at this point will ſee the ſtars through the glaſs of the window. Let the points oſ the glaſs, through which a ſtar appears from time to time be marked. The marks will be found to lie in the circumſerence oſ a cirele, the centre of which will mark the place of the pole in the heavens. 247. Thoſe ſtars which are fartheſt from the poles will deſeribe the greateſt circles; and thoſe will deſcribe the largeſt poſſible circles which are in the circumference of the circle EW Q E, which is equidiſtant from both poles. This circle is called the EQUATOR, and, being a great circle, it cuts the horizon in two points, E, W, diametrically oppoſite to each other. They are the eaſt and weſt points of the horizon. 248. If a great circle AN QS A paſſes through the poles perpendicularly to the horizon H W OE, it will cut it in the north and ſouth points; and any ſtar A vill acquire its greateſt elevation when it comes to the ſemicircle NAS, and its greateſt depreſſion when it comes to the ſemicircle NBS; and the arch D A F of its apparition will be biſected in A. 249. If the circle AD DF of revolution be between the equator and that pole N which is above the horizon, the greateſt portion of it will be viſible; but if it be on the other ſide of the equator, the ſmalleſt portion will be viſiblee. One half of the equator is viſible. Some circles of revolution are wholly above the horizon, and ſome are wholly below it. A ſtar in one of the ſirſt is always ſeen, and one in the laſt ĩs never ſeen. 250. The diſtance A Z£ of any point A from the equator is called its DECLINATION, and the circle ADBF, being parallel to the equator, is called a PARALLEL oF DECLINATION. 251. The angle £ CII, contained by the planes of the equator and horizon, is the complement of the angle N C O, which is the elevation of the pole. 252. Thæ revolution of the ſtarry heavens is perſormed in 230 56 4'. It is called the DIVRNAL REVOLUTION. No appearance of inequality has been obſerved in it; and it is thereſore aſumed as the moſt perfect meaſure of time. - - ' i EliEl - 253. The timæ of the diurml apparition or diſparition of a point of the ſtarrv heavens is biſected in the inſtant oſ its culmination or greateſt depreſſion. Thæ ſun, thereſore, is in the circle N AS Q at noon. For this reaſon the circle NAS Q is called the MERIDIAN. 254. A phenomenon whoſe circle of diurnal revolution AD BF is on the ſame ſide of the equator with the elevated pole, is longer viſible than it is inviſibleThe contrary obtains if it be on the other ſide of the cquator. 255. Any great cirele NA'S, or NBLS (fig 32.), paſſing through the poles of the world, is called an HOUR CIRCLE. 256. The angle LCL, or ZNL, contained between the pline oſ the hour-circle NB LS, paſſing through any phenomenon B, and the plane of the hour circle N S, pnſſing through a certain noted point of the equator, is called the RIGHT AsCENSION of the phenomenon. The ntercepted arch æ L of the equator, which meaſures this angle, is called by the ſame name. li 257. In aſſigning the place of any celeſtial phenomenon, we camot uſe any points oſ the earth as points of reference. The ſtarry heavens aſford a very convenient means for this purpoſe. Moſt of the ſtars retain their relative ſituations, and may thereſore be uſed as ſo many points of reference. The application of this to our purpoſe requires a knowledge of the poſitions of the ſtars. This may be acquired. The diſference between the meridional altitude of a ſtar B, and of the equator, gives the arch A T, intercepted between the equator and the parallel of declination, or circle of diurnal revolution A B D, deſcribed by the ſtar. And the time which elapſes between the paſſage of this ſtar over the meridian, and the paſſage of that point £ of the equator from which the right aſcenſions are computed, gives the arch æ L of the equator which has paſſed during this interva. Therefore, an hour circle NL S being drawn through the point L of the equator, and a circle of revolution ABD being drawn at the obſerved diſtance A ſ from the equator, the place of the ſtar will be found in their interſection B. 258. Globes and maæps have been made, on which the repreſentations of the ſtars have been placed, in poſitions ſimilar to their real poſitions; and catalogues of the ſtars have been compoſed, in which every ſtar is ſet down with its declination and right aſcenſion, this being the moſt convenient arrangement for the practical aſtronomer. Their longitudes and latitudes (to be explained afterwards) are alſo ſet down, in ſeparate columns. The moſt noted of all theſe is the BRITANNIC CATALOGUE, conſtructed by Dr Flamſtead, ſfrom his own obſervations in the Royal Obſervatory at Greenwich. This catalogue contains the places of 3030 ſtars. It is accompanied by a collection of maps, known to all aſtronomers by the title of ATLAS CELESTIS. An uſeſul abridgement of both has been publiſhied by Bode in Berlin, and by Fortin at Paris, in ſmall quarto. Two planiſpheres have alſo been publiſhed by Senex, in London, conſtructed from the ſame obſervations, and executed with uncommon elegance;3 as alſo a particular map oſ that zone of the heavens to which all the planetary motions are limited. This is alſo executed with ſuperior elegance and accuracy. The place of any phenomenon may be aſcertained in it within 5 of the truth, by mere inſpection, without calculation, ſcale, or compaſſes. No aſtronomer ſhould be unprovided with it. 259. All theſe repreſcntations and deſcriptions of the ſtarry heavens become obſolete, in ſome meaſure, in conſequence of a gradual change in the declination and right aſcenſion of the ſtars. But, as this may be accurately computed, the maps and catalogues retain their original value, requiring only a little trouble in accomodating them to the preſent ſtate of the heavens. The Britannic Catalogue and Atlas are adjuſted to the ſtate of the heavens in 1690; and the planiſpheres, &c. by Senex are the ſame. The editions of Paris and Berlin are for 1750. 260. In theſe maps and catalogues, it has been found convenient to diſtribute the ſtars into groups, callgd CONSTELLATIONS; and figures are drawn, which comprehend all the ſtars of a group, and give them a ſort of eonnexion and a name. Each ſtar is diſtinguiſhed by its number in the conſtellation, and alſo by a letter of the alphabet. Thus, the moſt brilliant ſtar in the heavens, the Dog ſtar, or Sirius, is known to all aſtronomers as Ne 9., or as æ, canis majoris. The numbers always refer to the Britannic catalogue, it being conſidered as claſſical 261. Since the publication of that work, however, great additions have been made to our knowldge of the ſtarry heavens, and ſeveral Catalogues and Atlaſes have been publiſhed in different parts of Europe. Of the catalogues, the moſt eſteemed are, I. a ſmall catalogue of 389 ſtars, the places of which have been determined with the utmoſt care by Dr Bradley, at the Greenwich Obſervatory; 2. a catalogue of the ſouthern ſtars by Abbè de Ia Caille; 3. a catalogue of the zodiacal ſtars by Tobias Mayer at Gottingen; and, laſily, a new atlas celeſtis, conſifting of a catalogue and maps of the whole heavens, and containing above 15,000 ſtars, by Mr Bode of Berlin. The Rev. Mr Fr. Wollaſton publiſhed, in 1780, a ſpecimen of a general aſtronomical catalogue of the fixed ſtars, arranged according to their declinations, folio, London, 1780. This is a moſt valuable work, containing the places of many thouſand ſtars, according to the catalogues of Flamſtead, La Caille, Bradley, and Mayer. Theſe being arranged in parallel columns, we ſee the differences between the determimations of thoſe aſtronomers, and are advertiſed of any changes which have occurred in the heavens. The catalogue is accompanied by directions for proſecuting this method of obtaining æ minute ſurvey of the whole ſtarry heavens. In the valuable aſtronomical tables publiſhed in 1776 by the academy of Berlin, Mr Bode has given a ſimilar fynopſis of the catalogues of Flamſtead, La Caille, Bradley and Mayer, not indeed ſo extenſive, nor ſo minute, as Wollaſton's, but of great uſe. 262. Having thus obtained maps of the heavens, the place of a celeſtial phenomenon is aſcertained in a variety of ways. I. By its obſerved diſtance from two known ſtars. 2. By its altitude and azimuth. 3. Moſt accurately, by its right aſcenſion and declination. 263. This laſt being the moſt accurate method of aſcertaining the place of any celeſtial phenomenon, obſervations of meridional altitude, and of TRANSITS over the meridian, are the moſt important. For an account of the manner of conducting theſe obſervations, and a deſcription of the inſtruments, we may conſult Smiths Optics, Vol. II.; Mr Vince's Treatiſe of Practical Aſtronomy; La Lande's Aſtronomy, &e. The MURAL QuaDRANT, TRANSIT INSTRUMENT, and CLOCK, are therefore the capital furniture of an obſervatory; to which, however, ſhould be added an EQUATOREAL INSTRUMENT for obſerving phenomena out of the meridian. Other inſtruments, ſuch as the EQUAL ALTITUDE INSTRUMENT, the RHOMBOIDAL RETICULA, the ZENITH SECTOR, and one or two more, are ſitted for aſtronomers on a voyage. 264. The poſition of the meridian, and the latitude of the obſervatory, muſt be accurately determined. Various methods of determining the meridian. The moſt accurate is to view a circumpolar ſtar through a teleſcope which has an accurate motion in a vertical plane, and to change the poſition of the teleſcope till the times which elapſe between the ſucceſſive upper and lower tranſits of the ſtar are preciſely equal. The inſtrument is then in the plane of the meridian (fig: 33.) 265. In order to find the declination of a phenomenon more readily, it is convenient to know the inclination of the axis of diurnal revolution NS (fig. 31.) to the horizon, or the elevation of the pole N. The beſt method for this purpoſe is to obſerve the greateſt elevation IO, and the leaſt elevation XO, of ſome circumpolar ſta. The elevation of the pole N is half the ſum of thoſe elevations. 266. The elevation of the pole is diſferent in different places. An obſerver, ſituated 6o4 ſtatute miles due north of another, will ſind the pole elevated about a degree more above his horizon. From obſervations of this kind, the bulk and ſhape of the earth are determined. For it is plain that 360 times 695 miles muſt be the circumference of the globe. It is found to be nearly an elliptical ſpheroid, of which the axis is 7904 miles, and the greateſt diameter 7940% miles. This deviation from perfect ſphericity has been diſcovered by meaſuring, m in the way now mentioned, a degree of the meridian in different latitudes. One was meaſured in Laplnd, in Iatitude 66° 20, and it meaſured 122,457 yvards, exceeding 695 miles by 137 yards. Another was meaſured at Peru, croſſing the very equator. It contained 121,029 vards, falling ſort of 691 miles by 1203 yards, and wanting 1430 yards, or almoft a mile, of the other. Other degrees have been meaſured in intermediate latitudes; and it is clearly eſtabliſhed, that the degrees gradually increaſe, as we go from the equator towards either pole. 267. The length of a degree is the diſtance between two places where the tangents to the ſurface are inclined to one another one degree, or where two plumb lines, which are perpendicular to the ſurface of ſtanding water, will, vhen produced downwards, meet one another, intercepting an angle of one degree. The ſurface of the ſtill ocean is therefore leſs incurvated as we approach the poles, or it requires a longer arch to have the ſame curvature. It is a degree of a larger circle, and has a longer radius. Perſons who do not conſider the thing attentively, are apt to imagine, from this, that the earth is fhaped like an egg; becauſe, if we draw from its centre lnes CN (fig. 33. N 2.) CO, CP, CQ, equally inclined to one another, the arches N O, OP, PQ, will gradually increaſe from N towards Q. If theſe lines make angles of one degree with one another, they will meet the ſurface in points that are farther and farther aſunder, and the degree will appear to increaſe as we approach the points E and Q, which we ſuppoſe, at preſent, to be the poles. But let ſuch perſons reflect, that if theſe lines from the centre are produced beyond the ſurface, they cannot be plumb lines, perpendicular to the ſurface of ſtanding water. But if an ellipſe NES Q (fig. 33.: N 2.) be made to turn round its ſhorter axis NS, it will generate a ſfigure ſlatter round N and S than at E or Q. If we draw two lines a D and b B perpendicular to the curve in a and b, and exceedingly near one another, they will be tangents to a curve AB DF, by the evolution of which the elliptic quadrant E a N is deſcribed. AE is the radius of curvature of the equatoreal. degree of the meridian Ea N. NF is the radius of the polar degree, and a D is the radius oſ curvature at the intermediate latitude of a, &c. All theſe radii are plumb lines, perpendicular to the elliptical curve oſ the ocean. Theſe plumb lines therefore do not meet in the centre of the earth, as is commonly imagined, but meet, in ſucceſſion, in the circumference of the evolute ABDVF. The earth is not a prolate ſpheroid like an egg, but an sblate ſpheroid, like a turnip or bias bowl. 268. Since the axis of diurnal revolution paſſes through the centre of the earth, it marks on its ſurface two points, which are the poles of the earth. Theſe are in the extremities of the axis of the terreſtrial ſpheroid, In like manner, the plane of the celeſtial equator paſſing through the centre of the earth, divides it into two hemiſpheres, the northern and ſouthern, ſeparated by the terreſirial equator. Alſo the hour circles, paſſing through the earth's centre, mark on its ſurface the terreſtrial meridians. 269. The poſition of a place on the ſurface of the earth is determined by its LATITUDE, or diſtance from the terreſtrial equator, and its LONGITUDE, or the angular diſtance of its meridian, from ſome noted meridian. 270. Aſtronomical obſervations are made from a point on the ſurface of the earth, but, for the purpoſes of computation, are ſuppoſed to be made from the centre. The angular diſtance between the obſerved place A (fig. 34.) of a phenomenon S in the heavens, as ſeen from a place D on the Earths ſurface, and its place B, as viewed from the centre, is called the PARALLAX of the phenomenon. 271. Beſides the motion of diurnal revolution, common to all the heavenly bodies, there are other motions, which are peculiar to ſome of them, and are obſerved by us by means of their change of place in the ſtarry heavens. Thus, while the ſtarry heavens turn round the Earth from eaſt to weſt in 233 56 47, the Sun turns round it in 24. He muſi, therefore, change his place to the eaſtward in the ſtarry heavens. The Moon has aun evident motion eaſtward among the ſtars, moving her &wn breadth in about an hour. There are five ſtars which are obſerved to change their places remarkably in the heavens, and are thereſore called PLANETS, or wanderers; while thoſe which do not change their relative places are called ?IXED sTARS. The planets are MERcurY, VENUS, MARS, JUPITER, and SATU~RN. To theſe we muſt now add the planet diſcovered in 1781 by Dr Herſchel, which he called the Georgian Planet, in honour of his Sovereign, the diſtinguiſhed patron of Aſtronomy. Aſtronomers on the continent have not adopted this denomination, and ſeem generally agreed to call it by the name of the diſcoverer. M. Piaææi, at Palermo, has diſcovered another, and M. Olbers, at Bremen, a third, which they have named Ceres and Pallas. None of the three are viſible to the naked eye. 272. Planets are diſtinguiſhable from the fixed ſtars by the ſteadineſs of their light, while all the fixed ſtars are obſerved to twinkle. The following ſymbols are frequently uſed: For the Sun : 5 - - ò the Moon- à - - ) Mercury - - - ſ Venus - / - - Q the Earth - - - - s Mars - - - - a Jupiter - - - - u Saturm- - - - 5 Herſchel - - - FL l The motions of thefæ bodies have become intereſting on various accounts. In order to acquire a knowledge of their motions more eaſily, it is convenient to abſtract our attention from the diurnal motion, common to all, and attend only to their proper motions among the fixed ftars. Of the proper Motions of the Sun. 2733 We cannot obſerve the motion of the Sun æmong the ſixed ſtars immediately, on account of his great ſplendour, vhich hinders us from perceiving the ſtars in his neighbourhood. But we can obſerve the inſtant oſ his coming to the meridian, and his meridional altitude (257.0 The Sun muſt he in that point of the heavens which paſſts the meridian at that inſtant, and with that altitude. Or we can obſerve the point of the heavens which eomes to the meridian at midnight, with a declination as far on one ſide of the equator as the Suns obſerved declination is on the other ſide of iĩt. The Sun muſt be in the point of the heavens which is diametrically oppoſite to this point. By taking either of theſe methods, but particularly the firſt, we can aſcertain a ſeries of points oſ the heavens through which the Sun paſſes. Theſe are found to be in the circumſerence of a great circle of the ſphere AS VW ſſig. 35.), which cuts the celeſtial equator in two oppoſite points A, V, and is inclined to it at an angle of 23028 10' nearly. This circle, or Sun's path, is called the ECLIPTIC. 274. In conſequence of the obliquity oſ the ecliptic, the Sun's motion in it is accompanied by a change in the Sun's declination and right aſcenſion, by a change in the length of the natural day, and by a change of the ſeaſons. Therefore, the revolution of the Sun in the ecliptic is perſormed in a year. 275. The pomts V, A, are called EQUINOCTIAL POINTS; becauſe, when the ſun is in theſe points, his circle of diurnal revolution is the celeſtial equator, and therefore the day and night are equal. The point V, through which he paſies in the month of March, is called the VERNAL Equinox, and the point A is called the AUTUMNAL EQUINOX. The points  and W, where he is fartheſt from the equator, are called the soLsTITiat POINTS, S being the ſummer, and W the winter ſolſtice. The parallels of declination paſſing through the ſolſtitial points are called TROPICS. 276. Right aſcenſion is always computed eaſtward on the equator, from the vernal equinox. 277. The ecliptic paſſes through the conſtellations Aries, diſtinguiſhed by the ſymbol m Taurus --- Gemini- -r -mDx Cancer - - - - -38 Leo- --2~n Virgo ----m Libra, diſtinguiſhed by the ſymbol Scorpio- - - - -m Sagittarius - - - - r Capricornus - - - -u Aquarius - - - - -x Piſces - - - - - x Theſe conſtellations are called the s168 of the zoDIAC; and a motion ſrom weſt to eaſt is ſaid to be DIRECT, Or IN CONSEQUFNTIA SIGNORUM, while a contrary motion is called RETROGRADE, IN ANTECEDENTIA SIGNORUM, 278. The changes of the ſeaſons were attributed by the ancients to the inſluence of the ſtars which were ſeen in the diſferent ſeaſons of the year. 279. The poſition of the ecliptic is invariable, and a complete revolution is performed in 365 days, 6 hours, 9 minutes, and II ſeconds, 280. Iſ ſucceſſive obſervations be made of the Suns croſſing the equator, it will be found that the equinoctial points are not fixed, but move to the weſtward about 50 in a year, ſo that they would make a complete revolution in about 25,972 years. This is called the PrECESSION of the EQUINOXES. 281. Sir Iſaac Newton made a very ingenious and important inference from this aſtronomical ſact,. If ve know the ſituation of the equinoctial points at the time of any hiſtorical event, the date of the event may be diſcovered He thinks that this poſition at the time of the Argonautic expedition may be inſerred from the deſcription given by Aratus oſ the ſtarry heavens. The poet deſcribes a celeſtial ſphere by which Chiron, one of the heroes, directed their motions; and from this he deduces data for a chronology oſ the heroie or fabulous ages. But, ſince the equinoctial points ſhiſt only at the rate of a degree in 72 years, and the Greeks were ſo ignorant, ſor ages aſter that epoch, that they did not know that the poſitions of the ſtars were changeable, it does not appear that much reliance can be had on this datum. We cannot, ſrom the deſcription by Aratus, be certain of the poſition of the vernal equinox within ſive or ſix degrees This makes a difference of 400 years in the epochs. 282. The axis of diurnal revolution is not always the ſame, and the poles of the heavens deſcribe (in 25,972 years) a circle round the pole of the ecliptic, diſtant from it 23028 1 nearly. 283. On account of the weſterly motion of the equinoctial points, the return of the ſeaſons muſt be accompliſhed in leſs time than that of the Suns revolution round the heavens. The ſeaſons return aſter an interval of 36505 48 45. This is called a TROPICAL year, to diſtinguiſh it ſrom the interval 365 6 9 1, called a SYDEREAL year. 284. Aſtronomers have choſen to refer the places of the heavenly bodies to the ecliptic, on account of its ſtability, rather than to the equator. For this purpoſe, great circles, ſuch as P Vꝓ, PAꝑ, (ſig. 30.) are drawn through the poles P, 4, of the ecliptic. Theſe are called ECLIPIC MERIDIANS. The arch AB of one of theſe circles, intercepted between a phenomenon A and the ecliptic, is called the LATI TUPE of the phenomenon; and the arch VB, intercepted between the point V of the vernal equinox and the pont B, is called the LoNGITUDE of the phenomenon. This is ſometimes expreſſed in degrees and minutes, and ſometimes in ſigns, (each  300.) 285. The motion of the Sun in the ecliptic is not uniform. On the ſirſt of January his daily motion is nearly 1°' 137. But on the ſirſt of July, his daily motion is 55 137. The mean daily motion is 59 oò. The Sun's place in the ecliptic, calculated on the ſuppoſition of a daily motion of 59 o8, will be behind his obſerved place, ſrom the beginning of January to the beginning of July, and will be before it, from the beginning of July to the beginning of January. The greateſt diſference is about 1° 55'327, which is obſerved about the beginning of April and October; at which times, the obſerved daily motion is 59 oò. 286. This unequable motion of the Sun appeared to the ancient aſtronomers to require ſome explanation. It had been receved as a firſt principle, that the celeſtial motions were of the moſt perſect kindand this perfection was thought to require invariable ſameneſs. Thereſore the Sun muſt be carried uniformly in the circumference of a sgure perſectly uniform in every part. EHe muſt therefore move uniformly in the circumference of a cirelee The aſtronomers thereſore ſuppoſcd that the Earth is not in the centre of this circle. Let AbP à (fig. 37.) repreſent the Sun's orbit, having the Earth in E, at ſome diſtance from the centre C. It is plain that if the Sun's motion be uniform in the circumferenee, deſcribing every day 59 o8, his angular motion, as ſeen from the Earth, muſt be ſlower when he is at A, his greateſt diſtance, than when neareſt to the Earth, at P. It is alſo evident rhat the point E may be ſo choſen, that an arch of 59 o8 at A ſhall ſubtend an angle at E that is only 57 137, and that an arch of 59 oò at P ſhall ſubtend an angle of 6' 137. This will be accompliſhed, i? we make EP ©o EA as 57 13' to 6 135, or nearly as 14 to 153.. This was accordingly done; and this method oſ ſolving the appearances was called the eccentric hypotheſis. E C is the ECCENTRICITY, and PE is to P C nearly as 28 to 29. 287. But although this hypotheſis agreed very well vith obſervation in thoſe pomts of the orbit where the Sun is moſt remote from the Earth, or neareſt to it, it was ſound to diſfer greatly in other parts of the orbit, ſtronomers, aſter trying various other hypotheſes, were obliged to content themſelves with reducing the eccentricity conſiderably, and alſo to ſuppoſe that the angular motion oſ 59 o8' per day was performed round a point  on the other ſide of the centre, at the ſame diſtance with E. This, however, was giving up the principle of perfect motion, if its perſection conſiſted in uniſormity; for, in this caſe, the Sun cannot have an uniform motion in the circumſerence, and alſo an uniform angular motion round e. BEcſides, even this amendment of the eccentric hypotheſis by no means agreed with the obſervations in the months of April and October: but they could not make iĩt any better. 288. Aſtronomical computations are made on the ſuppoſition of uniform angular motion. The angle proportional to the time is called the MEAN MoTION, and the place thus computed is called the MEAN PLACE. The diſferences between the mean places and the obſerved, or TRUE PLACES, are called EQuATIONS. They are always greateſt when the mean and true motions are cqual, and they are nothing when the mean and true motions diſfer moſt. For, while the true daily. angular motion is leſs than the mean daily motion, the obſerved place ſalls more and more behind the calculated place every day; and although, by gradually quickening, it loſes leſs every day, it ſtill loſes, and falls ſtill more behind; and when the true daily motion has at laſt become equal to the mean, it loſes no more indeed, but it is now the fartheſt behind that can hbe. Next day it gains a little of the loſt ground, but is ſtill behind. Gaining more and more every day, by its increaſe of angular motion, it at laſt comes up with the calculated place; but now, its angular motion is the greateſt poſſible, and diſſers moſt from the equable mean motion: 289: Theſe computations are begun ſrom that point of the orbit where the motion is ſloweſt, and the mean angular diſtance from this point is called the MEAN aNoMALY. A table is made of the equations correſponding to each degree of the mean anomaly. The true anomaly is found by adding to, or ſubtracting from the computed mean anomaly, the equations correſponding to it. In this manner may the ſun's longitude, or place in the ecliptic, be found for any time. 290. In conſequence of the obliquity of the ecliptic, and the ſun's unequal motion in it, the natural days, or the interval between two ſucceſſive paſſages of the ſun over the meridian, are unequal; and if a clock, which meaſures 3650 50 48 45' in a tropical year, be compared from day to day with an exact ſun dial, they will be found to differ, and will agree only four times in the year. This difference is called the EQUATION of TiME, and ſometimes amounts to 16 minutes. The time ſiewn by the clock is called MEAN S0LAR TIME, and that ſnewn by the dial is called TRUE TIME and aPPARENT TIME. Aa : 29I. 201. The change in the ſun's motion is accompanicd by a change in his apparent diameter, which, at the beginning oſ January, is about 32' 39, and at the b ęinning of July is about 35' 33, 4 leſs. This muſt be aſcribed to a change of diſtance, which muſt always be ſuppoſcd inverſely proportional to the apparent diameter. 202. By combining the obſervations of the ſun's place in the ecliptic with thoſe of his diſtance, inferred from the apparent diameter, and by other more deciſive, but leſs obvicus obſervations, Kepler, a German aſtronomer, found that his apparent path round the earth is an ellipſe, having the earth in one ſocus, and having the longer axis to the ſhorter axis as 200,000 to 199,972. The extremities A and P of the longer axis of the ſu's orbit ABP D (ſig. 357.) are called the APSIDES. The point A, where the ſun is fartheſt from the earth (placed in E), is called the higher apſis, or APOGEE. P is the lower apſis, or PERIGEE. The diſtance EC between the focus and centre is called the ECCENTRIcrry, and is 1680 parts oſ a ſcale, of which the mean diſtance ED is 100,000. li 293. Kepler obſerved, that the ſun's angular motion in this orbit was inverſely proportional to the ſquare of his diſtance from the earth; for he obſerved the ſuns daily change of place to be as the ſquare of his apparent diameter. Hence, he inferred that the radius vector EB deſcribed areas proportional to the times (13.) 294. From this he deduced a method of c:leulating the ſun's place ſor any given time. Draw a line EF from the focus of the ellipſe, which ſhall cut ofſ a ſector AEF, having the ſame proportion to the whole ſurface of the ellipſe, which the interval of time between the ſuns laſt paſage through his apogee, and the time for which the computation is made, has to a ſydereal year; F will be the ſun's true place for that time. This is called XEPLER'S PROBLEM. This problem, the moſt intereſting to aſtronomers, has not yet been ſolved otherwiſe than by approximation, or by geometrical conſtructions which do not admit oſ accurate computation. 295. Let ABP D (ſig. 37.) be the elliptical orbit, having the earth in the focus EA and P, the extremities of the tranſverſe axis, are the apogee and perſ;ee oſ the revolving body. BD is the conjugate axis, and C the centree It is required to draw a line ET which ſhall cut oſf a ſector AET, which has to the whole ellipſe the proportion of m to n; m being taken to n in the proportion of the time elapſed ſince the body was in A to the time of a complete revolution. Kepler, who was an excellent geometer, ſaw that this would be effected, if he could drawv a line E I, which ſhould cut off from the circumſcribed circle Ab Pd the area A E I, which is to the whole circle in the ſame proportion of m to n. For, then, drawing the perpendicular ordinate IR, cutting the ellipſe in T, he knew that the area AET has the ſame proportion to the elAa lipſe that AEI has to the circle. The proof of this is eaſy, and it ſcems greatly to ſimplify the problem. Draw IC through the centre, and make ES perpendicular to ICS. The area AE I conſiſts of the circular ſector A CI, and the triangle CIE. The ſector is equal to half the rectangle of the radius CI and the arch A, that is, to eA xIA The triangle CTE is equal to cCIxES or caxes Thereſore it is evident that, if we make the arch IM equal to the ſtraight line ES, the ſector ACM vill be equal to the circular area A CI, and the angle ACM ill be to 360 degrees, as m to n. 206. Hence we ſee that it will be eaſy to find the time when the revolving body is in any point T. To find this, draw the ordinate RTI; draw ICS and ES, and make IMæES. Then, 360° is to the achAM as the time of a revolution to the time in which the body moves over AT. This is (in the aſtronomical language) finding the mean anomaly when the true anomaly is given. The angle ACM, proportional to the time, is called the MEAN ANOMALY, and the angle AET is the TRUE AxOMALY. The angle ACI is called the anoMALY OF THE ECCENTRIC, or the ECCENTRIC ANOMALY. 207. But the aſtronomer wants the true anomaly correſponding to a given mean anomaly. The proceſhere given canot be reverſedl. We cannot tell how much to cut off from the given mean anomily AM, ſo as to leave AI of a proper magnitude, hecauſe the indiſpenſable meaſure of MI, namely ES, cannot be had till ICS be drawn. Kepler ſaw this, and ſiid that his problem could not be ſolved geometrieally. Since the invention of fluxions, however, and of converging ſerieſes, very accurate ſolutions have been obtumed. That given by Friſius in his Coſmographia is the ſ.me in principle with all the moſt approved methods, and the ſorm in which it is preſented is peculiarly ſimple and neat. But, except for the conſtruction of original tables, theſe methods are rarely employed, on account of the Inborious calculation which they require. O all the direct approximate ſolutions, that given by Dr Matthew Stewart at the end of his Tracis, Phyſical and Mathematical, publiſhed in 1761, ſeems the moſt accurate and elegant; and the calculations founded on it are even ſhorter than the indirect methods generally employed. His conſtruction is as follows. 298. Let the angle AEM be the mean anomaly, join EM, and draw Ci parallel to it, and MO perpendicular to Ci. If the orbit is not more eccentric than that of Mars, make the arch i I equal to the exceſs of the arch Mi above its ſine M O. Then AT is the eccentric anomaly correſponding to the mean anomaly AM, and the ordinate IR will cut the ellipſe in T, ſo that AET will be the true anomaly required. The error bits. But, ſor orbits of greater eccentricity, another ſtep is neceſſury. Ioin Ei, and draw CQ parallel to E i, meeting the tangent i Q in . Let D repreſent the exceſs of the arch Mi above its ſinie M OF, and inſtitute the following analogy, ſin. M Ci: tan. i CQæD: i I, taking ĩ I from i towards M. The point, I, will be ſo ſituated that the ſector AEI is very nearly equal to the ſector ACM, or AI is the eccentric anomaly correſponding to the mean anomaly AM. The error will not amount to one ſecond, even in the orbit of Mercury. The demonſtration of this conſtruction is by no means abſtruſe or diſicult. Draw IS, and M I. The triangles i CE a i CM are evidently equal, being on one baſe i C, and between the parallels i C and M E. For ſimilar reaſons, the triangles i S I and i E I are equal. Therefore the triangle i CE, together with the ſegment included between the arch M bi and the chord Mi, will be equal to the circular ſector i CM. Now it is plain, from the conſtruction, that Si: Ci =SE:i Q. =MO:i Q, =Mii—M&: i I. Therefore Si X ImCi Xx Mbi —Ci x MO. But Ci x Méi  This exceſs muſt be expreſſed in degrees, minutes, or ſeconds. The radius of a circle is equal to an arch of 206,265 ſeconds. The logarithm of this number is 5.3144251. Therefore we ſnall obtain ES, or the ſeconds in ES, by adding this logarithm to the logarithms of E C (AC being unity), and the logarithm of the ſine of A CI. The ſum is the logarithm M bi is equal to twice the ſector M Ci, and Ci X M O is equal to twice the triangle M Ci. Therefore S i }X i I is equal to twice the ſegment contained between Mbi and the chord Mi. Thereſore this ſegment is equal to the triangle i S I, or to the triangle i E I. Therefore the ſpace Ci IE C is equal to the ſector i CM, and the ſector AEI to the ſector ACM. The calculation founded on this conſtruction is extremely ſimple. In the triangle MCE, the ſides M C and CE are given, with the included angle MCE; and the angles CEM, CME are ſought. Moreover, AL is the ſum of the given ſides, and P E is their diſſerence, and ACM is the ſum of the angles M and E. Therefore AE: E P æ tan. Eæ : tan. E l and thus T and M, or their equals, ACi and M Cj, are obtained. In the next place, in the triangle i CE, the ſides i C, CE, aud the included angle i CE, are given, and the angle E i C is ſought. We have, in the ſame manner as before, A Ci equal to the ſum of the angles E and ĩ : b E and therefore ALE: L P æ tan. r : ' tan. rP= Thus ihe angle EĩC, or its equal, i CQ, is obtained, and then, tan. i CQ the arch i I2D x 4, =D x Q MO ſm. M Ci In the very eccentric orbits oſ the comets, this brings us vaſtly nearer to the truth than any of the indirect methods we know does by the ſirſt ſtep. So near indeed, that the common method, by the rule of ſalle poſition, may now be ſafely employed. If the point, I, hus been accurately found, it is plain that if to the arch AI we add ES, that is, E C x ſin. ACI, we obtain the arch AM with which we began. But if I has not been accurately determined, AM ill diſfer from the primitive A MTherefore, make ſome ſmall change on AI, and again compute AM. This will probably be again erroneous. Then apply the rule of falſe poſition as uſual. The error remaining after the ſirſt ſtep of Dr Stewart's proceſs is always ſo moderate that the variations of AM are very nearly proportional to the varſations of AI; ſo that two ſteps of the rule will generally bring the calculation within two or three ſeconds of the truth. The aſtronomical ſtudent will ſind many beautiful and important propoſitions in theſe mathematical tracts. The propoſition juſt now employed ĩs in page 398, c. 299. Aſtronomers have diſcovered, that the line AP moves ſlowly round E to the eaſtward, changing its place about 2556 in a century. This makes the time of a complete revolution in the orbit to be 3650 6 15'20”. This time is called the ANOMALISTIC YEAR. Of the proper Motions of the Moon. 300. Of all the celeſtial motions, the moſt obvious are thoſe of the Moon. We ſee her iſt her ſituation among the ſtars about her own breadth to the eaſtward in an hour, and in ſomewhat leſs than a month ſhe makes a complete tour of the heavens. The gentle beauty of her appearance during the quiet hours of a ſerrne nivht, has attractedthe notice, and we may ſuy the at?? m of all mankind; and ſe is juſtly ſtyled the Q een of Heaven. The remarkable and diſtinẽt chanę of her appearance have aſſorded to all ſimple nations a moſt convenient index and meaſure of time, both for recording paſt events, and for making any future appointnents for buſineſs. Accordingly, we find, in the ſirſt hiſtories of all nations, that the lunar motions were the ſirſt ſtudied, and, in ſome degree, underſtood. It ſeems to have been in ſubſerviency to this ſtudy alone that the other appearances of the ſtarry heavens were attended to; and the relative poſitions of the ſtars ſeem to have intereſted us, merely as the means of aſcertaining the motions of the Moon. For we find all the Zodiacs oſf the ancient oriental nations divided, not into 12 equal portions, correſponding to the Sun's progreſs during the period of ſeaſons, but into 27 parts, correſponding to the Moon's daily progreſs, and theſe are expreſsly called the HoUSES or MANsions of the Moon. This is the diſtribution of the zodiac of the ancient Hindoos, the Perſiuns, the Chineſe, and even the Chaldeans. Some have no diviſion into 12, and thoſe who have, do not give names to 12 groups of ſtars, but to 27. They ſirſt deſcribe the ſituation of a planet in one of theſe manſions by name, noting its diſtance from ſome ſtars in that group, and thence infer in what part of which twelſth of the circumſerence it is placedl. The diviſion into 12 parts is merely mathematical, for the purpoſe of calculation. In all probability, therefore, this was an after-thought, the contrivance of a more cultivated age, well acquainted with the heavens as an object of ſight, and beginning to extend the attention to ſpeculations beyond the ſirſt conveniences oſ liſe. 300. When the Moon's path through this ſeries of manſions is careſully obſerved, it is ſound to be (very nearly) a great circle of the heavens, and therefore in a plane paſſing through the centre oſ the earth. 302. She makes a complete revolution of the heavens in 27970 43512, but with ſome variations. Her mean daily motion is thereſore 13° 1025, and her horary motion is 32 56'. 303. Her orbit is inclined to the plane of the ecliptic in an angle of 50 8' 45', nearly, cutting it in two points called her NoDES, diametrically oppoſite to each other; and that node through which ſhe paſies in coming from the ſouth to the north ſide of the ecliptic, is called the ASCENDING NODE. 304. The nodes have a motion which is generally veſtward, but with conſiderable irregularities, muking a complete revolution in about 68039 20 5518, nearly 183 yeans 305. IF we mark on a celeſtial globe a ſeries of points where the Moon was obſerved during three or four revolutions, and then lap a tape round the globe, covering thoſe points, we ſhall ſee that the tape croſſes the ecliptic more weſterly every turn, and then croſſcs the Iaſt round very obliquely; and we ſee that by continuing this operation, we ſhall completely cover with the tape a zone of the heavens, about ten or eleven degrees broad, having the ecliptic running along its middſe. 306. The Moon moves unequally in this orbit, her hourly motion increaſing from 29 337 to 36' 487, and the equation of the orbit ſometimes amounts to 6 1832; ſo that if, ſetting out from the point where her horary motion is ſloweſt, we calculate her place, for the eighth day thereafter, at the rate of 32 56 per hour, we ſhall find her obſerved place ſhort of our calculation more than half a day's motion. And we ſhould have found her as much before it, had we begun our calculation from the oppoſite point of her orbit. 307. Her apparent diameter changes from 29 26 to 33 47, and therefore her diſtance from the Earth changes. This diſtance may be diſcovered in miles by means of her parallax. She was obſerved, in her paſſage over the meridian, by two aſtronomers, one of whom was at Berlin, and the other at the Cape of Good Hope. Theſe two places are diſtant from one another above 5000 miles; ſo that the obſerver at Berlin ſaw the Moon every day conſiderably more to the ſouth than the perſon at the Cape. This di reoce of apparent declination is the meaſure of the anle D5C ſfę. 34.) ſubtended at the Moon by the line ?D of 5443 miles, between the obſervers. The anglts S De and Se D are given by means of the Moon's obſcred altitudes. Thereſore any of the ſides SD or 5 c mæy be computed. It is found to be nearly 60 ſemidiameters oſ the earth. 38. By combining the obſervatiuns of the Moons place in the heavens with thoſe of her apparent dĩameter, we diſcver that her orbit is nearly an ellipſe, having the Earth in one focus, and having the longer axis to the ſhorter axis nearly as 91 to 895. The greateſt and leaſt diſtances are nęarly in the proportion of 21 to 19. 359. Her motion in this ellipſe is ſuch, that the line joining the Earth and Moon deſcribes areas which are nearly proportional to the times. For her angular hourly motion is obſerved to be as the ſquare of her apparent diameter. 310. The line oſ the apſides has a ſlow motion eaſtward, completing a revolution in about 32329 11* 14730, nearly 9 years. 311. While the Moon is thus making a revolution round the heavens, her appearance undergoes great changes. She is ſometimes on our meridian at midnight, poſite to the Sun. In this ſituation, ſhe is a complete luminous circle, and is ſaid to be FuLL. As ſhe moves eaſtward, ſie becomes deficient on the weſt ſide, and, after about 75 days, comes to the meridian about ſix in the morning, having the appearance of a ſemicircle, with the convex ſide next the Sun. In this ſtate, her appearance is called HALF M00N. Moving ſtill eaſtward, ſhe becomes more deſicient on the weſt ſide, and has now the form of a creſcent, with the convex ſide turned towards the Sun. This creſcent becomes continually more ſlender, till, about 14 days aſter being ſull, ſie is ſo near the Sun that ſhe cannot be ſeen, on account of his great ſplendour. About four days aſter this diſappearance in the morning before ſunriſe, ſie is ſeen in the evening, a little to the eaſtward of the Sun, in the form of à fine creſcent, with the convex ſide turned toward the Sun. Moving ſtill to the eaſtward, the creſcent becomes more full, and when the Moon comes to the meridian about ſix in the evening, ſhe has again the appearance of a bright ſemicircle. Advancing ſtill to the eaſtward, ſie becomes fuller on the eaſt ſide, and, at laſt, aſter about 293 days, ſhe is again oppoſite to the Sun, and again full. 312. It frequently happens that the Moon is ECLIPsED when full; and that the Sun is eclipſed ſome time Between the diſappearance of the Moon in the morning on the weſt ſide of the Sun, and her reappearance in the evening on the eaſt ſide of the Sun. This eclipſe of the happens at the very time that the Moon, in the courſe of her revolution, paſũs that part of the heavens where the Sun is. 313. Trom theſe obſervations, we conclude, I. That the Moon is an opaque body, viſible only by means of the Sun's light illuminating her ſurface; 2. That her orbit round the Earth is nearer than the Suns. 374. From theſe principles all her PHASES, or appearances, may be explained (ſig. 39.) 335. When the Moon comes to the meridian at mid- day, ſie is ſaid to be NEW, and to be in coNju§cro8 with the Sun. When ſhe comes to the meridian at midnight, ſhe is ſaũ to be in oPPosITION. The line joining theſe two ſituations is called the line of the s7Z1Gi1ES. The points where ſhe is halſ illuminated are called the UADRATURES; and that is called the firſt quadrature which happens aſter new moon. 316. When the Moon is half illuminated, the line ENM (ſig. 39.) joining the Earth and Moon, is perpendicular to the line MS, joining the Moon and Sun. By obſerving the angle S EM, the proportion of the diſtance of the Sun to the diſtance of the Moon may be aſcertained. This method of aſcertaining the Bun's diſtance was propoſed by Ariſtarchus of Samos, about 264 years beſore genious, and ſtrictly juſt; and this was the ſirſt obſervation that gave the aſtronomers any conſident gueſs at the very great diſtance of the Sun. But it is impoſſible to judge of the half illumination of the Moon's di©k with ſuſficient accuracy ſor obtaining any tolerable meaſure. Even now, when aſſiſted by teleſcopes, we cannot tell to a few minutes when the boundary between light and darkneſs in the Moon is exactly a ſtraight line. When this really happens, the elongation S IE M wants but & of a right angle, and when it is altogether a right angle, there is no ſenſible change in the appearance oſ the Moon. All that the ancient aſtronomers could inſer from their beſt eſtimation oſf the biſection of the Moon was, that the Sun was, for certain, at a much greater diſtance than any perſon had ſuppoſed before that time. Ariſtarchus ſaid, that the angle S EM was not leſs than 87 degrees, and thereſore the Sun was at leaſt twenty times ſarther oſf than the Moon. But aſtronomers of the Alexandrian ſchool ſaid, that the angle SEM exceeded 89°, and the Sun was ſixty times more remote than the Moon. Modern obſervations ſhew him to be near four hundred times more remote. 317. This ſucceſſion of phaſes is completed in a period of 200 120 43, called a SYNODICAL MONTH and a LUNATION. It may be aſked here, how the period oſ a lunation comes to diſfer ſrom that of the Moons revolution round the Earth, which is accompliſhed in 27 76 43 127? This is owing to the Sun's change of place during a revolution of the Moon. Suppoſe it new Moon, and thereſore the Sun and Moon appearing in the ſame place of the heavens. At the end of the lunar period, the Moon is again in that point of the heavens. But the Sun, in the mean time, has advanced above 27 degrees; and ſomewhat more than two days muſt elapſe before the Moon can overtake the Sun, ſo as to be ſeen by us as new moon. 318. The period of this ſucceſſion of phaſes may be ſound within a few hours of the truth in a very ſhort time. We can tell, within four or fivs hours, the time of the Moon being half illuminated. Suppoſe this obſerved in the morning of her laſt quarter. We ſhall ſee this twice repeated in 59 days, which gives 294 12* for a lunation, wanting about three fourths of an hour of the truth. About 4353 years before the Chriſtian æra, Meton, a Greek aſtronomer, reported to the ſtates aſſembled at the Olympic games, that in nineteen years there happened exactly 235 lunations. 339. The lunar motions are ſubject to ſeveral irregularities, of which the following are the chief: ll 320. I. The periodic month is greater when the Sun is in perigee than when in apogee, the greateſt diſſerencæ being about 25 minutes. Tycho Brahè firſt rermrked this anomaly oſ the lunar motions, and called the correction, (depending on the Sun's place in his orbit), the ANNUAL EQuATION of the Moon. 321. 2. The mean period is leſs than it was in ancient times. 322. 3. The orbit is larger when the Sun is in perigee than when he is in apogee. 323. 4. The orbit is more eccentric when the Sun is in the line of the lunar apſides; and the equation of the orbit is then increaſed nearly 1° 20 34. This change is called the EVECTION. It was diſcovered by Ptolemy. 324. 5. The inclination of rhe orbit changes. 325. 6. The moon's motion is retarded in the ſirſt and third quarters, and accelerated in the ſecond anã lat. This anomaly was diſcovered by Tycho Brahẽ, who cãlls it the vARIATION. 326. 7. The motion of the nodes is very urequal. Of ibe Calendar. 327. Aſtronomy, like all other ſciences, was firſt practiſed as an art. The chief object oſ this art was to know the ſeaſons, which, as we liave ſeen, depend either immediatcly, or more remotely, on the Sun's motion in the eclipticc. A ready method for knowing the ſeaſon ſeems, in all ages, to have been the chieſ incitement to the ſtudy of aſtronomy. This muſt direct the labours of the ſield, the migrations oſ the ſhepherd, and the journies of the travcller. It is equally neceſſary for appointing all public meetings, and for recording events. VWere the ſtars viſible in the day time, it would be eaſy to mark all the portions of the year by the Sun's place among them. When he is on the foot of Caſtor, it is midſummer; and midwinter, vhen he is on the bow of Sagittarius. But this cannot be done, becauſe his ſplendour eclipſes them all. i 328. The beſt approximation which a rude people can make to this, is to mark the days in which the ſtars of the zodiac come ſirſt in ſight in the morning, in the eaſtern horiZzon, immediately beſore the Sun riſe. As he gradually travels eaſtward along the ecliptic, the brighter ſtars which riſe about three quarters of an hour before the Sun, may be ſeen in ſucceſſion. The huſbandman and the ſepherd were thus warned of the ſucceeding taſks by the appearance of certain ſtars before the Sun. Thus, in Egypt, the day was proclaimed in which the Dogſtar was firſt ſeen by thoſe ſet to watch. The inhabitants immediately began to gather home their wandering flocks and herds, and prepare themſelves for the inundation of the Nile in twelve or fourteen days. Hence that ſtar was called the Watch-dog;, THOTH, the Guardian THE KALENDARHELIACAL RISING. 20 This was thereſore a natural commencement of the period of ſeaſons in Egypt; and the interval between the ſucceſſive apparitions of Thoth, has been called the NaTURAL yvear of that country, to diſtinguith it from the civil or artificial year, by which all records vere kept, but which had little or no alliance with the ſeaſons. It has alſo been called the Canicular year. It evidently depends on the Sun's ſituation and diſtance from the Dog-ſtar, and muſt therefore have the ſame period with the Suns revolution from a ſtar to the ſame ſtar again. This requires 3650 6 & ſ1, and diſfers from our period of ſeaſons. Hence we muſt conclude that the riſing of the Dog-ſtar is not an infallible preſage of the inundation, but will be found faulty aſter a long courſe of ages. At preſent it happens about the 12th or rith of July. This obſervation of a ſtar's firſt appearance in the year, by getting out of the dazzling blaze of the Sun, is called the heliacal riſing of the ſta. The ancient almanacks for directing the rural labours were obliged to give the detail of theſe in ſucceſſion, and of the correſponding labours. Hefiod, the oldeſt poet of the Greeks, has given a very minute detail of thoſe heliacal riſings, ornamented by a pleaſing deſcription of the ſucceſſive occupations of rural lifee. This evidently required a very conſiderable knowledge of the ſtarry heavens, and of the chief circumſtances of diurnal motion, and particularly the number of days intervening between the firſt appearance of the different conſtellations. Such an almanack, however, cannot be expected, except among a ſomewhat cultivated people, as it requires a long continued obſervation of the revolution of the heavens in order to form it; and it muſt, even among ſuch peorie, be uncertain. Cloudy, or even hazy weather, may prevent us for a fortnight ſfrom ſeeing the ſtats we vant. 329. The Moon comes moſt opportunely to the aid of ſimple nations, for giving the inhabitants an eaſy diviſion and meaſure ꝗf time. The changes in her appearance are ſo remarkable, and ſo diſtinct, that they cannot be confounded. Accordingly, we find that all nations have made uſe of the lunar phaſes to reckon by, and for appointing all public meetings. The feſtivals and ſacred ceremonies of ſimple nations were not all dictated by ſuperſtition; but they ſerved to fix thoſe diviſions of time in the memory, and thus gave a comprehenſive notion of the year. All theſe feſtivals were celebrated at particular phaſes of the Moongenerally at new and full Moon. Men were appointed to watch her firſt appearance in the evening, aſter having been ſeen in the moming, riſing a few minutes beſore the Sun. This was done in conſecrated groves, and in high places; and her appearance was proclaimed. Fourteen days aſter, the feſtival was generally held during full Moon, Hence it is that the ſirſt day of a Roman month was named KALENDE, the day to be proclaimed. They ſaid pridie, tertio, quarto, &c. ante calendos neomenias Mar tias; the third, fourth, &c. before proclaiming the new Moon of March. And the aſſemblage of months, with the arrangement oſ all the feſtivals and ſacriſices, was called a KALENDARIUM. As ſuperſtition overran all rude nations, no meeting was held without ſacriſices and other religious ceremoniesthe watching and proclaiming was naturally committed to the prieſts&the kalendar became a ſacred thing, connected with the worſhip of the godsand, long before any moderate knowledge of the celeſtial motions had been acquired, every day oſ every Moon had its particular ſanctity, and its appropriated ceremonies, which could not be transferred to any other, 330. But as yet there ſeemed no preciſe dſſtinction of months, nor of what number of montlis ſiould be aſſembled into one group. Moſt nations ſeem to have obſerved that, aſter 12 Moons were completed, the ſeaſon was pretty much the ſame as at the beginning. This was probably thought exact enough. Accordingly, in moſt ancient nations, we ſind a year of 354 days. But a few returns oſ the winter's cold, when they expected heat, would ſiew that this conjecture was ſar from being correct; and now began the embarraſſment. There was no diſficulty in determining the period of the ſeaſons exactly enough, by means of very obvious obſervations. Almoſt any cottager has obſerved that, on the approach of winter, the Sun riſes more to the right hand, and ſets more to the left every day, the places of his riſing and ſerting coming continually nearer to each other; and that, aſter riſing for two or three days from behind the ſame object, the places of riſing and ſetting again gradually ſeparate from each other. By ſuch familiar obſervations, the experience of an ordinary life is ſuſficient for determining the period of the ſeaſons with abundant accuracy. The diſſiculty was to accompliſh the reconciliation of this period with the ſacred cycle of months, each day of which was conſecrated to a particular deity, jealous of his honours. Thus the Hierophantic ſcience, and the whole art of kalendar-making, were neceſſarily entruſted to the prieſt. We ſee this in the hiſtory of all nations, Jews, Pagans, and Chriſtians. 331. Various have been the contrivances of diſferont nations. The Egyptians, and ſome of the neighbouring Orientals, ſeem early to have known that the period of ſeaſons conſiderably exceeded 12 months, and contained 365 days. They made the civil year conſiſt of 12 months of 30 days, and added 5 complementary duys without ceremonies; and when more experience convinced them that the year contained a fraction of a day more, they made no change, but made the people believe that it was an improvement on their kalendar that their great day, the ſirſt of Thoth, by falling back one day in four periods of ſeaſons, would thus occupy in ſucceſſion every day of the year, and thus ſanctify the whole in 1461 years, as they imagined, but really in 1425 of their civil years. We have but a very imperfect knowledge of the arrangement of their feſtivals. Indeed they were totally diſſerent in almoſt every city. It is important to the aſtronomer to know this method of reckoning; becauſe all the obſervations of Hipparchus and Ptolemy, and all thoſe which they have quoted from the Chaldeans, Perſians, &c. are recorded by it. In An. Dom. 940, the firſt day of Thoth fell on the firſt of January, and another Egyptian year commenced on the 31ſ oF December of that year. From this datum it is eaſy to reckon back by years of 365 days, and to ſay on what day of what month of any of our years the iſt day of Thoth falls, and this wandering year commences. 33. The Greeks have been much more puzzled vith the formation of a luniſolar year than the Egyptians. Solon got an oracle to direct his Athenians (594 years before our æra), ſuũv naræ rqæ, xaræu H o, æræ Eem, nas nara iueas. The meaning of which ſeems to be, to regulate their year by the Sun, or ſeaſons, their months by the Moon, and their feſtivals by the days. Obſerving that 59 days made two months, he made theſe alternately of 30 and of 29 days, æruæ, and xaæ full, and deficient; and the 30th day of a month, the ręœæ⸗, was called iim xa: æ, nopuniu, as it belonged to both months. But this was not ſuſſiciently accurate; and the Olympic games, celebrated on every fourth year, during the full Moon neareſt to midſummer day, had gone into great confuſion. The Hierophants, whoſe proclamation to all the ſtates aſſembled the chieſs together, had not ſill enough to keep them from gradualiy falling intõ the autumn months. Injudicious corrections were made ſfrom time to time, by rules for inſerting months to bring things to rights again. It deſerves to be remarked here, that this is the way in which the ancient aſtronomy improved, before the eſtabliſiment of the Alexandrian ſchool. It was not by a more accurate obſervation of the motions, as in modern times, but by diſcovering the errors, when they amounted to an unit of the ſcale on which they were meaſuredl. The aſtronomers then improved their future computations by repeatedly cutting off this unit of accumulated error. 333. All theſe contrivances were publicly propoſed at the meeting of the States for the Olympic Games. This was an occaſion peculinrly proper, and here the ſcheme of Meton was received with juſt applauſe. For Meton not only gave his countrymen a very exact determination of the lunar month, but accompanied it with a ſcheme of intercalation, by which all their feſtivals, religious and civil, were arranged ſo as to have very ſmall diſlocations from the days of new and full Moon. As this had hitherto been a mattier of inſuperable diſficulty, Meton was declared victor in the firſt department, a ſtatue was decreed him, and his arrangement oſ the feſtivals was inſcribed on a pillar of marble, in letters of gold. This has occaſioned the number expreſſing the current year of the cycle of 19 years (called the Metonic cycle) ton's was indeed very judicious, though intricate, becauſe he arranged the interpolation of a month ſo as never 10 remove the firſt day of the month two days ſrom the time of new Moon, whereas it had oſten been a week. The Metonic cycle commenced on 16. July, 423 vears before the beginning of the Chriſtian æra, at 43 mmutes paſt 7 in the morning, that being the time of new Moon. The firſt year of each cycle is that in which the full Moon of its firſt month is the neareſt to the ſummer ſolſtice. 334. The Roman kalendar was in a much worſe condition than the rudeſt of the Greeks. The ſuperſtitious veneration for their ceremonies, or their paſſion for public ſports, had diverted the attention of the Romans (who never were cultivators or graziers) from the ſeaſons altogether. They were contented with a year of ten months for ſeveral centuries, and had the moſt abſurd contrivances for producing ſome eonformity with the ſeaſons. At laſt, that accompliſhed general, Julius Cæſar, having attained the height of his vaſt ambition, reſolved to reform the Roman kalendar. He was profoundly ſilled in aſtronomy, and had written ſome diſſertations on diſferent branches of the ſcience, which had great reputation, but are now loſt. He had no ſuperſtitious or religious qualms to diſturb him, and was determined to make every thing yield to the great purpoſe of a kalendar, its uſe in directing the occupations of the people, and for recording the events of hiſtory. He took the 210 ASTRONOMICAL PHENOMENA. help of Soſigenes, an aſtronomer of the Alexandrian ſchool, a man perſectly acquainted with all the diſcoveries oſ Hipparchus and others of that celebrated academy. Theſe eminent ſcholars, knowing that the period of ſeaſons occupicd 365 days and a quarter very nearly, made a ſiort eycle of 4 years, containing three years of 365, and one of 366 days; thus cutting off, in the Grecian manmner, the error, when it amounted to a whole day. Cæſar reſolved alſo to change the beginning of the year from March, where Romulus had placed it in honour oſ his patron Mars, to the winter ſolſtico. This is certinly the moſt natural way oſ eſtimating the commencement of the year of ſeaſlons. What we are moſt anxious to aſcertain is the preciſe day when the Sun, aſter having withdrawn his cheering beams, and expoſed us to the uncomſortable cold and ſtlorms oſ winter, begins to turn toward us, and to bring back the pleaſures of ſpring, and by his genial warmth to give us the hopes of another ſeaſon of productive fertility. Cæſar therefore choſe  In almoſt all nutions this ſcaſon is diſlinguiſed by feſtivities of various kinds. Many of theſe were incorporated with the religious ceremonies of the Chriſtian Church by our eccleſiuſties, beeauſe they ſaw that the people were too much wedded to them, to relinquiſh them with good humour. Among ouſclves, there are pretty evident traces of druidical ſuperſtition. We know that, in ancient times, the chief druid, attended by erowds of the peorle, went into the weuds in the night of the winter ſolſlice, and with a golden ſickle cut a choſe for the beginning of his kalendar, a year in which there was a new Moon following cloſe upon the vinter ſolſtice. This opportunity was aſforded him in the ſecond year oſ his dictatorſhip, and the 707th year fſrom the foundation of Rome. He found that there would be a new Moon 6 days after the winter ſolſtice. He made this new Moon the 1ſt of January of his ſirſt year. But, to do this, he was obliged to keep the preceding year dragging on 90 days longer than uſual, containing 444 Dd 2 days, branch of the miſelto oſ the oak, called Ghiah in Celtic, and carried it in triumph to the ſacred grove. The people cut for themſelves, and carried home their prize, conſecrated by the druid. At preſent, the pews of our churches, and even the chambers of our cottages, are ornamentcd with this plant at Chriſtmas. In France, till wichin theſe 150 years, there were ſtill more perceptible tracess A man perſonating a prince (Roi ſollet) ſet out from the village into the woods, bawling out, Au Gui menicæ—le Roi le vext. The monks followed in the rear ith their begging-boxes called ire-liri. They rattled them, crying tire-liri; aud the people put money into them, under the fiction that it was for a lady in labour. People in diſguiſe (Guiſards) forced into the houſes, playing antie tricks, and bullicd the indwellers for money, and ſor choice victuals, crying tire-lisnitire-lirimaini du blane, et point du Lis. They made ſuch riots, that the Eiſiop of Soiſſuns repreſented the enormities to Louis XIV., and the practice was forbidden. May not the guiſcarts of Edinburgh, with their ery of  Hog menay, tioll lollay; gie's your hite bread, none days, inſtead of the old number 354. As all theſe days were unprovided with ſolemnities, the year precæding Cæſars kalendar was called rhe year of confuſion. Cæſar alſo, for a particular reaſon, choſe to make his ſirſt year conſiſt of 366 days, and he inſerted the intercalary day between the 23d8 and 24th of February, chooſing that particular day, as a ſeparation of the luſtrations and other piaculums to the infernal deities, which ended with the 23d, from the worſhip of the celeſtial deities, which took place on the 24th of February. The 24th was the ſixtus ante talendas neomenias Martias. His inſerted day, anſwering civil purpoſcs alone, had no ceremonies, nor any name appropriated to it, and was to be conſidered merely as a ſupernumerary ſextus ante kalendas. Hence the year which had this intercalation was ſtyled an annus biſſextilis, a biſextile yea. With reſpect to the reſt of the year, Cæſar being alſo Pontifex Maximus (an oſſice of vaſt political importance), or rather, having all the power of the ſtate in his own perſon, ordered that attention ſould be given to the days of the month only, and that the religious feſtivals alone ſhould be regulated by the ſacred college. He aſſigned to each month the number oſ days which has been continued in them ever ſince. 335. Such is the ſimple kalendar of Julius Cæſar. Simple however as it was, his inſtructions were miſunderſtood, or not attended to, during the horrors of the civil wars. Inſtead of intercalating every fourth year, the intercalation was thrice made on every ſucceeding third year. The miſtake was diſcovered by Auguſtus, and corrected in the beſt manner poſſible, by omitting three intercalations during the next twelve years. Since that time, the kalendar has been continued without interruption over all Europe till 1582. The years, conſiſting of 365% days, were called Jalian years; and it was ordered, by an edict of Auguſtus, that this kalendar ſhall be uſed through the whole empire, and that the years ſhall be reckoned by the reigns of the diſferent emperors. This edict was but imperfectly executed in the diſtant provinces, where the rative princes were allowed to hold a vaſſal ſovereignty. In Egypt particularly, although the court obeyed the edict, the people followed their former kalendars and epochs. Ptolemy the aſtronomer retains the reckoning of Hipparchus, by Egyptian years, reckoned from the death of Aloxander the Great. We muſt underſtand all theſe modes of computation, in order to make uſe of the ancient aſtronomical obſervations. A compuriſon of the diſferent epochs will be given as we ſiniſh the ſubject. 336. The æra adopted by the Roman Empire when Chriſtianity became the religion of the ſtate, was not ſinally ſettled till a good while aſter Conſtantine. Dionyſius Exiguus, a French monk, after conſulting all proper documents, conſiders the 25th of December of the forty-fifth year of Julius Cæſar as the day of our Saviour's nativity. The 1ſt of January of the forty-ſixth year of Cæſar is thereſore the beginning oſ the æra now uſcd by the Chriſtian world. Any event happening in this year is dated anm Domini prim. As Cæſar had made Lis ſirſt year a biſextile, the year of the nativity was alſo biſextile; and the ſirſt year oſf our æra begins the ſhort cycle of four years, ſo that the fourth year of our æra is biſſoxtile. That we may connect this æra with all the others employed by aſtronomers or hiſtorians, it will be enough to know that this ſirſt year of the Chriſtian æra is the 4714th oſ the Julian period. It colncides with the fourth year of the 194th Olympiad till midſummer. It coincides with the 753d ab urbæ condita, till April 215t. It colncides with the ma8th of Nabonaſſar till Auguũt 251. It colncides with the 324th ciil year of Egypt, reckoncd ſrom the death of Alexander the Great. In the arrangement of epochs in the aſtronomical tables, the years before the Chriſtian æra are counted backwards, calling the year of the nativity o, the preceding year 1, &. But chronologiſts more frequently reckon the year of the mativity the firſt beſore Chriſt. Thus, Years of Ceſur an 42, 43, 44 45, 46, 47, 48, 49 Aſtronomers..... 4. 3, 2, 1I, o, I, 23;,3, 4 Chronologiſts.... 5 4. 3, 2, I, I, 2, 3, à4 This kalendar of Julius Cæſar has manifeſt advantages planted all others among the weſtern nations. Many other nations had perceived that the year of ſcaſons contained more than 365 days, hut had not fallen on eaſy methods of making the correction. It ĩs a very remarkable fact, that the Mexicans, when diſcovered by the Spaniards, employed a eycle which ſuppoſcd that the year contained 3655 days. For, at the end of ſifty-two ycars, they add thirteen days, which is equivalent to adding one every ſourth year. In their hieroglyphical ammals, their years are grouped into parcels of four, cach of which has a particular mark. 337. But although the Julian conſtruction of the civil year greatly excelled all that had gone beſore, it was not perfect, becauſe it contained 11 147 more than the period of ſeaſons. This, in 128 ycars, amounts exactly to a day. In 1582, it amounted to 12. The equinoxes and ſolſtices no longer happened on thoſe days of the month that were intended for them. The celebration of the church feſtivals was altogether deranged. For it muſt now be remarked, that there occurred the ſame embarraſſment on account of the lunar months, as formerly in the Pagan world. The Council of Nice had decreed that the great ſeſtival, Eaſter, ſhould be celebrated in conformity with the Jewiſh paſſover, vhich was regulated by the new moon ſollowing the vernal equinox. All the principal ſeſtivals are regulated by Eaſter Sunday. But by the deviation of the Julian kalendar from the ſeaſons, and the words of the decree of the Nicene Council, the celebration of Eaſter loſt all connexion with the Paſſover. For the decree did not ſay,  The firſt Sunday after the full moon following the vernal equinox, but the firſt Sunday after the full moon following the 21ſt of March. It frequently happcned that Eaſter and the Paſſover were ſix weeks apart. This was corrected by Pope Gregory the XIII. in 1582, by bringing the 21ſt of March to the equinox again. He ſirſt cut off the ten days which had accumulated ſince the Council of Nice; and, to prevent this accumulation, he directed the intercalation of a biſſextile to be omitted on every centurial year. But the error of a Julian century containing 36525 days, is not a whole day, but 18' 40. Therefore the correction introduces an error of 5 200. To prevent this from accumulating, the omiſſion of the centurial intercalation iĩs limited to the centuries not diviſible by four. Therefore 1600, 2000, 2400, &c. are ſtill biſſextile years; but 1700, I800, 19”0, 2 100, 2200, &c. are common years. There ſtill remains an error, amounting to a day in 144 centuries. The kalendar is now ſuſſiciently accurate for all purpoſes oſ hiſtory and recordcand even for aſtronomy, becauſe the tropical year of ſeaſons is ſubject to a periodical inequality. 338. A correction, much more accurate than the Gregorian, occurred to Omar, a Perſian aſtronomer at the court of Prince Gelala Eddin Melek Schah. Omar propoſed always to delay to the thirty-third year the intercalation which ſhould have been made in the thirtyſecond. This is equivalent to omitting the Julian intercalation altogether on the 128th year. This method is extremely ſimple, and ſcrupulouſly accurate. For the error of II' 15 of the Julian year amounts preciſely to a day in 128 years. It diſfers from the truth only one minute in 120 years. This correction took place in Ao D 1079, at the ſame time that the Arab Alhazen was reforming the ſcience of aſtronomy in Spain. The Gregorian kalendar, however, has leſs chance of being forgotten or miſtaken. Centurial years are remarkable, and call the attention, even by the unuſual ſound of the words. The thirty-ſecond year has nothing remarkable, and may be overlooked. 339. It now appears that certain attentions are neceſſary for avoiding miſtakes, vhen we would appeal to very diſtant obſervationsn. We muſt know the accurate interval, however large. Although one hundred Julian years contain 36525 days, we muſt keep in mind that between 1500 and 1600 ten days are wanting; and that each of the centuries 1700 and i800 alſo want a day. The interval from the Beginning of our æra and A. D. 1582 needs no attention; but that between 1505 and 1805 wants twelve days of three Julian centuries. 340.. We muſt alſo be careful, in uſing the ancient obſervations, to connect the years of our Lord with the years heſore Chriſt in a proper manner. An eclipſæ mentioned by an aſtronomer as having happened on the 1ſt of February anno 3t0 A. C. muſt be conſidered as happening in the forty-ſccond year of Julius Cæſar. But iſ the ſame thing is mentioned by a hiſtorian or chronologiſt, it is much more probable that it was in the fortythird ycar oſ Cæſar. It was chieſly to prevent all ambignitics of this kind that Scaliger contrived what he called the Julian period. This is a number made by multiplying together the numbers called the Lunar or Metonic cycle, the ſular eycle, and the indiction. The Linar cycle is 19, and the ſirſt year of our Lord was the ſccond of this cyclee. The ſolar cycle is 28, being the number of years in which the days of the month return to the ſame days of the week. As the year contains ſiſty-two weeks and one day, the ſirſt day of the year (or any day of any month) ſalls back in the week one day every year, till interrupted by the intercalation in a biſſextile yar. This makes it fall back two days in that year; and thereſore it will not return to the ſame day till aſter four times ſeven, or twenty-eight years. The ſirſt year of our Lord was the tenth of this cycle. The inDiCTION is a cycle of ſifteen years, at the beginning of which a tax was levied over the Roman Empire. It took place A. D. 312; and if reckoned backward, it would have begun three years before the Chriſtian æra. The year of this cycle for any year of the Chriſtian æra, will therefore be had by adding three to the year, and bers is 7980; and it is plain that this number of years muſt elapſe before a year can have the ſame place in all the three cycles. If therefore we know the place of theſe cycles belonging to any year, we can tell what year it is of the Julian period. The firſt year of our æra was the ſecond of the lunar cycle, the tenth of the ſolar, and the fourth of indiction, and the 4714th of the Julian period. By this we may arrange all the remarkable æras as follows. I.P. O C¢ I. A.C. ZEra of the Olympſads... 3038 18  8 775,776 Foundation of Rome... 30651 13 9I 752,753 Nabonaſſar...... . 3967 191537 746,747 Death of Alexander... 4390 323,324 Firſt of Julius Cæſar... 4669 21 14 4 44, 43 A. Dom. I.......... 4714 10o 2 4 341. Did the Metonic cycle of the Moon correſpond exactly with our year, it would mark for any year the number of years which have elapſed ſince it was new moon on the i1ſt of January. But its want oſ perfect accuracy, the vicinity of an intercalation, and the lunar equations, ſometimes cauſe an error of two days. It is much uſed, however, for ordinary calculations for the Church holidays. To find the golden number, add one to the year of our Lord, divide the ſum by 9, the remainder is the golden number. If there be no remainder, the golden number is 19. 342. Another number, called Epact, is alſo uſed for facilitating the calculation of new and full moon in a groſs way. The epact is nearly the moons age on the 1ſt oſ January. To ſind it, multiply the golden number by 11, add 19 to the product, and divide by 30. The remainder ĩs the epact. Enowing, by the epact, the Moon's age on the iſt of Jannary, and the day of the year correſponding to any day of a month, it is eaſy to find the Moons age on that day, by dividing the double of the ſum of this number and the epact by 59. The half remainder is nearly the Moons age. Although theſe rude computations do not correſpond with the motions of the two luminaries, they deſerve notice, being the methods employed by the rules of the Church for ſettling the moveable Church feſtivals. Of ihe proper Motions of the Planets. 343. The planets are obſerved to change their ſituations in the ſtarry heavens, and move among the ſigns pf the zodiac, never receding far from the ecliptic. Their motions are exceedingly irregular, as may be ſeen by fig. 65. A, which repreſents the motion of the planet Jupiter, from the beginning of 1708 to the begimming of 1716. EK repreſents the ecliptic, and the initial letters of the months are ꝑut to thoſe points of the apparent path where the planet was ſcen on the firſt day oſf each m/nth. It appears that, on the iſt of January 17c8, the planet was moving ſlowly eaſtward, and became ſtationary ahout the middle of the month, in the ſecond degree of Libra. It then turned weſtward, gradually increaſing its weſterly motion, till about the middle of March, when it Was in oppoſition to the Sun, at R, all the while deviating farther from the ecliptic toward the north. It now ſlackened its weſterly motion every day,  and was again ſtationary about the 20th of May, in the twenty-ſecond degree of Virgo, and had come nearer to the ecliptic. Jupiter now moved eaſtward, nearly parallel to the ecliptic, gradually accelerating in his motion, till the beginning of October, when he was in conjunction with the Sun at D, about the eleventh degree of Libra. He now ſlackened his progreſſive motion every day, till he was again ſtationary, in the ſecond degree of Scorpio, on the 12th or i13th of February 1709. He then moved weſtward, was again in oppoſition, in the twenty- ſoventh degree of Libra, about the middle of April. He became ſtationary, about the end of June, in the twenty-ſirſt degree of Libra; and from this place he again proceeded eaſt. ward; was in conjunction about the beginning of November, very near the ſtar in the ſouthern ſcale oſ Libra; and, on the iſt of January 1710, he was in the twentyfourth degree of Scorpio. This figure will very nearly correſpond with the apparent motions of the planet in the ſame months of 1803 and 1804. Jupiter will go on in this manner, forming a loop in his path in every thirteenth month; and he is in oppoſition to the Sun, when in the nmiddle of each loop. His regreſs in each loop is about 10 degrees, and his progreſſive motion is continued about 40. He gradually approaches the ecliptic, croſſes it, deviates to the ſouthward, then returns towards it; eroſſes it, about ſix years aſter his former croſlng, and in about twelve years comes to where he was at the beginning of theſe obſervations. 344. The other planets, and particularly Venus and and Mercury, are ſtill more irregular in their apparent motions, and have but few circumſtances of general reſemblance. The ſirſt general remark which can be made on theſe intricate motions is, that a planet always appears largeſt vhen in the points R, R, R, which are in the middle of its retrograde motions. Its diameter gradually diminiſhes, and becomes the leaſt of all when in the points D, D, D, which are in the middie of its direct motions. Hence we infer that the planet is neareſt to the Tarth when in the middle of its retrograde motion, and ſartheſt from it when in the middle oſ its direct motion. It may alſo be remarked, that a planet is always in conjunction with the Sun, or comes to our meridian at noon, when in the middle oſ its direct motions. The planets Venus and Mercury are alſo in conjunction with the Sun when in the middle of their retrograde motions. But the planets Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, are always in oppoſition to the Sun, or come to our meridian at riidnight, when in the middle of their retrograde motions. Their ſituations alſo, when ſtationary, are always ſimilar, relative to the Sun. Theſe appearances in all the planetary motions have therefore an evident relation to the Sun's place. 345. The ancient aſtronomers were of opinion that the perfection of nature required all motions to be uniform, as far as the purpoſe in view would permit. The planetary motions muſt thereſore be uniſorm, in a ſigure that is uniform; and the aſtronomers maintained that the obſerved irregularities were only apparent. Their method for reconciling theſe with their principle of perfection is very obviouſly ſuggeſted by the repreſentation here given of the motion of Jupiter. They taught that the planet moves uniformly in the circumference of a circle qr5 (ſig. 40.) in a year, while the centre Q of this circle is carried uniformly round the Earth T, in the circumference of another circle QA L. The circle Q AL is called the DEFERENT CIRCLE, and q75 is called the EPICYCLE. They explained the deviation from the ecliptic, by ſaying that the deferent and the epicycle were in planes diſferent from that of the ecliptic. By various trials of diſferent proportions of the deferent and the epicycle, they hit on ſuch dimenſions as produced the quantity of retrograde motion that was obſerved to be combined with the general progreſs in the order oſ the ſigns of the zodiacDBut another inequality was obſerved. The arch of the heavens intercepted between two ſuceæſive oppoſitions of Jupiter, (for example), was obſerved to be variable, being always leſs in a certain part of the æodiac, and gradually increaſing to a maximum ſtate in the oppoſite part of the zodiac. In order to correſpond with this SECOND INEQUALITY, as it was called, and yet not to imply any inequality of the motion of the epicycle in the circumference of the deferent circle, the aſtronomers placed the Earth not in, but at a certain diſtance from, the centre of the deferent; ſo that an equal arch between two ſucceeding oppoſitions ſiould ſubtend a ſmaller angle, when it is on the other ſide of that centre. Thus, the unequal motion of the epieycle was explained in the ſame way as the Su's unequal motion in his annual orbit. The line drawn through the Earth and the centre of the deferent is called the line of the planet's aPsiDES, and its extremities are called the apogee and perigee of the deferent as in the caſe of the Sun's orbit (292.) In this manner, they at laſt compoſed a ſet of motions which agreed tolerably well with obſervation. The celebrated geometer Apollonius gave very judicious directions how to proportion the epicycle to the deferent circle. But they ſeem not to have been attended to, even by Ptolemy; and the aſtronomers remained very ignorant of any method of conſtruction which agreed ſuſſiciently with the phenomena, till about the thirteenth century, when the doctrine of epicycles was cultivated with more care and ſkill. A very full and diſtinct account is given of all the ingenious contrivances of the ancient aſtronomers for explaining the irregularities of the celeſtial motions, in the firſt part of Br Small's Hiſtory oſ the Diſcoveries of Kepler, publiſhed in 1803. Of ibe Motions of Venus and Mercury. 346. Verius has been ſometimes ſeen moving acroſs the Sums diſ from eaſt to veſt, in the form of a round black ſpot, with an apparent diameter of about 5. A few days after this has been obſerved, Venus is ſeen in the morning, riſing a little before the Sun, in the form of a fime creſcent, with the convexity turned toward the Sun. She moves gradually weſtard, ſeparating from the Sun, with a retarded motion, and the creſcent becomes more full In about ten weeks, ſhe has moved 46° weſt of the Sun, and is now a ſemicircle, and her diameter is 26l. She now ſeparates no farther from the Sun, but moves eaſtward, with a motion gradually accelerated, and ſhe gradually diminiſhes in apparent diameter. She overtakes the Sun, about 98 months after having been ſeen on his diſk. Some time after, Venus is ſeen in the evening, eaſt of the Sun, round, but very ſmall. She moves eaſtward, and increaſes in apparent diameter, but loſes of her roundneſs, till ſhe gets about 46° eaſt of the Sun, when ſhe is again a ſemicircle, having the convexity toward the Sun. She now moves weſtard, increaſing in diameter, but becoming a creſcent, like the waneing Moon; and, at laſt, after a period of nearly 584 days, comes again into conjunction with the Sun, with an apparent diameter of 59. 347- From theſe phenomena we conclude that the Sun is included within the orbit of Venus, and is not far from its centre, while the Earth is without this orbit. Therefore, while the Sun revolves round the Earth, Venus revolves round the Sun. The time of the revolution of Venus round the Sun may be deduced from the interval which elapſes between two or more conjunctions, by help of the following theorem: i 348. Let two bodies A and B revolve uniformly in the ſame direction, and let a and b be their reſpective periods, of which b is the leaſt, and ? the interval between two ſucceſſive conjunctions or oppoſitions. at Then b æ v u For the angular motions are inverſely proportional to the periodic times. Therefore the angular motions of A and B are as : and : And, ſince they move in the ſame direction, the ſynodical or relative motion is the difference of their angular motions. Thereſore the fun. I I I I I damental equation is 77 Hence 77 + æ a +t at 1I1II tbD + nd iæ— aniæIL æ , at a +t a th ht and a m= ar " We may alſo calculate the ſynodical period , when II I we know the real periods of cach. For- 7B 325 a1 ab - 1 r =. This gives for the periodic time of Venus round the Sun 2249 16 49 13'. 349. But it is evident that if this angular motion is not uniform, the interval between two ſucceſſive conjunctions may chance to give a falſe meaſure of the period. But, by obſerving many conjunctions, in various parts of the heavens, and by dividing the interval between the firſt and Iaſt by the number of intervals between each (taking care that the fir?t and Iaſt ſall be nearly in the ſame part oſ the heavens), it is evident that the inequalities being diſtributed among them all, the quotient may be taken as nearly an exat medium. Hence ariſes the great value oſ ancient obſervations. In eight years we have five conjunctions of Venus, and ſhe is only 1° 32 ſhort of the place of the firſt conjunction. The period dęduced from the conjunctions in 1761 and 1769, ſcarcely differs from that deduced from the conjunctions in 1639 and 1761. But the other planets require more diſtant obſervations. 350. Venus does not move uniſormly in her orbit. For, if the place of Venus in the heavens be obſerved in a great number of ſucceſſive conjunctions with the Sun ſat which time her place in the ecliptic, as ſeen from the Sun, is either the Sun's place, as ſeen from the Earth, or the oppoſite to it), we find that her changes of place are not proportional to the elapſed times. By obſervations of this kind, we learn the inequality of the angular motion of Venus round the Sun, and hence can ſind the equations for every point of the orbit of Venus, and can thence deduce the poſition of Venus, as ſeen from the Sun, for any given inſtant. This however requires more obſervations oſ this kind than we are yet poſſeſſed of, becauſe her conjunctions happen ſo nearly in the ſame points of her orbit, that great part of it is leſt without obſervations of this kind. But we have other obſervations of almoſt equal value, namely, thoſe of her greateſt elongations from the Sun. There is none of the planets, thereſore, of which the equations (Which indeed are very ſmall) are more accurately determined, 351. We can now determine the ſorm and poſition of the orbit. For we can obſerve the place of the Sun, or the poſition of the line ES (ſig. 41.), joining the Earth and Sun. We know the length of this line (29I.) We can obſerve the GEOCENTRIC place of Venus, or the poſition of the line ED joining the Earth and Venus. And we can compute (350.) the HELIOCENTRIC place of Venus, or the poſition of the line S C joining Venus and the Sun. Venus muſt be in V, the interſection of theſe two lines; and thereſore that point of her orbit is determined. j 352. By ſuch obſervations Kepler diſcovered that the orbit of Venus is an ellipſe, haying the Sun in one focus, city 510, meaſured on a ſcale of which the Sun's mean diſtance from the Earth is 100co0. 353. The upper apſis of the orbit is called the APHELION, and the lower apſis is called the PERIHELION of Venus. 354. The line of the apſides has a ſlow motion eaſtward, at the rate of 2° 49' 46' in a century. 355. The orbit of Venus is inclined to the ecliptic at an angle of 3°20, and the nodes move weſtward about 31' in a yeas. 356. Venus moves in this orbit ſo as to deſcribe round the Sun areas proportional to the times. 357. The planet Mercury reſembles Venus in all the circumſtances of her apparent motion; and we make ſimilar inferences with reſpect to the real motions. His orbit is diſcovered to be an ellipſe, having the Sun in one focus. The ſemitranſverſe axis is 38710, and the eccentricity 7950. The apſides move eaſtward 1° 57 20 in a century. The orbit is inclined to the ecliptic 7°. The nodes move weſtward 45 in a year. The periodic time is 87 23 15'37; and areas are deſcribed proporjional to the times. Of the proper Motions of the Superior Planets. 358. Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, exhibit phenomena conſiderably diſferent from thoſe exhibited by Mercury and Venus. 1. They come to our meridian both at noon and at midnightt. When they come o our meridian at noon, and are in the ecliptic, they are never ſeen croſſing the Suns diſk. Hence we infer, that their orbits include both the Sun and the Earth. 2. They are always retrograde when in oppoſition, and direct when in conjunction. The planet Jupiter may ſerve as an example of the way in which their real motions may be inveſtigated. 359: lupiter is an opaque body, viſible by means of the reflected light of the Sun. For the ſhadows of ſome of the heavenly bodies are fometimes obſerved on his diſk, and his ſhadow frequently falls on them. 360. His apparent diameter, when in oppoſition, is ahout 46, and, when in conjunction, it is about 31, and his diſk is always round. Hence we infer, that he is neareſt when in oppoſition, and that his leaſt and greateſt diſtance are nearly as two to three. The Earth is, therefore, far removed from the centre of his motion; and, if we endeavour to explain his motion by means of a deferent circle and an epicycle (), the radius of the deferent muſt be about five times the radius of the epicycle. 361. Since Jupiter is always retrograde when in oppoſition, and direct when in conjunction, his poſition, with reſpect to the centre of his epicycle, muſt be ſimilar to the poſition of the Sun with reſpect to the Earth. His motion, therefore, in the epicycle, has a dependence on the motion of the Sun; and his motion, as ſeen from the Sun, muſt be ſimpler than as ſeen from the Earth. His poſition, as ſeen from the Sun, may be accurately obſerved in every oppoſition and conjunction. It was very natural for the ancient aſtronomers of Greece to infer, from what has been ſaid juſt now, that the poſition of Jupiter, in reſpect of the centre of his epicycle, was the ſame as that of the Sun in reſpect of the Earth, not only in oppoſition and conjunction, but in every other ſituation. For, in twelve years, we ſee it to be ſo in the oppoſitions obſerved in 12 parts of the heavens, and in 83 years we ſee it in 76 parts. It is very improbable, therefore, that it ſhould be otherwiſe in the intervals. The motion of a ſuperior planet may be explained upon theſe principles in the following manner: Let T (fig. 40.) be the Earth, and æx:9 v x æ be the Sun's orbit. Alſo, let A, B, C, h, E, F, G, H, I, be the places of the centre of the epicycle in the circumference of the deſerent when the ſun is in æ 8, æ 3, n 9 n x æ, make Aa parallel to Tæ, and BS parallel to T8, and C⸗ parallel to Tæ, &c., and make theſe lines of a length that is duly proportioned (by the Apollonian rule) to the radius TA of the deſerent circle. When the Sun is in æ, 8, , &c. the centre of the epicycle is in A, B, C, &c. and the planet is in a, b, c, &c.; and the dotted curve a bc d e fg h a  is its path in abſolute ſpace between two ſucceeding oppoſitions to the Sun, viz. in a, and in à. 362. IF we make the radius of Jupiter's deferent circle to that of the epicycle, as 52 to 10, the epityclical motion ariſing from this conſtruction will very nearly agree with the obſervation. Only we may obſerve that the oppoſitions which ſucceed each other near the conſtellation Virgo, are leſs diſtant from one another than thoſe obſerved in the oppoſite part of the heavens; ſo that the centre of the epicycle ſeems to move ſlower in the firſt caſe than in the Iaſt. To reconcile this with the perſfect uniformity of the motion of that centre in the circumference of the deſerent circle, the ancient aſtronomers ſaid that the earth was not exactly in the centre oſ the defſerent, but ſo placed that the equable motion of the centre of the epicycle appeared ſlower, becauſe it ĩs then more remote; and after various trials, they fixed on a degree of eccentricity for the deferent, which accorded better than any other with the obſervations, and really differed very little from them. Copernicus ſhews that their hypotheſis for Jupiter never deviates more than half a degree ſrom obſervation, if it be properly employed. They found that the epicycle moved round the deferent ferent in 43325 days, with an equation gradually increaſing to near õ degrees; ſo that if the place of the epicycle be calculated for a quarter of a revolution from the apogee, at the mean rate of 5' per day, it will be found too far advanced by near ten weeks motion. 363. But the ancient aſtronomers had no ſuch data for determining the abſolute magnitude of the deferent circles and epicycles for the ſuperior planets, as Mercury and Venus afforded them. The rules given them by Apollonius only taught them what proportion the epicycle of each planet muſt have to its deferent circle, but gave no information as to the abſolute magnitude of either, or the proportion between the deſerent circles of any two ſuperior planets. Accordingly, no two ancient aſtronomers agree in their meaſures, farther than in ſaying that Saturn is farther off than Jupiter, and Jupiter than Mars. This they inferred ſfrom their longer periods. AH that they had to take care of was to make their ſizes ſuſficiently different, ſo that the epicycles of two neighbouring planets ſhould not croſs and juſtle each other. Yet they might eaſily have come very near the truth, by a ſmall and very allowable addition to their hypotheſis of epicyclical motion, namely, by ſuppoſing that the epicycle of each planet is equal to the Sun's orbit. This was quite allowable. 364. If we do this, we ſhall deduce conſequences that are very remarkable, and which would have put the ancient aſtronomy on a footing very near to perfection. For, if Cæ (fig. 40.) be not only parallel to Tæ, but alſo equal to it, then CT æc is a parallelogram, and æ⸗ is equal and parallel toT C. The bearing (to expreſs it as a mariner) and diſtance of Jupiter from the Sun, is at all times the ſame with the bearing and diſtance of the centre of his epicycle from the Earth; and Jupiter is always found in an orbit round the Sun, equal and ſimilar to the deferent orbit round the Earth. Thus, æ a is equal to TA; 85 to TB; æc to TC, &c. with reſpect to all the points of the looped curve. If the Earth be in the centre of the deferent, the diſtance of Jupiter from the Sun is always the ſame, and he may be ſaid to deſcribe a circle round the Sun, while the Sun moves round the Earth. Nay, it reſults from the equality of Aa to Tæ, of Bb to T4ꝶ, &c., that whatever eccentricity, or whatever form it has been thought neceſſary to aſſign to the deferent, the diſtances æa, à6, æc, &c. will ſtill be reſpectively equal to TA, TB, TC, Xc. The cirele which the aſtronomers called the deferent, becauſe it is ſuppoſed to carry Jupiter's epicycle round the Earth, may be ſuppoſed to accompany the Sun, being carried round by him in a year, the line of its apſides (362.) keeping parallel to itſelf, that is, in our figure, to TA. And thus, the motion of Jupiter round the Sun will be ihcomparably more ſimple than the Iooped curve round the Earth; for it will be preciſely the motion which was given by the aſtronomers to the centre of Jupiters epicycle. The motion of Jupiter in abſolute ſpace is indeed the ſame looped curve in both caſes; but the way of conceiving it is much more ſmple. 365. This ſuppoſition of the equ-lity of Jupiters epicycle to the Sun's orbit, and the paralleliſm of C⸗ to Tæ in every poſition of Jupiter, are ſully verified by the modern diſcoveries of his ſatellites. Theſe little planets revolve round him with perſect regularity, and their ſfhadows frequently fall on his diſk, and they are often obſcured by his ſnadow. This ſiews the poſition of Jupiters ſadow at all times, and, conſequently, Jupiters poſition in reſpect oſ the Sun. This we ſind at all times to be parallel to the ſuppoſed poſition of the centre of his epicycle. Thus æ c is found parallel to TC. 366. We now can tell the preciſe point in which Jupiter is found in any moment of time. Having made the radius Tæ to the radius TA in the due proportion of i10 to 52, and having placed the Earth at the proper diſtance from the centre of the deferent QAL, we can calculate (298.) the poſition and length of the line Tæ joining the Earth with the Sun. We can draw the line T C to the ſuppoſed centre of Jupiters epicycle, having learned the law or equation of the ſuppoſed motion of that centre by our obſervation of his oppoſitions in all quarters of the ecliptic (362.), and we then draw æV parallel to it. This muſt paſs through Jupiter, or Jupiter muſt be ſomewhere in this line. We obſerve IJupimr, however, in the direction TZ. Jupiter muſt thereG fore be in the interſection c of the lines æV and TZ. And then we can meaſure c æ, Jupiter's diſtance ſfrom the Sun. 367. Kepler, by taking this method with a ſeries of obſervations made by Tycho Brahè, diſcovered that Iupiter was always found in the circumference of an ellipſe, having the Sun in its focus. Its ſemitranſverſe axis is 520098, the mean diſtance of the Earth from the Sun being ſuppoſed 100000. Its eccentricity is 23277Its inclination to the ecliptic is 1° 20, and the nodes move eaſtward about I' in a year. 368. The revolution in this orbit is completed in 43325 days, and areas are deſcribed proportional to the times. 369. Proceeding in the ſame manner, we diſcover that the planets Mars, Saturn, and the one diſcovered by Dr Herſchel in 1781, are always ſound in the circumſerence of ellipſes, with the Sun in one focus, and deſcribe round him arcas proportional to the times. The chief circumſtances of their motions are ſtated as follows: Mean Ditanie. Eccetricity. Period in Day Georgian planet 1908584 99738 30456,7 Saturm ---- 953941 53210 10759,27 Mars - ---- I52369 14218 686,98 370. Two other bodies have been lately detected in the planetary regions, revolving round the Sun in orbits which do not ſeem very eccentric, and ſeem placed between thoſe of Mars and Jupiter. The ſirſt was obſerved in 1801 by Mr Piazzi of Palermo, and by him named Ceres. The other was diſcovered in 1802 by Mr OIberg of Bremen, who has called it Pallas. They are exceedingly ſmall, and we have ſeen too little of their motions as yet to enable us to ſtate their elements with any preciſion. 371. Thus it has been diſcovered, that, while the Sun revolves round the Earth, the ſix planets now mentioned are always found in the circumſerences of ellipſes, having the Sun in one focus; and that they deſcribe round the Sun areas proportional to the times. 372. But now, inſtead of ſuppoſing that the centre of a ſmall epicycle is carried round the circumference of a greater deferent circle, diſferent for each planet, we may rather conſider the Sun's orbit round the Earth as the only deferent circle, and ſuppoſe that the planets deſcribe their great elliptical epicycles round him with diſerent periods, while he moves round the Earth in a year. The real motions of the planets are ſtill the ſame looped curves in both caſes. For, in either caſe, the motion of a planet is compounded of the ſame motions. But the latter ſuppoſition is much more probablee We can ſcarcely conceive the motion of Jupiter in the epicycle ꝗ 7 5 as having any phyſical relution to its centre, a mere mathematical point oſ ſpacee We camnot conſider this point as having any phyſical properties that ſhall influence the motions of the planet. This point alſo is ſuppoſed to be in motion, carrying with it the influence by which the planet is retained in the circumſerence of the epicycleThis is another inconceivable circumſtance. This combination of circles, therefore, cannot be conſidered as any thing but a mere mathematical hypotheſis, to furniſh ſome means of calculution, or for the delineation of the looped path of the planct. Accordingly, the Eſt propoſors of theſe epicycles, ſenſible of the mere nothingneſs of their centre, and the impoſſibility of a nothing moving in the circumſerence of a circle, and drawing a planet along with it, farther ſuppoſed that the epicycles were vaſt ſolid tranſparent globes, and that the planet was a luminous point or ſtar, ſticking in the ſurface of this globe. And, to complete the hypotheſis, they ſuppoſed that the globe turned round its centre, carrying the planet round with it, and thus produced the direct and retrograde motions that we obſerve. Ariſtotle taught that this motion was effected by the genius of the planet reſiding in the globe, and directing it, as the mind of man directs his motions. But, further, to account for the motion oſ this globe in the circumference of the deferent, the ancient philoſophers ſuppoſed that the deferent was alſo a vaſt cryſtalline, or, t leaſt, tranſparent material ſpherical ſhell, turning round the earth, and that cyclic globe within its ſolid ſubſtance, not adhering, but at liberty to turn round its own centre. This hypotheſis, though more like the dream of a feveriſh man than the thoughts of one in his ſenſes, was received as unqueſtionable, from the time of Ariſtotle till that of Copernicus. It is ſcarcely credible that thinking men ſhould admit its truth for a minute, even in its moſt admiſſible form. But, as the art of obſerving improved, it was ſound neceſſary to add another epicycle to the one already admitted, in order to account for an annuàl inequality in the epicyęlical motion. This was a ſmall tranſparent globe, placed where Ariſtotle placed the planet, and the planet was ſtuck on its ſurface. Even this was found inſuſficient, and another ſet of epicycles were added, till, in ſhort, the heavens were ſilled with ſolid matter. It is needleſs to ſay any more of this epicyclical doctrine and machinery. 373. But the other mode of conceiving the planetary motions, while it equally furniſhes the means of caculation or graphical operation, has much more the appearance of reality. The Sun's motion is round the Earth, which we are naturally diſpoſed to think the centre of the world; and the planets revolve, not round a mathematical point, a nothing, but round the Sun, a real, and very remarkable ſubſtance. 374. Kepler, to whom we are indebted for this diſcovery tion of areas, alſo obſerved that the ſquares of the periodic times in theſe cllipſes are proportional to the cubes of the mean diſtances from the Sun. He alſo obſerved the ſame analogy with reſpect to the Sun's period and diſtance ſrom the Earth. 375. The diſtances here alluded to, are all taken from a ſcale of equal parts, of which the Sun's mean diſtance from the Earth, contains 100000. But aſtronomers wiſh to know the abſolute quantity of thoſe diſtances in ſome known meaſures. This may be learned by means of the parallax of any one of the planets. Thus, let Mars be in M (fig. 42.), and let his diſtance from ſome fixed ſtar C be obſerved by two perſons on the ſurface of the Earth at A and B. The difference GD of the obſerved diſtances CG, CD, will give the angle D MG, or its equal AM B. The angles MAB and MB A are given by obſervation, and the line AB is given; and therefore AM, and conſequently EM, may be computed in miles. The tranſit of Venus acroſs the Sun's diſk aſfords much better obſervations for this purpoſe. For, at the time, Venus is much nearer to the Earth than Mars is when in oppoſition, their diſtances from us being nearly as 28 to 52. Therefore the diſtance between the obſervers will ſubtend a larger angle at Venus. This may be meaſured by the diſtance between the apparent tracks of Venus acroſs the Sun's diſk. A ſpectator in Lapland, for example, ſees Venus move in the line CD 241 (fig. 43.), while one at the Cape of Good Hope ſees her move in the line AB. Alſo, as CD is a ſhorter chord than AB, the tranſit will occupy leſs time. This diſference in time, amounting, in ſome fortunate caſes, to many minutes, will give a very exact meaſure of the interval between thoſe two chords: 376. The tranſits in 1761 and 1769 were employed for this purpoſe, at the earneſt recommendation of Dr Edmund Halley. From thoſe obſervations, combined with the proportions deduced from Keplers third law, we may aſſume the following diſtances from the Sun in Engliſh ſtatute miles, as pretty near the truth. The Earth... .......... 93,726,900 Mercury.......... 36,281,700 Venus...... .. 67,795,500 Mars  :-  I42,818,000 Jupiter.. ........ 487,472,000 Saturm............. 894, 162,000 Georgian Planet...... 1,789,982,00 Of the Secondary Planets. 377: Dupiter is obſerved to be always accompanied by four ſmall planets called sATELLITES, which revolve round him, while he revolves round the Sun. Their diſtances from Jupiter are mesſured by means of their greateſt elongations, and their periods are diſcovered by their eclipſes; when they come into his ſhaH dow, and by other methods. They are obſerved to deſcribe ellipſes, having Jupiter in one focus; and they deſcribe areas round Jupiter, which are proportional to the times. Alſo the ſquares oſ their periods are in the proportion of the cubes of their mean diſtances from Jupſter. 378. It has been diſcovered by means of the eclipſes of Jupiter's ſutellites, that light is propagated in time, and emplovs about 8 11 in moving along a line equal to the mean diſtance of the Larth ſrom the Sun. The times of the revolutions of theſe little bodies had been ſtudied with the greateſt care, on account of the eaſy and accurate means which their frequent eclipſes gave us ſor aſcertaining the longitudes of places. But it was ſound that, aſter having calculated the time of an eclipſe in conſormity to the periods, which had been moſt accurately determined, the eclipſe happened later than the calculation, in proportion as Jupiter was farther from the Earth. If an eclipſe, when Jupiter is in oppoſition, be obſerved to happen preciſely at the time calculated; an eclipſe three months before, or after, when Jupiter is in quadrature, will be obſerved to happen about eight minutes later than the calculated time. An eclipſe happening about ſix weeks before or after oppoſition, will be about four minutes later than the calculation, when thoſe about the time of Jupiters oppoſition happen at the exact time. In general, this retardation of the eclipſes is obſerved to be exactly proportional to the increaſe of Jupiter's diſtance from the Earth. It is the ſame with reſpect to all the ſatellites. This error greatly perplexed the aſtronomers, till the connexion of it with Jupiters change of diſtance was remarked by Mr Roemer, a Daniſh aſtronomer, in 1674. As ſoon as this gentleman took notice of this connexion, he concluded that the retardation of the eclipſe was owing to the time employed by the light in coming to us. The ſatellite, now eclipſed, continued to be ſeen, till the laſ reſlected light reached us, and, when the ſtream of light ceaſed, the ſatellite diſappeared, or was eclipſed. When it has paſſed through the ſndow, and is again illuminated, it is not ſeen at that inſtant by a ſpectator almoſt four hundred millions of miles oſit does not reappear to him, till the ſirſt reſlected light reaches him. It is not till about forty minutes aſter being reillluminated by the Sun, that the firſt reſlected light from the ſatellite reaches the Earth when Jupiter is in quadrature, and about thirtytwo minutes when he is in oppoſition. This ingenious inference of Mr Roemer was doubted for ſome time; but moſt of the eminent philoſophers agreed with him. It became more probable, as the motions of the ſatellites were more accurately defined; and it received complete conſirmation by Dr Bradley diſcovering another, and very difſerent conſequence of the progreſſive motion of light from the fixed ſtars and planets. This will be conſidered aſterwards; and, in the mean time, it is evinced that light, or the cauſe of viſion, is propagated in time, and requires about 16G3 miH nutes to move along the diameter of the Sun's orbit, or about 8' 11 to come from the Sun to us, moving about 200,000 miles in a ſecond. Some imagine viſion to be produced by the undulation of an elaſtic medium, as ſound is produced by the undulation of air. Others imagine light to be emitted from the luminous body, as a ſtream of water from the diſperſcr of a watering-pan. Whichever of theſe be the caſe, Light now becomes a proper ſubject of Mechanical diſcuſfion; and we may now ſpeculate about its motions, and the forces which produce and regulate them. 379. Saturn is alſo obſerved to be accompanied by ſeven ſatellites, which circulate round him in ellipſes, having Saturn in the focus. They deſcribe areas proportional to the times, and the ſquares of the periodic times are proportional to the cubes of their mean diſtances. 380. Befides this numerous band of fatellites, Saturn is alſo accompanied by a vaſt arch or ring of coherent matter, which ſurrounds him, at a great diſtance. Its diameter is about 208,000 miles, and its breadth about 40,000. It is flat, and extremely thin; and as it nines only by reſlecting the Sums light, we do not ſee it when its edge is turned towards us. Late obſervation has ſiewn it to be two rings, in the ſame plane, and almoſt united. But that they are feparated, is demonſtrated by a ſtar belng ſeæn through the interval between rhem. Its plane makes an angle of 29° or 30° with that of Saturn's orbit; and whon Saturn is in 1I? 200, or 53 200, the plane of the ring paſics through the Sun, and reflects no light to us. 381. In 1787, Dr Herſchel diſcovered two ſatellites attending the Georgian planet; and in 1798, he diſcovered four more. Their diſtances and their periodic times obſerve the laws oſ Kepler; but the poſition of their orbits is peculiarly intereſting. Inſtcad of revolving in the order of the ſigns, in planes not deviating far from the ecliptic, their orbits are almoſt, if not preciſely perpendicular to it; ſo that it cannot be ſaid that they move either in the order of the ſigns, or in the oppoſite. 382. Thus do they preſent a new problem in Phyſical Aſtronomy, in order to aſcertain the Sun's inſluence on their motionsthe interſection of their nodes, and the other diſturbances of their motions round the planet. 383. They alſo ſnew the miſtake of the Coſmogoniſts, who would willingly aſcribe the general tendency oſ the planetary motions from weſt to eaſt along the ecliptic to the inſluence of ſome general mechanical impulſion, inſtructing us how the world may be made as wve ſee it. Theſe perpendicular orbits are incompatible Of the Rotation oſ the Heavenly Bodies. 384. In 1611, Scheiner, proſeſſor at Ingolſtadt, obſorved ſpots on the diſ of the Sun, which come into view on the eaſtern limb, move acroſs his diſ in parallel circles, diſappear on the weſtern limb, and, aſter ſome time, again appear on the eaſtern limb, and repeat the ſame motions. Hence it is inferred that the Sun revolves from weſt to eaſt in the ſpace of 250 1/ 12, round an axis inclined to the plane of the ecliptic 73 degrees, and having the aſcending node of his equator in longitude 2: 1°. Philoſophers have formed various opinions concerning the nature of theſe ſpors. The moſt probable is, that the Sun conſiſts of a dark nucleus, ſurrounded by a luminous covering, and that the nucleus is ſometimes laid bare in particular places. For the general appearance of æ ſpot during its revolution is like fig. 43. 385. A ſeries of moſt intereſting obſervations has been lately made by Dr Herſchel, by the help of his great teleſcopes. Theſe obſervations are recorded in the Philoſophical Tranſactions for the years 1801 and 1802. They lead to very curious concluſions reſpecting the peculiar conſtitution of the Sun. It would ſeem that the Sun is immediately ſurrounded by an atmoſphere, heavy and tranſparent, like our air. This reaches to the height of ſeveral thouſand miles. On this atmoſphere ſeems to ſloat a ſtratum of ſiining clouds, alſo ſome thouſands of miles in thickneſs. It is not clear however that this cloudy ſtratum ſhines by its native light. There is above it, at ſome diſtance, another ſtratum of matter, of moſt dazzling ſplendor. It would ſeem that it is this alone vhich illuminates the whole planetary ſyſtem, and alſo the clouds below it. This reſplendent ſtratum is not equally ſo, but moſt luminous in irregular lines or ridges, which cover the whole diſk like a very cloſe brilliant etwork. Something of this appearance was noticed by Mr James Short in 1748, while obſerving a total eclipſe of the Sun, and is mentioned in the Philoſophical Tranſactions. Some operation of nature in this ſolar atmoſphere ſeems to produce an upward motion in it, like a blaſt, which cauſes both the clouds and the dazæling ſtratum to remove from the ſpot, making a ſort of hole in the luminous ſtrata, ſo that we can ſee through them, down to the dark nucleus of the Sun. Dr Herſchel has obſerved tha: this change, and this denudation of the nucleus, is much more frequent in ſome particular places of the Sun's diſk. He has alſo obſerved a ſmall bit of ſhining cloud come in at one ſide of an opening, and, in a ſhort time, move acroſs it, and diſappear on the other ſide of the opening; and he thinks that theſe moving clouds are conſiderably below the great cloudy ſtratum. 3286. Dr Herſchel is diſpoſed to think that the upper reſplendent ſtratum never ſhines on the nucleus; not even when an opening has been made in the ſtratum of clouds. For he remuarks that the upper ſtratum is always much more driven aſide by what produces the opening than the clouds are; ſo that even the moſt oblique rays from the ſplendid ſtratum do not go through, being intercepted by the border of clouds which immediately ſurround the opening. 387. From Dr Herſchel's deſcription of this wonderful object, we are almoſt led to believe that the ſurface of the Sun may not be ſcorched with intolerable and deſtructive heat. It not unſrequently happens that we have very cold weather in ſummer, when the ſy is overcaſt with thick clouds, impenetrable by the direct rays of the Sun. The curious obſervations of Count Rumford of the manner in which heat is moſt copiouſly communicated through fluid ſubſtances, concur with what we knew beſore, to ſiew us that even an intenſe heat, communicated by radiation to the upper ſurface of the ſining clouds by the dazzling ſtratum above them, may never reach ſar down through their thickneſs. With much more confidence may we aſfirm that it would never warm the tranſparent atmoſphere below thoſe clouds, nor ſcorch the firm ſurface of the Sun. It is far ſfrom being improbable therefore, that the ſurface may not be uninhabitable, even by creatures like ourſelves. If ſo, there is preſented to our view a ſcene of habitation 13,000 times bigger than the ſurface of this Earth, and about 50 times greater than thoſe of all the planets added together. 388. Similar obſervations, firſt made by Dr Hooke in 1664, on ſpots in the diſk of Jupiter, ſow that he revolves from weſt to eaſt in 9 56, round an axis inclined to the plane of his orbit 232. It is alſo obſerved that his equatoreal diameter is to his axis nearly as 14 to 13. 389. There ate ſome remarkable circumſtances in the rotation of this planet. The ſpots, by whoſe change of place on the di©k we judge of the rotation, are not permanent, any more than thoſe obſerved on the Sun's diſk. We muſt therefore conclude that, either the ſurface of the planet is ſubject to very conſiderable variations of brightneſs, or that Jupiter is ſurrounded by a cloudy atmoſphere. The laſt is, of itſelf, the moſt probable; and it becomes ſtill more ſo from another circumſtance. There is a certain part of the planet that is ſenſibly brighter than the reſt, and ſometimes remarkably fo. It is known to be one and the ſame part by its ſituation. This ſpot turns round in ſomewhat leſs time than the reſt. That is, if a dark ſpot remains during ſeveral revolutions, it is found to have ſeparated a little from this bright ſpot, to the leſt hand, that is, to the weſtward. There is a minute or two of difference between the rotation of Jupiter, as deduced from the ſucceſſive appearances of the bright ſpot, and that deduced from obſervations made on the others. 390. Theſe circumſtances lead us to imagine that Jupiter is really covered with a cloudy atmoſphere, and that this has a ſ=low motion from eaſt to weſt relative the ſurface of the planet. The ſtriped appearances, callel Belts or Zones, are undoubtedly the eſfect of a diſference of climate. They are diſpoſed with a certain regularity, generally occupying a complete round of his ſurſacee. Mr Schroeter, vho has minutely ſtudied their appearances for a long tract oſ time, and with excellent glaſſes, ſays that the changes in the atmoſphere are very anomalous, and oſten very ſudden and extenſive; in ſhort, there ſcems almoſt the ſame unſettled weather as on this globe. He does not imagine that we ever ſee the real ſurface of Jupiter; and even the bright ſpot which ſo firmly maintains its ſituation, is thought by Schroeter to be in the atmoſphere. The general current of the clouds is from eaſt to weſt, like our trade winds, but they often move in other directions. The motion is alſo frequently too rapi to be thought the transſerence of an individual ſubſtance; it more reſembles the rapid propagation of ſome ſhort-lived change in the ſtate of the atmoſphere, as we often obſerve in a thunder ſtorm. The axis of rotation is almoſt perpendicular to the plane of the orbit, ſo that tho days and nights are always equal. 391. The rotation of Mars, firſt obſerved by Hooke and Caſſini in 1666, is ſtill more remarkable than that of Jupiter. The ſurface of the planet is generally of unequal brightneſs, and ſomething like a permanent figure may be obſerved in it, by whiclr we gueſs at the ime of the rotation. But the figure is ſo ill deſined, and ſo ſubject to conſiderable changes, that it was long before aſtronomers could be certain of a rotation, ſo as to aſcertain the time. Dr Herſchel has been at much pains to do this with aceuracy, and, by comparing many ſucceſſive apparitions of the ſame objects, he has found that the time of a revolution is 24 hours and 40 minutes, round an axis inclined to the plane of the ecliptic in an angle of nearly 60 degrees, but making an angle of 61° 18 with his own orbit. 392. It is midſummer-day in Mars when he is in long. 11 19° from our vernal equinox. As the planet is oſf a very oblate form, and probably hollow, there may be a conſiderable preceſſion of his equinoctial points, by a change in the direction of his axis. 393. Being ſo much inclined to the ecliptic, the poles of Mars come into ſight in the courſe of a revolution. When either pole comes ſirſt into view, it is obſerved to be remarkably brighter than the reſt of the diſc. This brightneſs gradually diminiſhes, and is generally altogether gone, before this pole goes out of ſight by the change of the planets poſition. The other pole now comes into view, and exhibits ſimilar appearances. 394. This appearance of Mars greatly reſembles what our own globe will exhibit to a ſpectator placed on Venus or Mercury. The ſnows in the colder cliIi mates diminiſh during ſummer, and are renewed in the enſuing winter. The appearances in Mars may either be owing to ſnows, or to denſe clouds, which condenſe on his circumpolar regions during his winter, and are diſſipated in ſummer. Dr Herſchel remarks that the atmoſphere of Mars extends to a very ſenſible diſtance from his diſ. 395. Obſervers are not agreed as to the time of the rotation of Venus. Some think that ſhe turns round her axis in 23, and others make it 23 days and 8 hours. The uncertainty is owing to the very ſmall time allowed for obſervation, Venus never being ſeen for more than three hours at a time, ſo that the change of appearance that we obſerve day aſter day may either be a gart of a ſlow rotation, or more than a complete rotation made in a ſhort time. Indeed no diſtinct ſpots have been obſerved in her diſk ſince the time of the elder Caſſini, about the middle of the ſeventeenth century. Dr Herſchel has always obſerved her covered with an impenetrable cloud, as white as ſnow, and without any variety of appearance. 396. The Moon turns round her axis in the courſe of a periodic month, ſo that one face is always preſented to our view. There is indeed a very ſmall LIRRATION, as it is called, by which we occaſionally ſee a little variation, ſo that the ſpot which occupies the very centre of the diſc, when the Moon is in apogee and in perigee, ſhiſts a little to one ſide and a little up or down. This ariſes from the perfect uniformity oſ her rotation, and the unequal motion in her orbit. As the greateſt equation of her orbital motion amounts to little more than 50, this cauſes the central ſpot to ſift about 2 of her diameter to one ſide, and, returning again to the centre, to ſhift as far to the other ſide. She turns always the ſame face to the other focus of her elliptical orbit round the Earth, becauſe her angular motion round that point is almoſt perfectly equable. 397. It has been diſcovered by Dr Herſchel that Saturn turns round his axis in 10 16, and that his ring turns round the ſame axis in 10* 323. This axis is inclined to the ecliptic in an angle of 6of nearly, and the interſection of the ring and ecliptic is in the line paſing through long. 5° 20° and 11' 2000. We ſee it very open when Saturn is in long. 2' 20, or 8° 2003 and its length is then double of its apparent breadth. It is then midſummer and midwinter on Saturn. When Saturn is in the line of its nodes, it diſappears, becauſe its plane paſſes through the Sun, and its edge is too thin to be viſible. It ſhines only by reſlecting the Suns light. For we ſometimes ſee the ſnadow of Saturn on it, and ſometimes its Thadow on Saturn. It will be very open in 1811. Juſt now (1803) it is extremely ſlender, and it diſappeared for a while in the month of June. Its diameter is above 200,000 miles, almoſt half of that of the Moons orbit round the Earth. ] 398. No rotation can be obſerved in Mercury, on account of his apparent minuteneſs; nor is any obſerved in the Georgian planet for the ſame reaſon, 399. Many philoſophers have imagined that the Earth revolves round its axis in 235 56 4' from weſt to eaſt: and that this is the cauſe of the obſerved diurnal motion of the heavens, which is therefore only an appearance. It muſt be acknowledged that the appearances will be the ſame, and that we muſt be inſenſible of the motion, There are alſo many circumſtances which render this rotation very probable. 400. 1I. All the celeſtial motions will be rendered incomparably more moderate and ſimple. If the heavens really turn round the Earth in 230 56 4, the motion of the Sun, or of any of the planets, is ſwiſter than any motion of which we have any meaſure; and this to a degree almoſt beyond conception. The motion of the S8un would be 20,060 times ſwiſter than that of a cannon bal. That of the Georgian planet will be twenty times greater than this. If the Earth turns round its axis, the ſwifteſt motion neceſſary for the appearances is that of the Earths equator, which does not exceed that of a cannon ball. The motions alſo become incomparably ſimpler. For the combination of diurnal motion with the proper motion of the planets makes it vaſtly more complex, and impoſſible to account for on any mechanical principles. This diurnal motion muſt vary, in all the planets, by their change of declination, being about à ſlower when they are near the tropics. Yet we cannot conceive that any phyſical relation can ſubſiſt between the orbital motion of a planet and the poſition of the Earths equator, fuſicient for producing ſuch a change in the planet's motion. Beſides, the axis of diurnal revolution is far from being the ſame juſt now and in the time of Hipparchus. Juſt now, it paſſes near the ſtar in the extremity of the tail of the little Bea. When Hipparchus obferved the heavens, it paſſed near the ſnout of the Camelopard. It is to the laſt degree improbable that every object in the univerſe has changed its motion in this manner. It muſt be ſuppoſed that all have changed their motions in different degrees, yet all in a certain preciſe order, without any connexion or mutual dependence that we can conceive. 401. 2. There is no withholding the belief that the Sun was intended to be a ſouree of light and genial warmth to the organized beings which occupy the ſurface of our globe:. How much more ſimply, eaſily, and beautifully, this is eſſected by the Earth's rotation, and how much more agreeably to the known œconomy of nature 402. 3. This rotation would be analogous to what is obſerved in the Sun and moſt of the planets. 403. 4. We obſerve phenomena on our globe that are neceſſary conſequences of rotation, but cannot be accounted for without it. We know that the equatore:l regions are about twenty miles higher than the circumpolar; yet the waters of the ocean do not quit this elevation, and retire and inundate the poles. This may be prevented by a proper degree of rotation. It may be ſo ſwift, that the waters would all flow toward the equator, and inundate the torrid zone; nay, ſo ſwift, that every thing looſe would be thrown off, as we ſee the water diſperſed from a twirled mop. Now, a very ſimple calculation will ſiew us that a rotation in 23 56 is preciſely what will balance the tendency of the waters to flow from the elevated equator towards the poles, and will keep it uniformly ſpread over the whole ſpheroid. We alſo obſerve that a lump of matter of any kind weighs more (by a ſpring ſteelyard) at Spitzbergen than at Quito, and that the diminution of gravity is preciſely what would ariſe from the ſuppoſed rotation, viz. 45There are arguments which give the moſt convincing demonſtration of the Earths rotation. 404. 1. Did the heavens turn round the Earth, as has long been believed, it is almoſt certain that no zodiacal fixed ſtar could be ſeen by us. For it is highly probable that light is an emiſion of matter from the luminous body. If this be the caſe, ſuch is the diſtance of any fixed ſtar A (fig. 44.) that, whn its velocity AC is compounded with the velocity of light emitted in uny direction AB, or Ab, it would produce a motion in a direction AD, or A d, which would never reach the Earth, or which might chance to reach it, but with a velocity infinitely below the known velocity of light; and, in any hypotheſis concerning the nature of light, the velocity of the light by which we ſee the eircumpolar ſtars muſt greatly exceed that by which we ſee the equatoreal ſtars. All this is contrary to obſervation. à. The ſadow of Jupiter alſo ſould deviate greatly from the line drawn from the Sun to Jupiter, juſt as we ſee a ſhip's vane deviate from the direction of the wind, vhen ſhe is ſailing brikly acroſds that direction. If the diurnal revolution is a real motion, when Jupiter is in oppoſition, his firſt ſatellite muſt be ſeen to come from behind his diſ, and, aſter appearing for about 1' 19, muſt be eclipſed. This is alſo contrary to obſervation; for the ſatellites are eclipſed preciſely when they come into that line, whereas it ſhould happen more than an hour aſter. 405. We muſt therefore conclude that the Earth revolves round its axis from weſt to eat in 23°56 4We muſt further conclude, from the agreement of the ancient and modern Iatitudes of places, that the axis oſ the Earth is the ſame as formerly; but tharit changes its poſition, as we obſerve in a top whoſe motion is nearly ſpent. This change of poſition is ſeen by the ſhiſting 6f the equinoctiall points. As theſe make a tour of the ecliptic in 25972 yeas, the pole of the eqiator, beephãũ always perpendicular to its plane, muſt deſcribe a circle round the pole oſ the ecliptic, diſtant from it 230 28' 10, the inclination of the equator to the ecliptic. It will be ſeen, in due time, that this motion of the Ea:th's axis, which appeared a myſtery even to Copernicus, Tycho Brahẽ and Kepler, is a neceſſary eonſequence of the general power of nature by which the whole aſſemblage is held together; and the detection of this conſequence is the moſt illuſtiious ſpecimen of the ſagacity of the diſeoverer, Sr Iaae Newton. Of ihe Sclar Syſtem. 406. We have ſcen (372.) that the planets are always found in the circumſerences of ellipſes, which have the Sun in their common focus, while the Sun moves in an ellipſe round the Earth. The motion of any planet is compounded of any motion which it has in reſpect of the Sun, and any motion which the Sun has in reſpect of the Earth. Therefore (92. 93.) the appearances of the planetary motions will be the ſame as we have deſcribed, if we ſuppoſe the Sun to be at reſt, and give the Earth a motion round the Sun, equal and oppoſite to what the Sun has been thougnt to have round the Earth. In the ſecond part of that article concerning relative motion, it was ſnewn that the relative motion, or change of motion, of the hody B, as ſeen from A, is equal and oppoſite to that of A ſeen from B. In the preſent caſe, the diſtance of the Sun from the Earth is equal to that of the Earth from the Sun. The poſition or bearing is the oppoſite. When the Earth is in Aries or Taurus, the Sun will be ſeen in Libra or Scorpio. When the Earth is in the tropic oſ Capricorn, the Sun will appear in that of Cancer, and her north pole will be turned toward the Sun; ſo that the northern hemiſphere will have longer days than nights. In ſhort, the gradual variation of the ſeaſons will be the ſame in both caſes, if the Earth's axis keeps the ſame poſition during its revolution round the Sun. It muſt do ſo, if there be no force to change its poſition; and we ſee that the axes of the other planets retain their poſition. 407. Then, with reſpect to the planets, the appearances of direct and retrograde motion, with points of ſtation, will alſo be the ſame as if the Sun revolved round the Earth. That this may be more evident, it muſt be obſerved that our judgement of a planet's ſituation is preciſely ſimilar to that of a mariner who ſees a ſhips light in a dark night. He ſets it by the compaſs. If he ſees it due north, and a few minutes after, ſees it a little to the weſtward of north, he imagines that the ſhip has really gone a little weſtward Yet this might have happened, had both been ſailing due eaſt, provided that the ſhip of the ſpectator had been ſailing faſter. It is juſt the ſame in the planetary motions. If we give the Earth the motion that was aſcribed to the Sun, the real velocity of the Earth will be more than double of the velocity of Jupiter. Now ſuppoſe, according to the old hypotheſis, the Earth at T (ſig. 40.) and the Sun at æ. Suppoſe Jupiter in oppoſition. Then we muſt place the centre of his epicycle in A, and make Aæ equal to Tæ. Jupiter is in a, and his bearing and diſtance from the Earth is Ta, nearly 2 of TA. Six weeks after, the Sun is in 85 the centre of Jupiter's epicycle is in B. Draw BS equal and parallel to T⸗, and b is now the place of Jupiter, and Th is now his bearing and diſtance He has changed his bearing to the right hand, or weſtward on the ecliptic; and his change of poſition is had by meaſuring the angle a Th. His longitude on the ecliptic is diminiſhed by this number of degrees. 408. Now Iet the Sun be at T, according to the new hypotheſis, and let ABE L be Jupiter's orbit round the Sun. Let Jupiter be in oppoſition to the Sun. We muſt place Jupiter in A, and the Earth in s ſo as to have the Sun and Jupiter in oppoſition. It is evident that Jupiter's bearing and diſtance ſrom the Earth are the ſame as in the ſormer hypotheſis. For Aa being equal to : T, we have : A, the dſſlance of Jupiter ſfrom the Earth, equal to Ta of the former hypotheſiss Six wecks aſter, the Earth is at ę, and Jupiter at B. Join 9 B, and drawv ę N parallel to TA. It is evident that the diſtance 9 B of Jupiter from the Earth, is equal to the diſtance Tò oſ the former conſtruction. Alſo the angle 3 o B, which is Jupiters change of bearing, (by the aſtronomer's compaſi, the ecliptic), is equal to the angle aTb of the former conſtruction. Jupiter thereſore, inftead of moving to the leſt hand, has moved to the right, or weſtward, and has diminiſhed his ecliptical bearing or longitude by the degrees in the angle N' ꝗ 3. 409. In the ſame manner may the apparent motion of Jupiter be aſcertained for every ſituation of the ſirth and Jupiter; and it will be found that, in every cuſe, the line correſponding to  B is equal and parallel to the line correſponding to Tò; thus  C ĩs equal and parallel to Tc; æD is equal and parallel to Tã, &c. The apparent motions of the plancts are therefore preciſely the ſame in either hypotheſis, ſo that we are leſt to follow either opinion, as it appears beſt ſupported by other arguments. 410. Accordingly, it has been the opinion of ſome philoſophers, both in ancient and modern times, that the Earth is a planet, revolving round the Sun placed in the focus of its elliptical orbit, and that it is accompanied by the Moon, in the ſame manner as Jupiter and Satumn are by their ſatellites. The following are the reaſons for preferring this opinion to that contained in the 3715t and 373d articles, which equally explains all the phenomena hitherto mentioned, and is more conſiſtent with our firſt judgements. 411. I. The celeſtial motions become incomparably more ſimple; and free of thoſe looped contortions which muſt be ſuppoſed in the other caſe, and which are extremely improbable, and incompatible with what we know of the laws of motion. 412. 2. This opinion is alſo more reaſonable, on account of the extreme minuteneſs of the Earth, when compared with the immenſe bulk of the Sun, Jupiter, and Saturn; and becauſe the Sun is the ſource of light and heat to all the planets. The reaſons adduced in this and the preceding article were all that could oſfer themſelves to the philoſophers of antiquity. They had not the teleſcope, and the ſatellites were therefore unknown. They had no knowledge of the powers of nature by which the planetary motions are produced and regulated; their knowledge of dynamical ſcience was extremely ſcanty. Yet Pythagoras, Philolaus, Apollonius, Anaxagoras, and others, maintained this opinion. But they had few ſollowers in an opinion ſo different ſrom our habitual thoughts, and for which they could only oſfer ſome reaſons founded on certain notions of propriety or ſuitableneſs. But, as men became more converſant, in modern times, with the mechanical arts, every thing connected with the motion of bodies became more familiar, and was better underſtood, and we had leſs heſitation in adopting ſentiments unlike the firſt and moſt familiar ſuggeſtions of ſenſe. Other arguments now oſfered themſelves. 413. 3. If the Earth turns round the Sun, then the analogy between the ſquares of the periodic times and the cubes of the diſtances, will obtain in all the bodies which circulate round a common centre; whereas this will not be the caſe with reſpect to the Sun and Moon, if both turn round the Earth. 414. 4. It is thought that the motion of the Sun round the Earth is inconſiſtent with the diſcoveries which have been made eoncerning the forces which operate in the planetary motions. We have ſeen, by article 230, combined with the third Iaw of motion, that neither can the Sun revolve round the Earth at reſt, nor the Earth round the Sun at reſt, but that both muſt revolve round their common centre of poſition. It is diſcovered that the quantity of matter in the Sun is more than 300,000 times that of the matter in the Earth. Therefore the centre of poſition of theſe two bodies muſt be almoſt in the centre of the Sun. Nay, if all the planets were on one ſide of the Sun, the common centre would be very near his ęœntre. 415. But, perhaps, this argument is not of the great weight that is ſuppoſed. The diſcovery of the proportion of theſe quantities of matter ſeems to depend on its being previouſly eſtabliſhed that the Sun is in, or near, the centre of poſition of the whole aſſemblage. It muſt be owned, however, that the perfect harmony of all the comparative meaſures of the quantities oſf matter of the Sun and planets, deduced from ſources independent of each other, renders their accuracy almoſt unqueſtionable. 416. 5. It is inconteſtably proved by obſervation. A motion has been diſcovered in all the fixed ſtars, which ariſes ſrom a combination of the motion of light with the motion of the Earth in its orbit. Suppoſe a ſiower of hail falling during a perfect calm, and thereſore ſulling perpendicularly. Were it required to hold a long tube in ſuch a poſition that a hailſtone ſhall ſall tchrough it without touching either ſide, it is plain that the tube muſt be held perpendicular. Suppoſe now that the tube is faſtened to the arm of a gin, ſuch as thoſe employed in raiſing coals from the pit, and that it is carried round, with a velocity that is equal to that of the falling hail. It is now evident that a perpendicular tube will not do. The hailſtones will all ſtrike on the hindmoſt ſide of the tube. The tube muſt be put into the direction of the relative motion of the hailſtones. Now, it was demonſtrated in § 92, that this is the diagonal of a parallelogram, one ſide of which is the real motion of the hail, and the other is equal, but oppoſite, to the motion of the tube. Thereſore if the tube be inclined ſorward, at an angle of 45, the experiment will ſucceed, becauſe the tangent of this angle is equal to the radius; and, while the hailſtone falls two feet, the tube advances two, and the hailſtone will paſs along the tube without touching it. In the very ſame manner, if the Earth be at reſt, and we would view a ſtar near the pole of the ecliptic, the teleſcope muſt be pointed directly at the ſtar. But iſ the Earth be in motion round the Sun; the teleſcope muſt be pointed a little forward, that the light may come along the axis oſ the tube. The proportion of the velocity of light to the ſuppofed velocity of the Earth in its orhit is nearly that of 10,000 to 1. Therefore the teleſcope muſt lean about 20 forward. Half a year after this, let the ſame ſtar be viewed again. The teleſcope muſt again be pointed 20 a-head of the true poſition of the ſtar: but this is in the oppoſite direction to the former deviation of the teleſcope, becauſe the Earth, being now in the oppoſite part of its orbit, is moving, the other way. Therefore the poſition of the ſtar muſt appear to have changed 40 in the ſix months. It is eaſy to ſhew that the conſequence of this is, that every ſtar muſt appear to have 40 more longitude when it is on our meridian at midnight, than when it is on the meridian at mid-day. The eſfect of this compoſition of motions which is moſt ſuſceptible of accurate examination is the following. Let the declination of ſome ſtar near the pole of the eclipti be obſerved at the time of the equinoxes It will be ſound to have 40/ more declination ! in the autumnal thai in the vernal equinox, if the bſerver be in latitude 66 30; and not much leſs if he be in the latit ade of London. Alſo every ſtur in the heavens ſhould appeer to deſeribe a Iitle ellipie, whoſe louger axis is 400. : 417. Now this is actually obſerved, and was diſcovered by Dr Bradley about the year 1726. It ĩs called the ABERRATION OF THE FIXED STARS, and is one of the moſt curious, and moſt important diſcoveries of the eighteenth century. It is important, by furniſhing an incontrovertible proof that the Earth is a planet, revolving, like the others, round the Sun. It is alſo important, by ſhewing that the light of the fixed ſtars moves with the ſame velocity with the light of the Sun, which illuminates our ſyſtem. 418. This arrangement of the planets ĩs called the COPERNICAN SYSTEM, having been revived and eſtabliſed by Copernicus, repreſented In fiz. A The other opinion, mentioned (371.), which equally explains the general phenomena, was maintained by Longomontanus. 419. Account of the PToLEMAIC, EGYPTIAN, and TrcnoNIC ſyſtems (fig. B, C, D.) 420. The Copernican ſyſtem is now univerſally admitted; and it is fully eſtabliſhed, 1. That the planets and  In the preceding pages, no notice has been taken of the latitude of the planets, and the obſervations by which it may be aſcertainedl. What is delivered here is not to be conſidered as a treatiſe of the celeſtial motions; nothing was inſerted but what was neceſſary for enabling the reader to judge of the vidences for the progrſive and other motions of the heavenly and the comets deſcribe round the Sun areas ꝑroportional to the times; and that the Moon, and the ſatellites of Iupiter and Saturn, deſcribe round the Earth, Jupiter, and Saturn, areas proportional to the times. 2. That the orbits deſcribed by thoſe bodies are ellipſes, having the Sun, or the primary planet, in one focus. 3. That the ſquares of the periodic times oſ thoſe bodies which revolve round' a common centre are proportional to the cubes of their mean diſtances from that centree. Theſe three propoſitions are called the Laws OF KEPLEE. 421. There is however an objection to this account of the planetary motions, which has been thought formidable. Suppoſe a teleſcope pointed in a direction perpendicular to the plane of the Earth's orbit, and carried round the Sun in this poſition. Its axis, produced to the ſtarry firmament, ſhould trace out a ſigure preciſely equal and ſimilar to the orbit, and we ſhould be able to mark it among the ſtars round the pole of thæ ecliptic. But, if this be tried, we find that we are always looking at the ſame point, which always remains the centre of the little ellipſe which is the effect of the aberration of light. This objection was made, even in the ſchools of Greece, to Ariſtarchus of Samos, when he uſed his utj DDVIiNa moſ bodies, from which we are to infer the nature of thoſe forces by which they are continually regulated. The motion of revolution, from which the inference is made, is in one plane, moſt endeavours to bring into credit the later opinon œ Pythagoras, placing the Sun in the centre of the ſyſtem. And the anſwer given by Ariſtarchus is the only one that we can give at the preſent day.. . 422. The only anſwer that can be given to this is, that the diſtance of the fixed ſtars is ſo great, that æ ſigure of near 200 millions of miles dlameter is not a ſenſible object. This, incredible as it may ſeem, has nothing in it of abſurdity. We know that their diſtance is immenſe. The comet of 1680 goes 155; times ſarther from the Sun than we are, and we muſt ſuppoſe it much farther from the neareſt ſtar, that it may not be aſfected by it in its motion round our Sun. Suppoſe it only twice as far, the Earth's orbit traced among the ſtęrs would appear only half the diameter of the Sun. We have teleſcopes which maguify the diameter of objects 1200 times. Yet a ſixed ſtar is not magnified by them in the ſmalleſt degree. That is, though we were only at the 1200dth part of our preſent diſtance from it, ĩt would appear no bigger. The more perfect the teleſcope is, the ſtars appear the ſmaller. We need not be ſurpriſed therefore that obſervation ſnhews no parallax of the ſixed ſtars, not even I. Yet a parallax of 1' puts the object 206,000 times farther o than the Sun. But ſpace is without bounds, and we have no reaſon to think that our view comprehends the whole creation. On the contrary, it is more probable that we ſee but an inconſiderable part of the ſcenc on which the perfections of the Creator and Governor of the univerſc are diſplayed. - - EEEEE - . I or ihe Gomets. 423. Therè are ſometimes ſeen in the heavens ceiain bodies, accompanied by a train of faint light, which has occaſioned them to be called comets. Their appearance and motions are extremely various; and the only general remarks that can be made on them are, at the train, or tail, is generally ſmũll on the ſirſt appear ance of a comet, gradually Iengthens as the comet comes into the neighbourhood of the Sun, and again diminiſhes as it retires to a diſtanee. Alſo the tail is always extended in a direction nearly oppoſite to the Sun. 424. The opinions oſ philoſophers concerning comets have been very diſſerent. Sir Iſaac Newton ſirſt ſhowed that they are a part of the ſolar ſyſlem, revolving round the Sun in trajectories, nearly parabolical, having the Sun in the focus. Dr Halley computed the motions of ſeveral comets, and, among them, found ſome which had preciſely the ſame trajectory. He therefore concluded, that theſe were diſferent appearances of one comet, and that the path of a comet is a very eccnt:ſc ellipſe, having the Sun in one focus. The apparition oſ the comet of 1682 in 1759, which was predicted by Halley, has given his opinion the moſt complete confirmation. 425. Comets are therefore planets, reſcmbling the others in the laws of their motion, revolving round the sun in ellipſes, deſcribing areas proportional to the times, and having the ſquares oſ their periodic times proportional to the cubes of their mean diſtances from the Sun. They differ from the planets in the great variety in the poſition oſ their orbits, and in this, that many of them have their courſe in antecedentio ſignorum 426. Their number is very great; but there are but few with the elements of whoſe motions we are well acquaintedl. The comet of 1680 came very near to the Sun on the I1th of December, its diſtance not exceeding his ſemidiameter. When in its aphelion, it will be almoſt 150 times farther from the Sun than the Earth is. Our ideas oſ the extent of the ſolar ſyſtem are thus greatly enlarged. 427. No ſatisfactory knowledge has been acquired concerning the cauſe of that train of light which accompanies the comets. Some philoſophers imagine that it is the rarer atmoſphere oſ the comet, impelled by the Sun's rays. Others imagine, that it is the atmoſphere of the comet, riſing in the ſolar atmoſphere by its ſpecific levity. Others imagine, that it is a phenomenon of the ſame kind with the aurora borealis, and that this Earth would appear like a comet to a ſpectator placed on another planet. Conſult Newtons Principia;a Diſſertation, by Profeſſor Hamilton of Trinity College, Dublin; a Diſſertation, by Mr Winthorpe of New Jerſey, &c.; both in the Philoſophical Tranſactions. 428. Ir i hoped that the preceding account of the celeſtial phenomena has given the attentive ſtudent a diſtinct conception of the nature of that evidence which Kepler had ſor the truth of the three general ſacts diſcovered by him in all the motions, and for the truth of thoſe ſeeming deviations from Keplers laws which were ſo happily reconciled with them by Sir Iſaac Newton, by ſhewing that theſe deviations are examples of mutual deſlections of the celeſtial bodies towards one another. Several phenomena were occaſionally noticed, although not immediately ſubſervient to this purpoſe. Theſe are the chief objects of our ſubſequent attempts to explain. The account given of the kind of obſervation by which the different motions were proved to be what has been affirmed of them, has been exceedingly ſhort and ſlight, on the preſumption that the young aſtronomer will ſtudy the celeſtial phenomenology in the detail, as delivered by Gregory, Keill, and other authors of reputation. This ſtudy will terminate in the fulleſt conviction of the validity of the evidence ſor the truth oſ the Copernican ſyſtem of the Sun and planets; and in a minute acquaintance with all thoſe peculiaritic, of motion that diitinguiſh the individuuls oſ the magnificent aſſemblage. We are now in a condition to inveſtigate the particular characters oſ thoſe extenſive powers of nature, thoſe mechanical aficclions of matter, which cauſe the obſerved deviations from that uniſorm rectilineal motion which would have been obſcrved in every body, had it been under no mechanical inſluence. And we ſhall alſo be able to explain or account for the diſtinguiſhing peculiarities of motion which characteriſe the individuals of the ſyſtem, if we ſull ſo far ſucceed in our ſirſt inveſtigation as to ſiew that no other force operates in the ſyſtem, and that theſe peculiarities are only particular and accurately narrated caſes of the three general laws, preciſely conformable to their legitimate conſequences.* In æ I think it neceſſary here to forewamn the well-informed mathematician, if any ſuch ſall honour theſe pages with a peruſal, that he ill be diſappointed if he look for any thing profound, or curious, or new, in what follows. My ſole aim is to aſit the ignorant in the elements of phyſical aſtronomy; aud I mean to inſert nothing but what ſeems to me to be elementary in the Newtonian philoſophy. This ſtudy requires I think) a few more ſteps than are uſually given in the elementary publications of this country. Theſe perſormances generally leave the ſtudent too ſcantily prepared for reading the valuable works on this ſubject, uuleſs by a very obſtinate and ſatiguing ſtudy, They are deterred by the great dificul In our ſirſt inveſtigation, we muſt aſirm the forces to be ſuch as are indicated by the motions, in the manner agreed on in the general doctrines of Iynanics. That is, the kind and the intenſity of the force muſt be inferred from the direction and the magnitude of the change which we conſider as its eſfect. In all this proceſs, it is plain that we conſider the heavenly bodies as conſiſting oſ matter that has the ſame mechanical properties with the bodies which are daily in our hands. We are not at liberty.to imagine that the celeſtial matter has any other properties than what is indicated by the motions, otherwiſe we have no explanation, ties thus occaſioned in the beginning; and, proceecing no further, they never taſte the great pleaſure afſorded by this noble ſcience. I wiſh to render it acceſſiLle to all who have learned Euclid’s Elements, and the leading properties of the three conic ſections. I have preferred the geometrical to the algebraical manner of expreſſing the quantities under conſideration. Frequently both methods are ſymbolical; but, even in this caſe, the geometrical ſymbol, by preſenting a pieture of the thing, gives an object of eaſier recollection, and more expreſſive of its nature, than an algebraical formula; and in phyſical aſtronomy, the geometrical figure is often not a ſymbol, but the very quantity under exmmiuaion. It is from the experience of my own ſtudies that I am induced to preſfer this method, fully aware, however, that its advantages are reſtricted to mere elementary inſtruction, and that no very great progreſs will bæ made in the more recondite parts of tion, and may a5 well reſt contented with the ſimple narration of the facts. The conſtant practice, in all attempts to explain a natural appearance, is to try to find a claſs of familiar phenomena which reſemble it; and if we ſucceed, wo account it to be one of the number, and we reſt ſatisfied with this as a ſuſficient explanation. Accordingly, this is the way that philoſophers, both in ancient and modern times, have proceeded in their attempt to diſcover the cauſes of the planetary motions. 429. I. Nothing is more ſumiliar to our experience than bodies carried round fixed centres by means of ſolid matter connecting the bodies with the centre, in one way or another. This was the firſt attempt to explain the planetary phyſical aſtronomy without employing the algebraic along with the geometrical analyſis.. I fear that I ſhall frequently be thought prolix and inelegant. But I beg that it may be remembered for whom theſe pages are writtenfor mere beginners in the ſtudy. I wiſh to leave no difficulty in the way that I can remove. If I have failed in thisoperam perdidi et olesm. But I hope that I may enable an attentive ſtudent to read Newtons lunar theory with ſome reliſh, and a perception of its beauty. If ſo, my favourite point is gained,the ſtudent will go forward. The two articles which occupy ſo much at the cloſe of this ſubject, are not ſo far purſued in our elementary books; yet what is here inſerted are only the elements of the ſubject; and without this inſtruction, we can have no conception of planetary motions of which we have any account. Eudoxus and Callippus, many ages beſore our æra, taught that all the ſtars in the firmament are ſo many lucid points or bodies, adhering to the inſide oſ a vaſt material concave ſphere, which turned round rhe Earth placed in the centre in twenty-four hours. It was called the crYSTALLINE ORB Or Sphere. But this will not explain the eaſterly motion of the Sun and Moon, unleſs we ſuppoſe them endowed with ſome ſelf-moving power, by which they can creep ſlowly æaſtward along the ſurface of the cryſtalline orb; far leſs will it account for the Moon ſometimes hiding the Sun from us. Theſe philoſophers were therefore obliged to ſay that there were other ſpheres, or rather ſpherical ſhells, tranſparent, like vaſt glaſs globes, one within another, and all having a common centree. The Sun and the Moon were ſuppoſed to be attached to the ſurface of thoſe globes. The ſphere which carried the Moon Was the ſmalleſt, immediately ſurrounding the Earth. The ſphere of the Sun was much larger, but ſtill leſt a vaſt ſpace between it and the ſphere oſ the fixed ſtars, which contained all. This machinery may make a ſhift to carry round the Moon, the Sun, and the ſtars, in a way ſomewhat like what we behold. But the planets gave the philoſophers much trouble, in order to explain their retrograde and direct motions, and ſtationary points, &c. To move Jupiter in a way reſembling what we behold, they ſuppoſed the ſhell of his ſphere to be of vaſt thickneſs, and in its ſolid matter they lodged a ſmall tranſparnt ſphere, in the ſurface of which Jupiter was ſixed. This ſphere turned round in the hollow mule for ĩt in the thick ſhell of the deferent ſphere, and, as all was tranſparent, exhibited Jupiter mving to the weſtward, wh.en his epiſphere brought him toward us, and to the eaſt, when it carried him round toward the outer ſurface oſ the deferent ſhell. Meanwhile, the great deferent globe was moving ſlowly eaſtward, or rather was turning more ſlowly weſtward than the ſphere of the ſtars. No doubt, this mechaniſm will produce round-about motions, and ſtations and retrogradations, &c. This, however, is only a very groſs outline of the planetary motions. But the Sun's unequable motion could not be repreſented without ſuppoſing the Earth out of the centre of rotãtion of his ſphere. This was accordingly ſuppoſedand it was an eaſy ſuppoſition. But the motion of Jupiter in relation to the centre of his epicycle muſt be ſimilar to the Sun's motion in relation to the Earth (361.); but a ſolid ſphere, turning in a hollow which exactly ſits it, can only turn round its centre. This is evident. Thereſore the inequality of Iupiters epiyclical motion cannot be repreſented by this mechaniſm. The deſerent ſphere may be eccentric, but the epicycle cannot. This obliged thoſe engineers to give Jupiter a ſecondary epicycle much ſmaller than the epicycle which produced his retrogradations and ſtations. It moved in a hollow lodgement mude for it in the ſolid matter of the epicycle, juſt as this moved in a hollow in ile ſolid matter of the deſcrent globe. Even this would not correſpond with tolerable exactneſs with the obſerved tenor oſ Jupiters motion; other epicycles were added, to tally with every improvement made on the equation of the apparent motion, till the whole ſpace was almoſt crammed ſull of ſolid matter; and after all theſe efforts, ſome mathematicians aſirmed that there are motions in the heavens that are neither uniform nor circular, nor can be compounded of ſuch motions. Iſ ſo, this ſpherical muchinery is impoſſible. In modern times, Tycho Brahè proved beyond all contradiction that the comet of 1574 paſed through all thoſe ſpheres, and therefore their exiſtence was a mere ſiction. One ſhould think the whole of this contrivance ſo artleſs and rude, that we wonder that it ever obtained the leaſt credit; yet was it adopted by the prince of ancient philoſophersby Ariſtotle; and his authority gave it poſſeſſion of all the ſchools till modern times. But where, all this while, is the mover of all this machinery? Ariſtotle taught that each globe was conducted, or turned round its axis, by a peculior genius or dæmon. This was worthy of the reſt; and when ſuch aſſertions are called explanations, nothing in nature need remain unexplained. We muſt however do Hipparchus and Ptolemy the juſlice to ſay that they never adopted this hypotheſis oſ Eudoxus and Callippus; they did not ſpeculate about the cauſes, but only endeavoured to aſcertain the motions; and their epicycle and deſerent circles are given by them merely as ſteps oſ mathematical contemplation, and in order to have ſome principle to direct their calculation, juſt as we demonſtrate the parabolic path of a cannon ball by compounding a uniform motion in the line of direction with a uniſormly accelerated motion in the vertical line. There is no ſuch compoſition, but the motion of the ball is the ſame as if there were. 430. 2. A much more feaſible attempt wãs made by Cleanthes, another philoſopher of Greece, to aſſign the cauſes of the planetary motions. He obſerved that bodies are eaſily carried round in whirlpools or vortices of water. He taught that the celeſtial ſpaces are filled vith an ethereal fluid, which is in continual motion round the Earth, and that it carried the Sun and planets round with it. But a ſlight examination of this ſpecious hypotheſis ſewed that it was much more diſſicult to form a notion of the vortices, ſo as to correſpond with the obſerved motions, than to ſtudy the motions themſelves. It therefore gave no explanation. Yet this very hypotheſis was revived in modern times, and was maintained by two of the moſt eminent mathematicians and philoſophers of Europe, namely, by Des Cartes and Leibnitz; and, for a long while, it was acquieſced in by all. We muſt conſtantly keep in mind that an explanation always means to ſhiew that the ſubject in queſtion is an example of ſomething that we clearly underſtand. Whatever is the avowed property of that more familiar ſubject, muſt therefore be admitted in the uſe made of it for explanationn. We explain the ſplitting of glaſs by heat, by ſhewing that the known and avowed eſfects of heat make the glaſs ſell on one ſide to a certain degree, with a certain known force; and we ſiew that the tenacity of the other ſide of the glaſs, which is not ſwelled by the heat, is not able to reſiſt this force which is pulling it aſunder; it muſt thereſore give way. In ſhort, we ſew the ſplitting to be one of the ordinary eſfects of heat, which operates here as it operates in all other caſes. Now, if we take this method, we ſind that the eſfects of a vortex or whirl in a ſluid are totally unlike the planetary motions, and that we cannot aſcribe them to the vortical motion of the æther, without giving it Iaws of motion unlike every thing obſerved in all the fluids that we know; nay, in contradiction of all thoſe Iaws oſ mechanics which are admitted by the very patrons of the hypotheſis. To give this fluid properties unknown in all others, is abſurd; we had better give thoſe properties to the planets themſelves. The fact is, that theſe two philoſophers had not taken the trouble to think about the matter, or to inquire what motions of a vortex of ſluid are poſſible, and what are not, or what effects will be produced by ſuch vortices as are poſſible. They had not thought of any means of moving the ſluid itſelf, or for preſerving it in motion; they contented themſelves (at leaſt this was the caſe with Des Cartes) with merely throwing out the general fact, that bodies may be carried round by a vortex. It is to Sir Iſaac Newton that. we are indebted for all that we know of vortical motion. In examining this hypotheſis of Des Cartes, which had ſupreme authority among the philoſophers at that time, he found iĩt neceſſary to inquire into the manner in which a vortex may be produced, and the conſtitution oſ the vortex which reſults ſrom the mode of its production. This led him, by neceſiary ſteps, to diſcover what forms of vortical motion are poſſible, what are permanent, and the variations to which the others are ſubject. In the ſecond book of his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philoſophy, he has given the reſult of this examination; and it contains a beautiſul ſyſtem of mechanical doctrine, concerning the mutual action of the filaments of ſluid matter, by which they modify each others motion. The reſult of the whole was a complete refutation of this hypotheſis as an explanation of the planetary motions, ſhewing that the legitimate conſequences of a vortical motion ãre altogether unlike the planetary mctions, nuy, are incompatible with them. It is quite enough, in this place, for proving the inſuſſiciency of the hypotheſis, to obſerve that it muſt explain the motion of the comets as well as that ꝗf the planets. If Mars be carried round the Sun by a fluid vortex, ſo is the comet which appeared in 1682 and 1759. This comet came from an immenſe diſtance, in the northem quarter of the heavens, into our neighbourhood, paſſing through the vortices of all the planets, deſcribing its very eccentric ellipſe with the moſt perfet regularity. Now, it is abſolutely impoſſible that, in one and the ſame place, there can be paſſing a ſtream of the vortex oP a planet, and a ſtroam of the cometary vortex, having a direction and a velocity ſo very different. It is inconceivable that theſe two ſtreams of fluid ſhall have force enough, one oſ them to drag a planet along with it, and ihe other to drag a comet, and yet that the particles of the one ſtream ſhall not diſturb the motion of thoſe of the other in the ſmalleſt degree: even the infinitely rare vapour which formed the tail of the comet was not in the leaſt derariged hy the motion of the planetary vorticòs through which iĩt paſted. All this Is inconceivable and abſurd. It is a pity that the account given b Newton of vortical motions appeared on ſuch an occaſion; ſor this Iimited the attention of his readers to this particular employment of it, which purpoſe being completely anſwered in another way, this argument became unneceſſary, and was not looked intoo. But it contains much valus Lle information, oſ great ſerviee in all problems of hydrauliess. Many conſequences of the mutual action of the fluid filaments produce important changes on the motion of the whole; ſo that till theſe are underſtood and taken into the account, we cannot give an anſwer to very ſimple, yet important queſtions. This is the eauſe why this branch of meehanical philoſophy is in ſo imperfect a ſtate, although ĩt is one of the moſt important. 431. 3. Many of the ancient philoſophers, ſtruck ith the order, regularity, and harmonions cooperation of the planetary motions, imagined that they were eonAducted by intelligent minds. Ariſtotle's way of conceiving this has been already mentioned. The ſame doctrine has been revived, in ſome reſpect, in modern times. LeibnitzZ animates every particle of matter, when he gives his Monads a perception of their ſituation with reſpect to every other monad, and a motion in conſequence of this perception. This, and the elemental mind aſcribed by Lord Monboddo to every thing that begins motion, do not ſeem to diſfer much from the iræ o⸗ of Ariſtotle; nor do they differ from what all the world diſtinguiſhes by the name of ſorce. This doctrine cannot be called a hypotheſis; it is rather a definition, or a miſnomer, giving the name Mind to what exhibits none of thoſe phenomena by which we diſtinguiſ mind. No end beneficial to the agent is gained by the motion of the planet. It may be beneficial to its inhabitantsBut ſhould we think more highly of the mind of an animal when it is covered with vermin ?2 Nor does this doctrine give the ſmalleſt explanation of the planetary motions. We muſt explain the motions by ſtudying them,. in order to diſcover the laws by which the action of their cauſe is regulated: this is juſt the way that we learn the nature oſ any mechanical force. Accordingly, 432. 4. Many philoſophers, both in ancient and modern tſimes, imagined that the planets were deſlected ſrom uniform rectilineal motion by ſorces ſimilar to what we obſerve in the motions of magnetical and electrical bodies, or in the motion of common heavy bodies, where one body ſeems to inſluence the motion of another at a diſtanee rom it, without any intervening impulſion. It is thus that a ſtone is bent continually from the line of its direction towards the Earth. In the ſame manner, an iron hall; rolling along a level table, will be turned aſide toward-a mãgnet, and, by properly adjuſting the diſtance and the velocity, the ball may be made to revolve round the pole of the magnet. Many of the ancients ſaid that the curvilineal motions of the planets were produced by tendencies to one another, or to a common centree. Among the moderns, Fermat is the firſt who ſaid in preciſe terms that the weight of a body is the ſum of the tendencies of each particle to every particle of the Earth. Kepler ſaid ſtill more expreſily, that if there be ſuppoſed two bodies, placed out of the reach of all external forces, and at perſect liberty to move, they would. approach each other, with velocities inverſely proportional to their quantities of matter. The Moon (ſays he) and the Earth mutually attract each other, and are prevented from meeting by their revolution round their common centre of attraction. And he ſays that the tides of the ocean are the efſects of the Moon's attraction, heaping up the waters immediately under her. Then, adopting the opinion of our countryman, Dr Gilbert of Colcheſter, that the Earth is a great magnet, he explains' how this mutual attraction will produce a deſlection into a curvilineal path, and adds, c Veritatis tin me ſit amor an gloriæ, loquantur dogmata mea, quæ pleNn2 i1s conſidered às the mark and meaſute of a- changing force, and his audience is reſerred to experience for the nature of this force He had beſore this exhibited to tha Society a very pretty experiment contrived on theſe prin? ciples. A ball ſuſpended by a long thread from the Geiling, was made toſwing round another ball laid on a table immediately, below the point oſ ſuſpenſion. When the puſh given to the pendulum was nicely adjuſted io ĩts deviation from the perpendicular, itdeſcribed a perfec; circle round the bull on the table. But when the puſh was very great, or very ſmall, it deſcribed an ellipſe, having the other ball in its centre. Hooke ſhewed that this was the operation of a deſlecting force proportionai to the diſtance ſrom the other hul. He added, that although this illuſtrated the planetary motions in ſome degree, yet it was not ſuſtable to their cauſe. For the plagets deſcribe ellipſes having the Sun, not in the centre, but in the focus. Thereſore they are not retained by a ſorce proportional to their diſtance from the Sun. This was ſtrict reaſoning, from good pinciples. It is worthy of remark, that in this clear, and candid, and modeſt expoſition of a rational theory, he anticipated the diſcoveries of Newton, as he anticiputed, with equal diſtinctneſs and preciſion, the diſcoveries of Lavoiſier, a philoſopher inferior perhaps only to Newton. Thus we ſeo that many hud noticed certain poinm of reſemblance between the celeſtial motions and the motions of magnets and heavy bodies. But theſe obſervers ĩet the remark remain barren in their hands, becauſe they had neither examined with ſuſſicient attention the celeſtial motions, which they attempted to explain, nor had they formed to themſelves any preciſe notions of the motions from which they hoped to derive an explanation. 434. At Iaſt a genius aroſe, fully qualiſied both by talents and diſpoſition, for thoſe arduous taſks. T ſpeak of Sir Iſaac Newton. This ornament, this hoaſt of our nature, had a moſt acute and penetrating mind, accompanied by the ſoundeſt judgment, with a modeſt and proper diſfidence in his own underſtanding. He had a patience in inveſtigation, which I believe is yet without an equal, and was convinced that this was the only compenſation attainable for the imperfection of human underſtanding, and that when exerciſed in proſecuting the conjectutes oſ a curious mind, it would not fail of giving him all the information that we are warranted to hope for. Although only 24 years of age, Mr Newton had already given the moſt illuſtrious ſpecimen of his abiſity to promote the knowledge of nature, in his curious diſcoveries concerning light and colours. Theſe were the reſult of the moſt unwearied patience, in making experiments of the moſt delicate kind, and the moſt acute penetration in ſeparating the reſulting phenomena from each other, and the cleareſt and moſt preciſe logic in reaſoning ſrom them; and they terminated in forming a body of ſcience which gave a total change to all the notions ofphiloſophers on this ſubject. Yet this body of optical ſcience was nothing but a fair narration of the facts preſented to his view. Not a ſingle ſuppoſition er conjecture is to be found in it, nor reaſoning on any thing not immediately before the eye; and all its ſcience conſiſted in the judicious claſſification. This had brought to light certain general laws, which comprehended all the reſt. Young Newton ſaw that this was ſure ground, and that a theory, ſo ſfounded, could never be ſhaken. He was determined therefore to proceed in no other way in all his future ſpeculations, well knowing that the fair exhibition of a law of nature is a diſcovery, and all thediſcovery to which our limited powers will ever admit us. For he felt in its full force the importance of that maxim ſo warmly inculcated by Lord Bacon, that nothing is to be received as proved in the ſtudy of nature that is not logically inferred from an obſerved fact; that accurate obſervation of phenomena muſt precede all theory; and that the only admiſſible theory is a proof that the phenomenon under conſideration is included in ſom general fact, or law of nature. 435. Retired to his country houſe, to eſcape the plague which thon raged at Cambridge where he ſtudied, and one day walking in his garden, his thoughts were turned to the cauſes of the planetary motions. A eonjecture to this purpoſe occurred to him. Adhering to the Baconian maxim, he immediately compared it with the phenomena by calculation. But he was miſled by æ falſe eſtimation he had made of the bulk of the Earth. His calculation ſiewed him that his conjecture did not agroe with the phenomenon. Nowton gave it up withiout heſitation; vet the difference was only about a ſixth or ſoventh part; and the conjecture, had it been confirmed by the calculution, was ſuch as would have acquired him great celebrity. What youth but Newton could have reſiſted ſuch a temptation? But he thought no more of it. As he admired Des Cartes as the ſirſt mathematician of Europe, and as his. deſire of underſtanding the planetary motions never quitted his mind, he ſet himſelf to examine, in his own ſtrict manner, the Carteſian theory, which at this time was ſupreme in the univerſities of Europe. He diſcovered its nullity, but would never have publiſied à refutation, hating controverſy above all things, and being already made unhappy by the conteſts to which his optical diſcoveries had given oceaſion. His optical diſcoveries had recommended him to the Royal Society, and he was now a member. There he learned the accurate meaſurement of the Earth by Picard, diſfering very much from the eſtimation by which he had made his calculation in 1666; and he thought his conjecture now more likely to be juſt. He went home, took out his old papers, and reſumed his calculations. As they drew to a eloſe, he was ſo much agitated, that he was obliged to deſire a friend to ſiniſh them. His former conjecture was now found to agree with the phenomena with the utmoſt preciſion. No wonder then that his mind was agitated. He ſow the revolution he was © make in the opinions of men, and that he was to ſtand at the head of philoſophers. 436. Newton now ſaw a grand ſcene laid open before him; and he was prepared for exploring it in the completeſt manner; ſor, ere this time, he had invented a ſpecies of geometry that ſeemed preciſely made for this reſearch. Dr Hookes diſcourſe to the Society, and his ſhewing that the pendulum was not a proper repreſentation of the planetary forces, was a ſort of challenge to him to find out that law of deſlection which Hooke owned himſelf unable to diſcover. He therefore ſet himſelf ſeriouſly to work on the great problem, to  determine the s motion of a body under the continual influence of a des fſlecting force. There were ſound among his papers many experiments on the force o magnets; but this does not ſeem to have detalned him long. He began to conſider the motions of terreſtrial bodies with an attention that never had been beſtowed on them before ; and in a ſhort time compoſed twelve propoſitions, which contained the leading points of celeſtial mechaniſm. Some years aſter, viz. in 1683, he communicated them to the Royal Society, and they were entered on recordl. But ſo little was Newton diſpoſed to court fame, that he never thought of publiſhing, till Dr Edmund Halley, the moſt eminent mathematician and philoſopher in the kingdom, went to viſit him at Cambridge, and never ceaſed importuning and entreating him, till he was prevailed on to bring his whole thoughts on the ſubject together, digeſted into a regular ſyſtem of univerſal mechanics. Dr Halley was even obliged to correct the manuſcript, to get the figures engraved, and, finally, to take charge oſ the printing and publication. Newton employed but eighteen months to compoſe this immortal work. It was publiſhed at laſt, in 1687, under the title of Mathematical Principles of Naturul Philoſiphy, and will be accounted the ſacred oracles oſ natural pliloſophy as long as any knowledge remains in Europe. 37. It ĩs pln, that in this proceſs oſ inveſtigation, in order to explain the planetary motions by means of our knowledge of motions that 2re more familiar, Newton was obliged to ſuppoſe that the planets conſiſt of common matter, in which we infer the nature of the moving cauſe ſrom the motions that we obſerve. Newton's ſirſt ſtep, therefore, was a ſcrupulous obſervation of the celeſtial motions, knowing that any miſtake with regard to theſe muſt bring with it a ſimilar miſtake with regard to the natural power inſerred from it. Every force, and every degree of it, is merely a philoſophical interpretation of ſome change of motion according to the Copernican ſyſtem. The Earth is ſaid to gravitate toward the Sun, becauſe, and only becauſe ſie deſcribes a curve line concave toward the Sun, and areas proportional to the times. If this be not true, it is not true that the Earth gravitates to the Sun. For this reaſon, a doubt was expreſſed (415.), whether the Newtonian diſcoveries were uſed with propriety as arguments for the truth of the Copernican ſyſtem. Moſt fortunately ſor ſcience, the real motions of the heavenly bodies had been at laſt detected; and the ſagacious Kepler had reduced them all to three general facts, known by the name of the laws of Kepler. 438. The fſirſt of thoſe laws is, that ull the planets move round the Sun in ſuch a manner that the line dran from a planet to ithe Sun poſſes over or deſer' bs (verrit, ſueeps) areas proportional to the times of the motion. Hence Newton made his firſt and great inference, tlhat the deſection of each planet is the action of a force always directed toward the 8uu (219.), that is, ſuch; that if the planet were ſlopped, and then let go, it would move toward the Sun in a ſtraight line, with a motion continually accelerated, juſt as we obſerve a ſtone fall toward the Earth. Subſequent obſervation has ſhewn this obſervation to be much more extenſive than Kepler had any notion of; for it comprehends above ninety comets, which have been accurately obſervedl. A ſimilar action or force is obſerved to connect the Moon with this Earth, four ſatellites with Jupiter, ſeven with Saturn, and ſix with Herſchel's planet, all of which deſcribe round the central body areas proportional to the times. Newton aſcribed all theſe deſflections to the action of a mechanical force, on the very ſame authority with which we aſcribe the deſlection of a bombſhell, or of a ſtone, from the line of projection to its weight, which all mankind conſider as a ſorce. He thorefore ſaid that 7he primary planets ore retained in their paths round the Sun, and the ſutellites in their puths round their reſectiv primaries, by a foree tending toward ihe central body. But it muſt be noticed that this expreſſion aſcertains nothing but the direction of this force, but gives no hint as to its manner of acting. It may be the impulſe of a ſtream of ſluid moving toward that centre; or it may be the attraction of the central body. It may be a tendency inherent in the planetit muy be the influence of ſome miniſtring ſpiritbut, whateyer it is, this is the direction of its eſſect. 439: Having made this great ſtep, by which the relation of the planets to the Sun is eſtabliſhed, and the Sun proved to be the great regulator of their motions, Newton proceeded to inquire farther into the nature of this deſlecting force, of which nature he had diſcovered only one circumſtance. He now endeavoured to diſcover what variation is made in this deſlection by a change of diſtance. I this ſollow any regular law, it will be a material point aſcertained This can be diſcovered only by comparing the momentary deſlections of a planet in its diſferent diſtances from the Sun. The magnitude or intenſity of the force muſt be conceived as preciſely proportional to the magnitude of the deſlection which it produces in the ſame time, juſt as we meaſure the force of terreſtrial gravity by the deſlection of ſixteen feet in a ſecond, which we obſerve, whether it be a bonbſhell ſlying three miles, or a pebble thrown to the Aiſtance of a few yards, or a ſtone ſimply dropped from the hand. Hence we infer that gravity is every where the ſame. We muſt reaſon in the ſame way concerning the planetary deſlections in the diſferent parts of their orbits. l Kepler's ſecond law, with the aſiſtance of the firſt, enabled Newton to make this compariſon. This ſecond general fact is, thut each planet deſcribes an ellipſe, having the Sun in one focus. Thereſore, to learn the proportion of the momentary deſlections in diſſerent points of the ellipſe, we have only to know the proportion of the arches deſcribed in equal ſmall. moments of time. This we may learn by drawing a pair of lines from the Sun to diſferent parts of the ellipſe, ſo that each pair oſ lines ſhall comprehend equal areas. The arches on which theſe areas ſtand muſt be deſcribed in equal times; and the proportion of their lincar deſlections from the tangents muſt be taken for the proportion of the deſlecting forces which produced them. To make thoſe equal areas, we muſt know the preciſe form of the ellipſe, and we muſt know the geometrical properties of this figure, that we may know the proportion of thoſe linear deſlections. * 430. * Some of thoſe properties are not to be found among the elementary propoſitions. For this reaſon, a few propoſitions, containing the properties frequently appealed to in aſtronomical diſcuſſions, are put into the hands of the ſtudents, and 440. The force by which a planet deſcrites areas proportional to the times round the focus of its elliptical orbit is as the ſquare of its diſtance from the focus, inverſely. Let F be the deſlecting force in the aphelion A (fig. 45.) and f the force in any intermediate point P. Let V and v be the velocities in A and P, and C and  be the deſlective chords oſf the equicurve circles in thoſe points. Then, by the dynamical propoſition in art. 210, we have F f= x : > or m Vi: C. But, when areas are deſcribed proportional to the times, the velocity in A is to that in P inverſely as the perpendiculars drawn from F to the tangents in A and P (102.) F A is perpendicular to the tangent in A4, and FN is perpendicular to the tangent PN. Therefore F: ſ =FN xc: FA x C. But it is ſiewn (Ellipſe, § 4.) that C, the deflective chord at A, is equal to L the principal parameter of the ellipſe. It was alſo ſiewn (Ellipſe, § 9.) that PO is half the deſlective chord at P, and (§ 8.) that P R is half the principal parameter L. Moreover, the triangles FNP and P Q O and P QR are ſimilar, and therefore FN: FP =P Q: PO. But PO: P QPQ: PR. Therefore PO:PR=IPO: P Q. Therefore FN': F?=/PR:PO, and formation, no confident knowledge can be acquired of that noble collection of demontrative truths taught by our illuſtrious and FN' X POFP: XPR, and FN' Xx 2P09FP x 2PR, that is, FN xcFP x L. Therefore F: f m FPP 3XL: FA x L, = FP:: FA:, that is, inverſely as the ſquare of the diſtance from F. 441. This propoſition may be demonſtrated more brieſly, and perhaps more palpably, as follows: It was ſiewn (Ellipſe, § 10. Cor.) that if Pꝓ be a very minute arch, and 7 be perpendicular to the radius vector PF, then q2, the linear deflection from the tangent is, ultimately, in the proportion of . But, becauſe equal areas are deſcribed in equal times, the elementary triangle P Fꝓ is a conſtant quantity, when the moments are ſuppoſed equal, and therefore 4 r is inverſely as PF, and ꝓr inverſely as P I. Thereſore q0 is inverſely as PF, or the momentary deſlection ſfrom the tangent is inverſely as the ſquare of PF, the diſtance from the ſocus. Now, the momentary deſlection is the meaſure of the deflecting force, and the force is inverſely as the ſquare of the diſtance from the focus. Here then is exhibited all that we know of that property or mechanical affection of the maſſes of matter which compoſe the ſolar ſyſtem. Each is under the continual influence of a force directed toward the Sun, urging the planet in that direction; and this force is variable in ĩts intenſity, being more intenſe as the planet comes nearer to the Sun; and this change is in the inverſe duplicate ratio of its diſtance from the Sun. It vill free us entirely from many metaphyſical objections which have heen made to this inference, if, inſtead of ſaying that the planets maniſeſt ſuch a variable tendency toward the Sun, we content ourſelves with ſimply aſfirming the ſact, that the planets are continually deſlected toward the Sun, and and that the momentary deſlections are in the inverſe duplicate ratio oſ the diſtances ſrom him. 4532. We muſt aſirm the ſame thing oſ the ſorces which retain the ſatellites in their elliptical orbits round their primary planets. For they alſo deſcribe ellipſes having the primary planet in the focus; and we muſt alſo include the Halleyan comet, which ſiewed, by its reapparition in 1759, that it deſcribes an ellipſe having the Sun in the focus. If the other comets be alſo carried round in eccentric ellipſes, we muſt draw the ſame concluſion. Nuy, ſhould they deſcribe parabolas or hyperbolas having the Sun in the focus, we ſhould ſtill find that they are retained by a force inverſely proportional to the ſquare of the diſtance. This is demonſtrated in preciſely the ſame manner as in the caſe oſ elliptical motion, namely, by comparing the linear deflections correſponding to equal elementary ſectors of the parabola or hyperbola. Theſe are deſcribed in equal times, and the lincar deſlections are proper meaſures of the deſlecting forces. We ſhall find in both of thoſe curves ꝗ proportional to  7. It is the common property of the gonic ſections referred to a focus. centric ellipſes. But we get ſight of them only when they come near to the Sun, within the orbit of Saturn. None has yet been obſerved as far oſf as that planet. The viſible portion oſ their orbits ſenſibly coincides with a parabola or hyperbola having the ſame ſocus; and their motion, computed on this ſuppoſition, agrees with obſervation. The computation in the parabola is very eaſy, and can then be transſerred to an ellipſe by an ingenious theorem of Dr Halley's in his 4ſtronomy of Comets. M. Lambert oſ Berlin has greatly ſimpliied the whole proceſs. The ſtudent will ſind much valuable inſormation on this ſubject in MfLaurin's Treatiſe of Pluxions. The chapters on curvature and ĩts variations, are ſcarcely diſtinguiſhable from propoſitions on curvilineal motion and defiecting forces. Indeed, ſince all that we know of a deſlecting force is the deſlection which we aſcribe to it, the employment of the word ſorce in ſuch diſcuſſions is little more than an abbreviation of language. This propoſition being, by its ſervices in explaining the phenomena of nature, the moſt valuable mechanical theorem ever given to the world, wve may believe that much attention has been given to it, and that many methods of demonſtrating it have been oſfered to the choice of mathematicians, the authors claiming ſome merit in facilitating or improving the inveſtigation. Newton's demonſtration is very ſhort, but is a good deal incumbered with compoſition of ratios, and an arithmetical or algebraical turn of expreſſion frequently mixed with ideas purely geometrica. Newton was obliged tocompreſs into it ſome properties of the conic ſections which were not very familiar at that time, becauſe nor of ſrequent uſe: they are now ſamiliar to every ſtudent, making part of the treatiſcs of conic ſeCtions. By referring to theſe, the ſucceeding authors gave their demonſtrations the appeãarance of greater ſimplicity and elegance:. But Newton gives another demonſtration in the ſecond and third editions of the Principia, employing the deſlective chord of the equicurve circle preciſely in the way employed in our 4ext. This mode of demonſtration has been varied a little, by employing the radius of curvature, inſtcad of the chord paſſing throughs the centre of forces. The theorems given by M. De Moivre were the ſirſt in this way, and are very general, and very elegant. Thoſe of Jo. Bernoulli, Hermann, and Keill, ſcarcely differ from them, and none of them all is preſerable to Newton's now mentioned, either for generality, ſimplicity, or elegance. 443. It remains now to inquire whether there be any analogy between the forces which retain the different planets in their reſpective orbits. It is highly probable that there is, ſecing they all reſpect the Sun. But it is by no means certain. Different bodies exhibit very different laws of action. Thoſe of magnetiſm, electricity, and coheſion, are extremely different; and the chemical aſfinities, conſidered as the eſfects of attractive and Tepulſive forces, are as varicus as the ſubſtances themſelves. As we know nothing of the conſtitution of the heavenly bodies, we cannol, a priori, ſay that it is not ſo here. Perhaps the planets are deflected by the impulſion of a fluid in motion, or are thruſt toward the Sun by an elaſtic æther, denſer and more elaſtic as we recede from the Sun. The Sun may be a magnet, and at the ſame time electrical. The Sun ſo conſtituted would act on a magnetical planet both by magnetical and electrical attraction, while another planet is affected only by his electricity. A thouſand ſuch ſuppoſitions may be formed, all very poſſible. Newton therefore could not leave this queſtion undecided. Various means of deciding it are oſfered to us by the phenomena. The motion of the comets, and particularly oſ the Halleyan comet, ſeems to decide it at once. This comet came from a diſtance, far beyond the remoteſt of the known planets, and came nearer to the Sun than Venus. Thereſore we are entitled to ſay, that a force inverſely as the ſquare oſ the diſtance from the Sun, extends without interruption through the whole planetary ſpaces. But farther, if we calculate the deſlection actually obſerved in the Halleyan comet, when it was at the ſame diſtance from the Sun as any of the planets, we ſhall find it to be preciſely the ſame with the deſlection of that planet. There can remain no doubt therefore that it is one and the ſame force which deſiects both the comet and the planet. But Newton could not employ this argument. The motions of the comets were altogether unknown, and probubly would have remained ſo, had he not diſcovered the ſameneſs oſ the planetary force through its whole ſcene of inſluence. The ſact iĩs, that Newton's ſirſt conjectures about the law of the ſolar ſorce were founded on much eaſier obſervations. Keplers third law is, that the ſquares of ile periodic times of the planets are in the ſame proportion with the cubei of their mean diſtances from the Sun,. Thus, Mars is nearly four times as far from the Sun as Mercury, and his period is nearly eight times that of MercuryNow 47 64,  8. The planets deſcribe figures which diſfer very little from circles, whoſe radii are thoſe mean diſtances. I they deſcribed circles, it would have been very eaſy to aſcertain the proportion of the centripetal forces. Tor, by art. 216, we had æ v Now, in the planetary motions, we have ſ . i d I ?  d?. Thereſore, in this caſe, ano4, that is, the forces which regulate the motions o the planets at their mean diſtances are inverſely as the ſquares of thoſe diſtances. It was this notion ſby no means preciſc) of the planetary force, which had ſirſt occupied the thoughts of young Newton, while yet a ſtudent at collegeand, on no better authority than this, had he ſuppoſed that a ſimilar analogy would be obſerved between the deſlcction of the Moon and that of a cannon bill. His diſappointment, occaſioncd by his erroncous eſtimation oſ the bul of this Earth, and his horror at the thoughts of any ſuch controverſies as his optical diſcoverics hud engaged him in, ſeem to have made him reſolve to keep theſe thoughts to himſclf. But when Picards meaſure of the Earth had removed his eauſe of miſtake, and he ſaw that the analogy did really hold with reſpect to the force reaching ſrom the Earth to the Moon; he then thought it worth his while to ſtudy the ſubject ſerloull;; and to inveſtignte the deſlection in the arch of an ellipſe. His ſtudy terminated in the propoſiiion demonſtrated above,doubtleſs, to his great delightt. He was no longer contented with the vague gueſs which he had made as to the proportion oſ the ſorces which deſlected the different planets. The orbit of Mars, and ſſill more, the orbit of Mercury, is too eccentric to be conſidered as a circle. Beſides, at the mean diſlances, the radius vector is not perpendicular to the curve, as it is in a circle. IIe was now in a condition to compare the ſimultaneous deſlections of any two plancts, in any part of their orbits. This he has done. In the fſiſteenth propoſition of the ſirſt book of the Principia, he demonſtrates that if the ſorces actuating the diſicrent planets are in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances ſrom the Sun, then the ſquares oſ the periodic times muſt be as the cubes of the mean diſtances.This bæing a matter of obſervation, it ſollows, converſely, that the ſorces are in this inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances. l Thus was his darling object attained. But, as this fiſteenth propoſition has ſome intricacy, it is not ſo clear as we ſhould wiſh in an elementary courſe like ours. The ſame truth may be eaſily made appear in the followjng manner. 444. If a planet, when at its mean diſlance from the Sun, be projected in a direction perpendicular to the radius vector, with the ſame velocity which it has in that point of its orbit, it will deſcribe a circle round the Sun in the sſame time that it deſcribes the elligſe. Let ABPD (ſig. 46.) be the elliptical orbit, having the Sun in the focus S. Let AP, BD, be the two axes, C the centre, A the aphelion, ? the perihelion, and B, D, the two ſituations of mean diſtance. About S deſcribe the circle BDM. Let BX and BN be very ſmall equal arches of the circle and the ellipſe, and let B E be onc halſ of BS. l BM, the double of BS, is the deſlective chord of the circle of curvature in the point B of the orbit (ellipſe, 5 9.), and BE is ; of that chord. Therefore (212.) the velocity in B is that which the force in B would generate by uniformly impelling the planet along BE. But a body projected with this velocity in the direction B vill deſcribe the circle BKMD. (106212.) The arches B K and BN, being equal, and deſcribed vith equal velocities, will be deſcribed in equal times. The triangles BKS, BNS, having equal baſes B K and B N, are proportional to their altitudes BS and B C (ſor the elementary arch BN may be conſidered as coinciding with the tangent in B, and B C is perpendicular to this tangent). But, becauſe BS is equal to CA, the area of the circle BM D is to that of the ellipſe ABP D as AC to BC, that is, as BS to B C, that is, as the triangle B KS to the trſangle BNS. Theſe triangles are therefore ſimilar portions oſ the whole areas, and thereſore, ſince they are deſcribed in equal times, the circle BM D and the ellipſe ABP D will alſo be deſeribed in equal times. Thus it appears that Newton's ſirſt conjecture was perfectly juſt. For if the planets, inſtead of deſcribing theiſ elliptical orbits, were deſcribing circles at the ſame diſtances, and in the ſame times, they would do it by the influence of the ſame ſorces. Therefore ſince, in this caſe, we ſhould have ? = d3, the forces will be proportional to dC inverſely. 445. We now ſee that the forces which retain the different planets in their orbits are not diſferent forces, but that all are under the inſluence oſ one force, which extends from the Sun in every direction, and decreaſes in intenſity as the ſquare of the diſtance from the Sun increaſes. The intenſity at any particular diſtance is the ſame, in whatever direction the diſtance is taken. Although the planetary courſes do not depart far ſrom our ecliptic, fined to that neighbourhood. Comets have been ſeen which riſe almoſt perpendicular to the ecliptic; and their orbits or trajectories occupy all quarters of the heavens. This relation, in which they all ſtand to the Sun, may juſtly be called a coſmical relation, depending on their mutual conſtitution, which appears to be the ſame in them all. As this force reſpects the Sun, it may be called a soLar FORCE, in the ſame ſenſe as we uſe the term magnetical force. All perſons unafſected by peculiar philoſophical notions, conceive magnetiſm diſtinctly enough by culling it Attraction. For, whatever it is, its eſects reſomble thoſe oſ attraction.  we conceive the magnetical phenomena as eſſects of a tendency toward the magnet, inberent in the iron, ve may conceive the planetary deſlections as produced in the ſame way; but this alſo indicates a ſaneneſs in the conſtitution of all the planets. Or we niay aſcribe the deſlections to the impulſions or preſſure oſ an æther; but this alſo indicates a ſameneſs of conſtitution over the whole ſyſtem. Thus, whatever notion we entertain of what we have called a ſolar or a planetary force (and the obſerved law of action limits us to no excluſive manner oſ conceiving it), we ſce a power of nuture, whether extrinſic, Iike the action of a ſluld, or intrinſie, like tendencies or attractions, which ſit the Sun and planets for a particular purpoſe, giving them à coſmical relation, and laws of action. : -u/  quas dum primordia rerum  Pangeret, omniparens leges violare Creator  Noluit, eternique operis fundamina fixit.  Sol ſolio reſidens ad ſe jubet omnia prono  Tendere deſcenſu, nec recto tramite currus * Sidereos patitur vaſtum per inane moveri,  Sed rapit; immotis, ſe centro, ſingula vris HaLLEY. 445. It is ſtill more intereſting to remark that the ſatellites obſerve the ſame law of action. For, in the little ſyſtems of a planet and its ſatellites, we obſerve the ſame analogy between the diſtances and periodic times. In ſhort, a centripetal force in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtance ſeems to be the bond by which all is held together 447. As the anmalogy obſerved by Kepler between the diſtances of the revolving bodies and the periods of their revolutions, led Newton to the diſeovery of the law of planetary deſlection; ſo, this law being eſtabliſhed, we are led to the ſecond and third fact obſerved by Kepler as its neceſſary conſequences. It appears that the periodic time of a planet under the influence of a force inverſely as the ſquare of the diſtance; depends on its mean diſtance alone, and will be the ſame, whether the planet deſcribe a circle or an ellipſe having any degree whatever of eccentricity. This, as was already obſerved, isthe ſifteenth propoſũtion of the firſt book of Newtons Principia. Suppoſe the ſhorter axis BD of the ellipio ABPD (fig. 47.) to diminiſh continually, the Ionger axis AP remaiuing the ſume. As the extremity B of the invariable line BS moves ſrom B toward C, the extremity will move toward P, and when B coincides vith C, S will coincide with P, and the ellipſe is changed into a ſtraight line P A, whoſe length is twice the mean diſtance S B. In all the ſucceſſive ellipſes produced by this gradual diminution of CB, the periodic time remains unchanged. Juſt before the perfect coincidence of B with C, the ellipſe may be conceived as undiſtinguiſhable from the lime P A. The revolution in this ellipſe is undiſtinguiſhable from the aſcent of the body from the perihelion P to the aphetion A, and the ſubſequent deſcent from A to P. Thereſore a body under the inſluence of the central force vill deſcend from A to P in half the time of the revolution in the ellipſe ADP B A. Fhereſore the time of deſcending from any diſtance BS is half the period of a body revolving at half that diſtance from the Sun. By ſuch means we can tell the time in which any planet would fall to the Sun. Multiply the half of the time of a revolution by the ſquare root of the cube of , that is, by the ſquare root of ;; the product is the time of deſcent. Or divide the time of half a revolution by the ſquare root of the cube of 2, that is, by the ſquare root of 8, that is, by 2,82847; or, which is the ſhorteſt proceſs, multiply the time of a revolution by the decimal 0,176776; d. h Mercury will fall to the Sunin ---5 13 Venus - - - - - - - 391 The Earth - - - - - - 64 10 Mars -------mn o Jupit4e ------4 29 O Saturm - - - - - - -7798 o Georgian planet --V2255406 ° The Moon to this Earth- - - - 4 21 Cor. The ſquares of the times of falling to the Sun are as the cubes of the diſtances ſrom him. 448. So far did Newton proceed in lils reaſonings from the obſervations of Kepler. But there remũined many important queſtions to be decided, in which thoſe obſervations ofered no direct help. It appeared improbable that the ſolar force ſhculd not aſfect the ſecondary plancts. It has been dcmonſtrated (252.) that if a body P (ſig. 29.) revolve round another body S, deſcribing areas proportional to the times, while S revolves round ſome other body, or is uſfocted by ſome external force, P is not only acted on by a central force directed to S, but is alio aſſected by ęvery accelerating force which acts on 5. Waiile, therefore, the Moon deſcribes areas proportional to the times round the Earth, it is not only deflected towãrd the Earth, but it is alſo deſlected as much æ the Earth is toward the Sun. For the Moon acconiQ panies the Earth in all its motions. The ſame thing muſt be aſfirmed concerning the ſatellites attending the other planets. And thus has Newton eſtablied a ſourth propoſ́tion, namely, The force hy which a ſieondory planet is mude to accompany the primary in its orbit round the S8un is continually direcied to the Sun, and is inverſely as the ſquare of th diſtance from him. For, as the primary changes its diſtance from the Sun, the force by which it is retained in its orbit varies in this inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtance. Therefore the force which cauſes the ſecondary planet to accompany its primary muſi vary in the ſame proportion,  in order to produce the ſame change in its motion that is produced in that of the primary. And, further, ſince the force which retains Jupiter in his orbit is to that which retains the Earth as the ſquare of the Earths diſtance is to that of Jupiters diſtance, the forces by which their reſpective ſatellites are made to accompany them muſt vary in the ſame proportion. TThus, all the bodies of the ſolar ſyſtem are continually urged by a force directed to the Sun, and decreaſing a: e ſquare of the diſtance from him increaſes. 449- Newton remarsed, that in all -e chęnges of motion obſervable in our fublunary world, the changes in the acting bodies are equal and oppoſite. In all impulſions, one body i is obſerved to loſe as much ral attractions and repulſions are mutual. Every action ſeems to be accompanied by an equal reaction in the oppoſite direction. He even imagined that it may be proved, from abſtract principles, that it muſt be ſoo. He thereſore aſfirmed that this law obtained alſo in the celeſtial motions, and that not only were the planets continually impelled toward the Sun, but alſo that the Sun was impelled toward the planets. The doubts which may be entertained concerning the authority of this law of motion have been noticed already. At preſent, we are to notice the facts which the celeſtial motions furniſh in Tupport of Sir Iſaac Newtons aſſertion. 450. Dirèctions have been given (294.) how to calculate the Stin's place for any given moment. When the aſtronomers had obtained inſtruments of nice conſtruction, and had improved the art of obſerving, there was found an irregularity in this calculation, which had an evident relation to the Moon. At new Moon, the obſervations correſponded exactly with the Suns calculated place; but ſeven or eight days after, the Sun is obſerved to be about 8 or 10 to the eaſtward of his calculated place, when the Moon is in her firſt quadrature, and he is obſerved as much to the weſtward when ſhe is in the laſt quadrature. In intermediate ſituations, the error is obſerved to increaſe in the proportion oſ the ſine of the Moon's diſtance from conjunction or oppoſition. lli Things muſt be ſo, if it be true that the deflection of the Moon toward the Earth is accompanied with an equal deſlection of the Earth toward the Moon. For (230.) the Moon will not revolve round the Earth, but the Earth and Moon will revolve round their common centre of poſitionn. When the Moon is in her firſt quadrature, her poſition may be repreſented by M (fig. 48.) while the Earth is at E, and their common centre ĩs at A. A ſpectator in A will ſee the Sun S in his calculated place B. But the ſpectator in the Earth E ſees the Sun in C, to the leſt hand, or eaſtward of B. The interval B C meaſures the angle BS C, or ASE, ſubtended at the Sun by the diſtance E A of the common centre of the Earth and Moon from the centre of the Earth. At new Moon, A, E, and S, are in a ſtraight line, ſo that B and C coincide. At the lait quadrature, the Moon is at m, the Earth at æ,, and the common centre at a. Now the Sun is ſeen at , 8 or 10 to the weſtward of his calculated place. This correction has been poiuted out by Newton, but it was not obſerved at the firſt, owing to its being blended with the Suns horizontal parallax which had not been taken into account. But it was ſoon recogniſed, and it now makes an article among the various equations uſed in calculating the Sun's place. . Here, then, is a plain proof of a mutual action and reaction of the Earrh and Moon. For, ſince they revolve round a common centre, the Earth is unqueſtionably deſlected into the curve line by the action of a force diy vected towards the Moon. But we have a. much better proof. The waters of the ocean are obſerved every day to heap up on that part of our globe which is under the Moon. In this ſituation, the weight of the water is diminiſhed by the attraction of the Moon, and it requires a greater elevation, or a greater quantity, to compenſate for the diminiſhed weight. On the other hand, we ſee the waters abſtracted from all thoſe parts which have the Moon in the horizon. Kepler, after aſſerting, in very poſitive terms, that the Earth and Moon would run together, and are prevented by a mutual circulation round their common centre, adduces the tides as a proof. 451. As the art of obſervation continued to improve, aſtronomers were able to remark abundant prooſs of the tendency of the Sun toward the planets. When the great planets Jupiter and Saturn are in quadrature with the Earth, to the right hand of the line drawn from the Earth to the Sun's calculated place, the Sun is then obſerved to ſhift to the left of that line, keeping always on the oppoſite ſide of the common centre of poſition. Theſe deviations are indeed very minute, becauſe the Sun is vaſtly more maſſive than all the planets collected into one lump. But in favourable ſituations of theſe planets, they are perfectly ſenſible, and have been calculated; and they muſt be taken into account in every calculation of the Sun's place, in order to have it with the accuracy that is now attainable. It muſt be granted that this accuracy, actually attained by means of thoſe corrections, and unattainable without them, is a poſitive proof of mutual deſlection of the Sun toward the planets. The quantity correſponding to one planet is too ſmall, of itſelf, to be very diſtinctly obſerved; but, by occaſionally combining with others of the ſame kind, the ſum becomes very ſenſible, and ſuſceptible of meaſure. It ſometimes amounts to 38 ſeconds, and muſt never be omitted in the calculations ſubſervient to the ſinding the Iongitude of a ſhip at ſea. Philoſophy, in this inſtance, is greatly indebted to the arts. And ſhe has liberally repaid the ſervice. 452. Here it is worthy of remark, that had the Sun been much ſmaller than he is, ſo that he would have moved much further ſrom the common centre, and would have been much more agitated by the tendencies to the different planets, it is probable that we never ſhould have acquired any diſtinct or uſeful knowledge of the ſyſtem. For we now ſee that Kepler's laws cannot be ſtrictly true; yet it was thoſe laws alone that ſuggeſted the thought, and furniſhed to young Newton the means of inveſtigation. The analogy of the periodic times and diſtances is accurate, only with reſpect to the common centre, but not with reſpect to the Sun. But the great maſs of the Sun occaſions this common centre to be generally within his ſurface, and it is never diſtant from it 7 of his diameter. Therefore this third law of Kepler is ſo nearly exact in reſpect of the Sun, that the art of obſervation, in Newtons lifetime, could not have found any error. The penetrating eye of Newton however immediately perceived his own good fortuſe, and his error in ſuppoſing Keplers laws accurately true. But this was not enough for his philoſophy; he was determined that it ſould narrate nothing but truth. With great ingenuity, and elegance of method, he demonſtrates that his mechanical inferences from Keplers laws are ſtill ſtrictly true, and that his own law of planetary ſorce is exact, although the centre of revolution is not the centre of the Sun. All the diſſerence reſpects the abſolute magnitude of the periodic times in relation to the magnitude of the force. This he demonſtrates in a ſeries oſ propoſitions, of which our § 231. is the chief. 453. Newton proceeds ſtill further in his inveſtigation of the extent oſ the inſluence of this planetary ſorce, and ſays that all the planets mutually tend toward each other. It does not appear how this opinion aroſe in hi; mind. There are abundance of phenomena, however, of eaſy obſervation, which make it very evident. It was probably a conjecture, ſuggeſted by obſerving this reciprocal action between the Earth and Moon. But he immediately followed it into its conſequences, and pointed them out to the aſtronomers. They are very important, and explain many phenomena which had hitherto greatly perplexed the aſtronomers. Suppoſe Jupiter and Mars to be in conjunction, lying in the ſame line from the Sun. As Mars revolves mucli quicker than Jupiter, he gets before him, but, being attracted by Jupiter, his motion is retarded—and Jupiter, being attracted by Mars, is accelerated. On the contrary, before Mars arrives at conjunction with Jupiter, Mars is accelerated, and Jupiter is retarded. Further, the attraction of Mars by Jupiter muſt diminiſh the tendency of Mors to the Sun, or muſt act in oppoſition to the attraction of the Sun; therefore the curvature of Marss orbit in that place muſt be diminiſhed. On the contrary, the tendency of Jupiter to Mars, acting in the ſame direction as his tendency to the Sun, muſt increaſe the curvature of that part of Jupiter's orbit. If Jupiter be at this time advancing to his aphelion, this increaſe oſ curvature will ſooner hend the line of bis motion from an obtuſe into a right angle with the radius vector. Therefore his aphelion will be ſooner attained, and it will appear to have ſhifted to the weſtward. For the oppoſite reaſons, the apſides of Mars will ſeem to ſhiſt to the eaſtward. There are other ſituations of theſe planets where the contrary effects ill happon. In each revolution, each planet will be alternately accelerated twice, and twice retarded, and the apſides of the exterior planet will continually recede, and that of the interior will advance. It is obvious that this diſturbance of the motion of a planet by its deflection to another, though probably very minute, yet being continued for a tract of time, its accumulated reſult may become very ſenſible. Theſe changes are all ſuſceptible of accurate calculation, as we ſhall aſterwards explain particularly. This muſt be conſidered as a convincing proof of the mutual action of the heavenly bodies, and it adds freſh lES luſre Iuſtre. to the penetration and genius of Newton, who made theſe aſſertions independent of obſervation, pointing out to aſtronomers the ſure means of perfecting their Enowledge of the celeſtial motions. 454: Here therefore we have eſtabliſhed a fifth propoſition in phyſical aſtronomy, namely, that all the hodies in the ſilar ſyſtem tend mutually toward one another, with forces which vary in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances. It did not ſatisfy Newton that he merely pointed out the groſs effect of this mutual tendency. He gave aſtronomers the means of inveſtigating and aſcertaining its intenſity, and its variation by a variation of diſtance. The effect of the Eartl's tendency to Jupiter during any length of time, may be computed by means of Newtons dynamical propoſitions, contained in the firſt book of his Principia, particularly by the 39th. Of theſe we have given a proper ſelection in the general doctrines of Dynamics. 455. But the inquiſitive mind of Newton did not ſtop heree. He was anxious to learn whether this planetary tendency had any reſemblance or relation to forces with which we are more familiarly acquainted. OF this kind are magnetiſm and gravity. He was the more incited to this inveſtigation by the conjectures on this ſubject which had ariſen in the mind of Kepler. This great aſtronomer had been much taken with the diſcoR1 very juſt publiſied by Dr Gilbert of Colcheſter, ſtating that this Earth is a great magnet, and he was diſpoſed to aſcribe the revolution of the Moon to the magnetical inſluence of the Earth. It appears from Newton's papers, that he had made a gret many experiments for diſcovering the law oſ magnetic action. But he had found it ſo dependant on circumſtances of form and ſituation, and ſo changeable hy time, that it feemed ſuſceptible of no compariſon wĩth the ſolar ſoree; and he ſoon gave it up. He was more ſucceſoful in tracing the reſemBlanees obſervable in the phenomena of common gravity.. It has been alveady reniarked (435.), that, very early in life, he had conjectured hat it was the ſame vith the ſolar force 3and that aftor he had formed the opinion that the ſolar force varied in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtance, he put his conjecture to the teſt, by comparing the fall of a ſtone with the deſlection of ſhie Moon. The diſtance of the Moon is eſtimated to be 60 femidiameters of the Earth. Therefore, if gravity and the lunar deſlecting force be the ſame, the ſtone ſhould deſlect as much in one ſecond as the Moon does in a minute. For we may, without any ſenſible error, ſuppoſe that the lunar ſorce acts uniforſly during one minute. Tf ſo, the linear deſlections muſt be as the ſquares of the times. The deſlection in a minute muſt be 66 X 60 times, or 3600 times the deſlection in a ſecond. But, according to the law of plane*ary force, the deſlection at the Earth's ſurface muſt be Go x 60, or 3600 times the deſlection at the Moonl Now, in a ſecond, a ſtone falls 16 feet and an inch. Therefore the Moon ſhould deſlect 16 feet and an inch in a minute from the tangent of her orbit. Newton calęulated the verſed ſirte of the arch deſcribed by the Moon in a minute, to a radius equal to 6o ſemidiameters of the Earth. He found it only about 135 feet, and he gave over any farther inquiry. But he had haſtily ſuppoſed a degree to contain Go miles, not attending to the difference between a geographical mile, or 6oth of a degree, and an Engliſh ſtatute mile. A degree contains 69% ſuch miles; ſo that he had made the Moons orbit, and conſequently her deſlection, too ſmall in the ſame proportion.  we increaſe the calculated deflection in this proportion, it comes out exaẽtly 16;; and the conjecture is fully eſtabliſhed. When Picards accurate meaſure of the Earth had enabled Newton to confirm his former conjecture concerning the identity of the planetary force and terreſtrial gravity, he again made the calculation and compariſon in the most ſerupulous manner. For we now ſee that ſeveral circumftances muſt be taken into the account, which he had omitted in his firſt computation from Picard's meaſure of the Earth The fall in a ſecond is not the exact meaſure of terreſtrial gravity. A ſtone would fall farther, were it not that ĩts gravity is:diminiſhed by the Earti's rotation. It is alſo diminiſhed by the action of the Sun and Moon, and hy the weight of the air which the ſtone diſplaces. All theſe diminutions of the accelerating tion, and were accordingly calculated by Newton, and the amount added to the obſerved acceleration of a falling body. In the next place, the real radius of the Moons orbit muſt be reckoned only from the common centre oſ the Earth and Moon. And then the force deduced ſrom this deflection mut be increaſed in the ſubduplicate ratio oſ the matter in the Earth to the matter in the Earth and Moon added together (231.) All this has been done, and the reſult cĩncides preciſely with obſervation. This may be demonſtrated in another way. We can tell in what time a body would revolve round the Earth, cloſe to its ſurface. For ve muſt. have ? proportional to d3. It will be found to be 84 minutes and 34 ſeconds. Then we know the arch deſcribed in one ſecond, and can calculate its defſlection from the tangent. We ſhall ſind it 16;; feet, the ſame with that produced by common gravity. 456. Terreſtrial gravity, therefore, or that force whicl canſes bodies to fall, or to preſs on their ſupports, is only a particular example of that univerſal tendency, by which all the bodies of the ſolar ſyſtem are retained in their orbits. We muſt now extend to thoſe bodies the other ſymptoms of common gravity. It is by gravity that water arranges itſelf into a level ſurface, that is, a ſurface which makes a part of the great ſphere oſ the ocean. The weight of this water keeps it together, in a round form. nets to a ſimilar operation. A body on their ſurface will preſs it as a heavy body preſſes the ground. Dr Hooke remarks that all the protuberances on the ſurſace of the Moon are of forms conſiſtent with a gravity toward its centre. They are generally ſloping, and, though in ſome places very rugged and precipitous, yet nowhere overhang, or have any ſhape that would not ſtand on the ground. The more rugged parts are moſt evidently matter which has been thrown up by volcanic exploſion, and have fallen down again by their lunar gravity. 457. That property by which bodies are heavy is called GRAVITY, HEAVINESSthe being heavy; and the fact that it moves toward the Earth, may be called õrAvrraTion. While it falls, or preſſes on its ſupports, it may be ſaid to gravitate, to give indication of its being gravis or heavy. In this ſenſe the ꝑlanets gravitate to the Sun, and the ſecondary planets to their primaries, and, in ſhort, every body in the ſolar ſyſtem to every other body. By the verb # gravitate, nothing is meant but the fact, that they either actually approach, or maniſeſt, by a very ſenſible preſſure, tendencies to approach the body to which they are ſaid to gravitate. The verb, or the noun, ſhould not be conſidered as the expreſſion of any quality or property, but merely of a phenomenon, a fact or event in nature. 458. But this deviation ſrom uniform rectilineal mopion is conſidered as an qſfect, and it ĩs of importance to diſcover the cauſe. Now, in the moſt ſamiliar inſtance, the ſall or preſſure of a heavy body, we aſcribe the fall, or preſſure indicating the tendency to ſall, to ĩts heavineſs. But we have no other notion of this heavineſs than the very thing which we aſcribe to it as an efſect. The feeling the heavineſs of the piece of lead that lies in our hand, is the ſum of all that we know about it. But we conſider this heavineſs as a property of all terreſtrial matter, becauſe all bodies give ſome of thoſe appearances which we conſider as indications of it. All move toward the Earth if not ſupported, and all preſs on the ſupport. The feeling of preſfure which a heavy body excites might be conſidered as its characteriſtic phenomenon; for it is this feeling that makes us think it a forcewe muſt oppoſe our foree to it; but we cannot diſtinguiſh it from the feeling of any other equal preſſure. It is moſt diſtinguiſhable as the cauſe of motion, as a moving or accelerating force. In ſhort, we know nothing of gravity but the phenomena, which we conſider, not as gravity, but as its indication. It is, like every other forcean unknown quality. The weight of a body ſhould be diſtinguiſhed from its gravity or heavineſs, and the term ſhould be reſerved for expreſſing the mcaſure of the united gravitation of all the mater in the body. This is indeed the proper ſenſe of the term ueightpondus. In ordinary buſineſs;, ve meaſure the weights of bodies by means of known units oſ weight. A piece of Iead is ſaid to be of twenty pounds weight, when it balances twenty pieces of matter, each of which is a pound; but we frœquently meaſure it by means of other preſiures, as when we judge of it by the divifion to which it draws the ſcale of a ſpring ſteelyard. 459. We eſtimate the quantity oſ matter in a body by its weight, and ſuy tt there is nineteen times as much marter in a cubic foot of gold as there is in a cubic ſoot of water. This evidently preſuppoſes that all matter is heavy, and equally heov;—that every primitive atom of matter is equally haavy. Sut this ſeems to be more thanm we are entitled to ſay, without ſome poſitive proof. There is nothing inconceivable or abſurd in ſuppoſing one atom to be twice or thrice as heavy as another. As gravity is a contingent quality o matter, its abſolute ſtrength or force ĩs alſo eontingent and arbitrary.. We can conceive an atom to have no weight. Nay, we ean as clearly conceive an atom of matter to be endowed with a tendency upwards as with a tendency downwards. Accordingly, during the prevaIence of the Stahlian doctrine of combuĩtion, that matter which imparts inflammability to bodies was ſuppoſed to be not only without weight, but poſitively light, and to diminiſh the weĩght of the other ingredients with which it was combined in a eombuitible body. In this way, the abettors of that doctrine uccounted for the increaſo of weight obſervable when a body is burnt. There is nothing abſurd or unreafonable in all this; and had we no other indication of gravity but its ꝓreſfure, ve do not ſee how this queſtion can be derided. But gravity is not only a preſſing power, but alſo a moving or accelerating power. If a body conſiſted of æ thouſand atoms of gravitating matter, and as many atoms of matter which does not gravitate, and if the gravity of each atom exerted the preſſure of one grain, this body would weigh a thouſand grains, either by a balance or a ſpring ſteelyard, yet it contiins two thouſand atoms of matter. But take another body of the ſame weight, but conſiſting wholly of gravitating atoms; drop theſe two bodies at once from the hand—the laſt mentioned will fall 16 feet in the ſirſt ſecondthe other will ſall only 8 ſeet. For in both there is the ſame moving force; therefore the ſame quantity of motion will be produced in both bodies; that is, the products of the quantities of matter by the velocities generated will be the ſame. Therefore the velocity acquired by the mixed body will be one half of that acquired in the ſame time by the ſimple body. The phenomenon will be what was aſſerted, one will fall 16 and the other only 8 feet. This will be ſtill more forcibly conceived, if we take two bodies a and b, each containing 1coo atoms of gravitating matter, and attach a to another body c, containing 1000 atoms which do not gravitate. Now, unleſs we ſuppoſe c moveable and arreſtable by a thought or a word, ve can have no heſitation in ſaying that the maſs a + c will fall with half the velocity of b. We ſee thereſore that the accelerating power alone of gravity enables us to decide the queſtion,  whether all terreſtrial matter gravitates, and gravitates alikee We have ònly to try whether all terreſtrial bodies fall equally ſar in the ſame time, or receive an equal increment of velocity in the ſame time. This teſt of the matter did not eſcape the penetrating genius of young Newton. He made experiments on every kind of ſubſtance, metals, ſtones, woods, grain, ſalts, animal ſubſtances, &c. and made them in a way ſuſceptible of the utmoſt accuracy, as we ſhall ſee aſfterwards. The reſult was, that all theſe ſubſtances were equally accelerated; and, on this authority, Newton thought himſelf entitled to ſay that ALL TERRESTRIAL MATTER IS EQUALLY HEAVY. This however may be diſputed. For it is plain that if all bodies contain an equal proportion of gravitating and nongravitating matter, they will be equally accelerated; nay, the unequal gravitation of diſcrent ſubſtances, and even poſitive levity, muy be ſo compenſated by the proportion of thoſe diſferent kinds of mutter, that the total gravitation may ſtill be proportional to the whole quantity of matter. But, till we have ſome authority for ſaying that there is a diſference in the gravitation of difſerent atoms, the juſt rules of philoſophical diſcuſſion oblige us to believe that all gravitate alike. This is corroborated by the univerſality of the law of mutual and equal reaction. This is next to demonſtration that the primitive atoms are alike in every reſpect, and therefore in their gravitation. We are entitled thereſore to ſay that all terreſtrial matter is equally heavy, and that the weight of a body is the meaſure of the united gravitation of every atom, and thereſore is a meaſure of, or is proportional to, the quantity of matter contained in it. 460. Newton naturally, and juſtly, extended the affirmation o the planets and to the Sun. But here ariſes a cueſtion, at once nice and important. The law of gravitation, ſo oſten mentioned, is exhibited in the mutual deſlections of great mæſſes oſf matter. Theſe deflections are in the inverſe duplicate ratio oſ the diſtances between the contres of the maſſes. Are we warranted by this obſervation to ſay that this is alſo the law of action between every atom of one body and every atom oſ another? Can we ſay in general that the law of corpuſcular action is the ſame with that of maſſes, reſulting ſfrom the combined action oſ each atom on each? We are aſſured by experience that it is not. For we obſerve that, in magnets, the law of acion (that is, the relation ſubſiſting between the diſtances and the intenſities of force) is diſferent in almoſt every diſſerent magnet, and ſeems to depend in a great meaſure on their form. Newton was too cautious, and too good a logician, to advance ſuch a propoſition without proof; and therefore, conſining himſelf to the ſinzle caſe of ſpherical and ſpheroidal bodies, the forms in which we obſerve the planetary maſſes to be compacted, he inquired what ſenſible actjon between the maſſes will reſult from an action between their particles inverſely proportional to the ſquare oſ their diitances. Let ALBM, albm (ſig. 49.) be two ſpherical ſurfaces, of which C is the common centre, and let the ſpace between them be filled with gravitating matter, uniformly denſe. Let 2 be a particle placed any where vithin this ſpherical ſhell, to every particle of which it gravitates with a force inverſely as the ſquare of its diſtance from it. This particle will have no tendency to move in any direction, becauſe ĩts gravitation in any one direction is exactly balanced by an equal gravitation in the oppoſite direction. Draw through ꝓ the two ſtraight Iines dps, epò, making a very ſmall angle at 5. This may repreſent the ſection of a very ſlender double cone a ꝓe, à 4:, having ? for the common vertex, and d ę, 3: for the diameters of the circular baſes. The gravitation of 4 to the matter in the baſe dæe is equil to its gravitation to the matter in the baſe 3:. For the number of purticles in àæ is to the number in à⸗ as the ſurſace of the baſe àæ to that of the baſe àc, that is, as d æ? to à.}, that is, as p d* to ò°, that is, as the gravitation to a particle in à: to the gravitation to a particle in d e. Thereſore the whole gravitation to the matter in dæe is the ſame with the whole gravitation to the matter in 3:.ſince it ĩs alſo in the oppoſite direction, the particle  is in equilibrio. The ſame thing may be demonſtrated of the gravitation to the matter in r and in 51, and, in like manner, of the gravitation to the matter in the ſections of the cones dpe, 3: by any other concentric ſurſace. Conſequently, the gravitation to the whole matter contained in the ſolid d qre is equal to the gravitation to the whole matter in the ſolid 31s:, and the porticle ꝓ is ſtill in equilibrio. i No, ſince the lines àps, æpà may be drawn in any direction, and thus be made to occupy the whole ſphere, it is evident that the gravitation of 2 is balanced in every direction, and therefore it has no tendency to move in any direction in conſequence of this gravitation to the ſpherical ſhell of matter comprehended between the ſurfaces AL BM and a ſb m. It is alſo evident that this holds true with reſpect to all the matter comprehended bętween AL BM and the concentric ſurface  n v paſſing through »3 in ſhort, is in equilibrio in its gravitation to all the matter more remote than itſelf from the centre of the ſphere, and appears as if it did not gravitate at all to any matter more romote from the centre. 461. We have ſuppoſed the ſpherical ſiell to be uniformly denſe. But ꝓ will ſtill be in equilibrio, although the ſhell be made up of concentric ſtrata oſ diſſerent denſity, provided that each ſtratum be uniſormly denſe. For, ſhould we ſuppoſe that, in the ſpace comprehended between AL BM and ꝓnv, there occurs a ſurface a lb m of a diſferent denſity from all the reſt, the gravitation to the intercepted portions 57 and s? are equal, becauſe theſe portions are of equal denſity, and are proportional to 44 and ꝓ5 inverſely. The propoſition may therefore be expreſſed in the following very general terms. 4A porticle placed any ahere within a ſpherical ſsbell of s gravitating matter, of equal denſity at all equal diſtances sfſrom ihe centre, will be in equilibrio, and aill have no tendency to move in any direction RemarEThe equality oſ the gra- itation to the ſurſace æd and to the ſurface :à is aſirmed, becauſe the numbers of particles in the two ſurfaces are inverſely as the gravitations towards one in each. For the very ſame reaſon, the gravitations to the ſurfaces e d, and qr, and ts, are all equal. Hence may be derived an elementary propoſition, which is of great uſe in all inquiries of this kind ;namely, 462. IF a cone or pyramid àꝓæ, of uniſorm gravitating matter, be divided by parallel ſections àæ, ꝗr, &e. the gravitation of1 a particle  in the vertex to each of thoſe ſections is the ſame, and the gravitations to the ſolids  qr, pde, q d e r, &c. are proportional to their lengths ꝓ q, ? d, qd, &c. The ſirſt part of this propoſition is already demonſtratedl. Now, conceive the cone to be thus divided into innumerable ſlices of equal thickneſs. It is plain that the gravitation to each of theſe is the ſame, and thereſore the gravitation to the ſolid ꝗ is 10 the gravitation to the ſolid ꝗ d e r as the number of ſlices in the ſirſt to the number in the ſecond, that is, as r9 the length of the ſirſt, to ꝗd, the length of the ſecond. The cone d p e was ſuppoſed extremely ſlender. This was not neceſſary for the demonſtration of the particular caſe, where all the ſections were paralle. But in this elementary propoſition, the angle at 4 is ſuppoſed ſmaller than any aſſigned angle, that the cone or pyramid may be conſidered as one of the elements into which we may reſolve a body of any ſform. In this reſolution, the baſes are ſuppoſcd, if not otherwiſe expreſly ſtated, to be parallel, and perpendicular to the axes; indecd they are ſuppoſcd to be portions æ r, ye, æ3, &c. of ſpherical ſurſuces, having their centres in . The ſmall portions xrq; ye d, æ3, &e. are held as inſigniſicant, vaniſhing in the ultimate ratios of the whole ſolids. It is eaſy alſo to ſee that the equilibrium of ꝓ is not Iimited to the caſe of a ſpherical ſiell, but will hold true of any body compoſed of parallel ſtrata, or ſtrata ſo formed that the lines ꝓ d, 2 are cut in the ſame proportion by the ſections dæ, q r, &e. In a ſpheroidal ſhell, for example, whoſe inner and outer ſurfaces are ſimilar, and ũmilarly poſired ſpheroĩds, the particle ꝓ will be in equilibrio any where within ĩt, becauſe in this caſe, the lines 25 and næ are equal; ſo are the lines . and o d, the lines 23 and re, the lines s: and qd, &e. In moſt caſes, however, there is but one ſituation of the particle ꝓ that will inſure this equilibrium. But we may, at the ſume time, inſer the following very uſeful propoſition. 63. If ihere he tuo ſolids perfectly ſimilar, and of the same uniſorm denſity, the gravitation to each of theſe ſolids by a particle ſimilarly placed on or in each, is proportiomal to any homologous lines of the ſulids. For, the ſolids being ſimilar, they may be reſolved into the ſame number of ſimilar pyramids ſimilarly placed in the ſolidss The gravitations to each of any correſponding pair of pyramids are proportional to the lengths oſ thoſe pyramids. Theſe lengths have the ſame proportion in every correſponding pair. Thereſore the abſoIute gravitations to the whole pyramids of one ſolid has the ſame ratio to the abſolute gravitation to the whole pyramids of the other ſolid. And, ſince the ſolids are ſimilar, and the particles are at the ſimilarly placed vertexes of all the ſimilar and ſimilarly placed pyramids, the gravitation compounded of the abſolute gravitations to the pyramids of one ſolid has the ſame ratio to the gravitation ſimilarly compounded of the abſolute gravitations to the pyramids of the other. 464. The gravitation of an external particle to a ſpherical ſurface, ſvell, or entire ſphere, which is equally denſe at all equal diſtances from the centre, is the ſume as if the whole matter aere collected in ils centre. Let ALBM (ſig. 49.) repreſent ſuch a ſphere, and Iet P be the external particle. Draw P A CB through the centre C of the ſphere, and croſs it by LCM at right angles. Draw two right lines P D, P E, containing a very ſmall angle at P, and cutting the great circle ALBM in D, E, D, E. About P as a centre, with the diſtance P C, deſcribe the arch Cà m, cutting DP in d, and EP in . About the ſame centre deſcribe the are DO. Draw d F, æ G parallel to AB, and cutting LC in and 2. Draw CK perpendicular to P D, and H, D), and F I9 perpendicular to AB. Join CD and CF. Now let the figure be ſuppoſed to turn round the ais PB. The ſemicircumſerence A L B will generate a complete ſpherical ſurſace. The arch Cd m will generate another ſpherical ſurface, having P for its centreThe ſmall arches DE, dæ, F G will generate rings or zones oſ thoſe ſpherical ſurfaces. D O will alſo generate a zone of a ſurface having P ſor its centre. ſg and FI will generate zones oſ ſlat circular ſurfaces. It is evident that the zones generated by DE and D O (which we may call the zones DE and D O), having the ſame radius D3, are to each other as their reſpective breadths D E and DO. In like manner, the zones generated by de, fę, FI, FG, being all at the ſame diſtance from the axis A B, are alſo as their reſpective breadths d ę, fę, FI, F G. But the zone D O is to the zone d e as P O to P d?. For DO is to de as PD to Pd, and the radius of rotation Dà is to the radius dH, alſo as ?PD to Pd. The circumferences deſcribed by D O and 4e are thereſore in the ſame proportion of PD to Pd. Thereſore the zones, being as their breadths and as their circumſerences jointly, are as PD: and Pà'. . C X and d H, being the ſines of the ſame arch C4, are equal. Therefore XD and ſF, the halves oſ chords equally diſtant ſrom the centre, are alſo equal. Thereſore the triangles CD K and CFf are equal and ſimilar. But CDK is ſimilar to ED O. For the right angles PDO and CDE are equal. Taking away the common angle CDO, the remainders CDK and EDO are equal. In like manner, CFf and GFI are ſimilar, and 5] mentary triangles ED O and G FI are ſimilar, and DO: DEæTFI: FG. The abſolute gravitation or tendency oſ P to the zone D O is equal to its abſolute gravitation to the zone d e, becauſe the number of particles of the ſirſt is to the number in the Ilaſt in P D? to P 4?, that is, inverſely as the gravitation to a particle in the firſt to the gravitation to a particle in the laſt. Therefore let expreſs the circumference of a circle whoſe radius is I. The ſurface of the zone generated by D O will be DO xX c x Dò, and the gravitation to it will be DO x  x D? de x c x dH de Xx c xdH 0D © which ?V& is equal. This expreſſcs the abſolute gravitation to the zone generated by DO, this gravitation being exerted in the direction P D. . But it is evident that the tendency oſf P, ariſing from its gravitation to every particle in the zone, muſt be in the direction PC. The oblique gravitation muſt therefore be eſtimated in the direction P C, and muſt (178.) be reduced, in the proportion of P d to P H. It is plain that Pà: PH =d æ: fg5, becauſe de and fę are perpendicular to Pà and T H. Thercfore the reduced or central gravitation of P to the zone generated by D O PrC i But the gravitation to the zone generated by D O is will be expreſſed by to the gravitation to the zone generated by DE as DO to DE, that is, as FI (or 7g) to F G. Therefore the central gravitation to the zone generated by D E will be expreſſed by Pœæ0 Now FG x  X dH is the value of the ſurſace of the zone generated by F G. And if all this matter were collected in C, the gravitaFG xX c xX dH ; P75 and it would be in the direction P C. Hence it ſollows that tion oſ P to it would be exactly the central gravitation oſ P to the zæone generated by DE, is the ſame as its gravitation to all the matter in the zone generated hy F G, if that matter were placed in C. What has been demonſtrated reſpecting the arch DE is true of every portion of the circumference, Each has a ſubſtitute FG, which being placed in the centre C, the gravitation oſ P is the ſame, IF PT touch the ſphere in T, every portion of the arch TL B will have its ſubſtitute in the quadrant L B, and every part of the arch AT has its ſubſtitute in the quadrant ATIL, as is eaſily ſeen, And hence it follows that the gravitation to a particle P to a ſpherical ſurſace AL BM is the ſame as if all the matter of that ſurſface were collected in its centre. We ſee alſo that the gravitation to the ſurface generated by the rotation of AT round AB is equal to the gravitation to the ſurface generated by TL B, which is much larger, but more remote. What we have now demonſtrated with reſpect to the furface generated by the ſemicircle AL B is equally true with regard to the ſurface generated by any concentrie ſemicirele, ſuch as a ſ b. It is true, therefore, in regard to the ſell comprehended between thoſe ſurfaces; for this ſhell may be reſolved into innumerable concentrie ſtrata, and the propoſition may be aſirmed with reſpect to each of them, and thereſore with reſpect to the whole. And this will ſtill be true if the whole ſphere be thus occupied. Laſtly, it follows that the propoſition ĩs ſtill true, although thoſe ſtrata ſhould diſſer in denſity, provided that each ſtratum is uniformly denſe in every part. It may thereſore be aſſirmed in the moſt general terms, that a particle P, placed without a ſpherical ſurface, ſhell, or entire ſphere, equally denſe at equal diſtances ſrom the centre, tends to the centre vith the ſame force as if the whole matter of the ſurſace, ſhell, or ſphere, were collected there. This will be found to be a very important propoſition, greatly aſſiſting us in the explanation of abſtruſe phenomena in other departments oſ natural philoſophy. 465. The gravitation of an external particle to a ſpherical ſurface, ſbell, or entire ſphere, of uniform denſity at equal diſtances from the centre, is as the quantity of matter in that body, directly, and as the ſquare of the diſtance from its centre, inverſcly. For, if all the matter were collected in its centre, the gravitation would be the ſame, and it would then vary in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtance. 466. Cor. 1. Particles placed on the ſurface oſ ſpheres of equal denſity gravitate to the centres of thoſe ſpheres with forces proportiona to the radii of the ſpheres. For the quantities of matter are as the cubes of the radii. Therefore the gravitation g is as, that is, as 4. di dm This is a particular caſe of Prop. 463. 467. Cor. 2. The ſame thing holds true, if the diſtance of the external particles from the centres of the ſpheres are as the diameters or radii of the ſpheres. 468. Cor. 3. If a particle be placed within the ſurface of a ſphere of uniform denſity, its gravitation, at diſforent diſtances from the centre, will be as thoſe diſtances. For it will not be affected by any matter of the ſphere that is more remote from the centre (463.); and its gravitation to what is leſs remote is as its diſtance from the centre, by the laũt corollary. 469. The mutual grovitation of tuo ſpheres of uniform denſity in their concentric ſtrata is in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſlance betaeen their centres. For the gravitation of each particle in the ſphere A to the ſphere B is the ſame as if all the matter in B were collected at its centre. Suppoſe it ſo placed. The gravitation of B to A will be the ſame as if all the matter in A were collected in its centre. Therefore it will be as d* inverſely. But the gravitation of A to B is equal to that of B to A. Therefore, &c. 470. The abſolute gravitation of two ſpheres whoſe quantities of matter are a and b, and à the diſtance of . . a xb their centres, is x⸗ For the tendency of one particle of a to b, being the aggregate of its tendencies to every particle of , is > Therefore the tendency of a x b the whole of a to b muſt be vis And the tendency of b to a is equal to that of a to b. 471. This conſequence of a mutual gravitation be: . I. tween particles proportional to u b agreeable to what ſi is obſerved in the ſolar ſyſtem. The planets are very nearly ſpherical, and they are obſerved to gravitate mutually in this proportion of the diſtance between their centres. This mutual action of two ſpheres could not reſult from any other Iaw of action between the particles. Therefore we conclude that the particles of gravitating matter of which the planets are formed gravitate to each other according to this law, and that the obſerved gravitation of the planets is the united eſfect of the gravitation of each particle to each. There is juſt one other caſe, in which the law of corpuſcular action is the ſame with the law of action between the maſſes; and this is when the mutual action of the corpuſcles is as their diſtance directly. But no ſuch law is obſerved in all the phenomena of nature. The general inference drawn by Sir Iſaac Newton from the phenomena, may be thus expreſed: Every particle of matter gravitates to every other particle of matter with a force inverſely proportional to the ſquare of ihe dittance from it. Hence this doctrine has been called THE DOCTRINE OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. The deſcription of a conic ſection round the focus fully proves that this law of the diſtances is the law competent to all the gravitating particles. But, vhether all particles gravitate, and gravitate alike, ĩs not demonſtrated. Ile analogy between the diſtance of the difſerent planets and their periodic times only proves that the total gravitation of the diſferent planets is in the ſame proportion with their quantity oſf matter. For the ſorce obſerved by us, and found to be in the inverſe duplicate ratio oſ the diſtance of the planet, is the accelerating ſorce of gravity, being meaſured by the acceleration which it produces in the different planets. But if one halſ of a planet be matter which does not gravitate, and the other half gravitates twice as much as the matter oſ another planet, theſe two planets will ſtill have their periods and diſtances agreeable to Kepler's third lIaw. But, ſince no phenomenon indicates any inequality in the gravitation of diſferent ſubſtances, it is proper to admit its perſect equality, and to conclude with Sir Tſaac Newton. 472. The general conſequence of this doctrine is, that any two bodies, at perfect liberty to move, ſhould approach each other. This may be made the ſubject of experiment, in order to ſee whether the mutual tendencies of the planets ariſe ſrom that of their particles. For it muſt ſtill be remembered that although this conſtitution of the particles will produce this appearance, it may ariſe from ſome other cauſe. . Such experiments have accordingly been made. Bodies have been ſuſpended very nicely, and they have bęen obſerved to approach each other. But a more careful examination of all circumſtances has ſiewn that moſt of thoſe mutual approaches have ariſen from other cauſes. Several philoſophers of reputation have therefore refuſed to admit a mutual gravitation as a phenomenon competent to all matter. But no ſuch approach ſould be obſerved in the experiments now alluded to: The mutual approach of two ſpheres A and B, at the diſtance D of their centres, muſt be to the approach to the Earth E at the diſtance à of their centres in the pròportion of Axæ to Axæ B : that is, of 5 toæ Therefore, if a particle be placed at the ſurface of a golden ſphere one foot in diameter; its gravitation to the Earth muſt be more than ten millions of times greater than its gravitation to the gold. For the diameter of the Earth is nearly forty millions of feet, and the denſity of gold is nearly four times the mean denſity of the Earth. And therefore, in a ſecond, it would approach leſs than the ten millionth part oſ 16 feeta quantity altogether inſenſible. If we could employ in theſe experiments bodies of ſuſicient magnitude, a ſenſible eſfect might be expected: Buppoſe T (fig. 50.) to be a hall oſ equal denſity with the Earth, and two geographical miles in diameter, and let the particle B be at its ſurſace. Its gravity to T will be to its gravitation to the Earth nearly as 1 to 2300, and therefore, i ſuſpended like a plummet, it would certainly deviate  from the perpendiculan. A mountain two miles high, and hemiſpherical, riſing in a level country, would produce the fame deviation of the plummet. 474. Accordingly, ſuch deviation of a plumb line has been obſerved. Firft by the French academicians employed to meafure a degree of the meridian in Peru. Having placed their obſervatories on the north and ſouth ſides of the vaſt mountain Chimboracao, they found that the plummets of their quadrants were deſlected toward the mountain. Of this they could accurately judge, by means of the ſtars which they ſaw through the teleſcope of their quadrant, when they were pointed vertically by means oſ the plummet. Thus, if the plummets take the poſitions AB, CD (fig. 51.), inſtead of hanging in the verticals AF and CH, a ſtar I, will ſeem to have the zenith diſtances æ I, g1, inſtead of E I, GI, which it ought to have; and the diſtance FH on the Earth's ſurface will ſeem the meafure of the difference of latitude æ 5, whereas it correfponds to E G. The meaſure of a degree including the fpace F H, and eſtimated by the declination of a ſtar I, will be too ſhort, and the meaſure of a degree terminating either at F or H will be too long, when the ſpace FH is excluded. Conſiderable doubts remaining a to the inferences drawn from this obſervation, the philoſophers were very deſirous of having it repeated. For this reaſon, our Bovereign, George III., ever zealous to promote true ſcience, ſent the Royal aſtronomer Dr Maſkelyne to Scotland, to make this experiment on the north and ſouth ſides of Shihallien, a lofty and ſolid mountain in Perthſhire. The deviation toward the mountain on each ſide exceeded 7; thus eonſirming, beyond doubt, the noble diſcovery of our illuſtrious countryman. Perhaps a very ſenſible effect might be obſerved a Annapolis-Royal in Nova Scotia, from the vaſt addition of matter brought on the coaſt twice every day by the tides. The water riſes there above a hundred feet at ſpring-tide. If a leaden pipe, a few hundred feet long, were laid on the level beach at right angles with the coaſt, and a glaſs pipe ſet upright at each end, and the whole filled with water;3 the water will riſe at the outer end, and ſink at the end next the land, as the tide riſes. Such an alternate change of level would give the moſt ſatisfactory evidence. Perhaps the effect might be ſenſible on a very long plummet, or even a nice ſpirit level. 475. A very fine and ſatisfactory examination was made in 1788 by Mr H. Cavendiſh. Two leaden balls were faſtened to the ends of a ſlender deal rod, which was ſuſpended horizontally at its middle by a fine wire. This arm, aſter oſcillating ſome time horizontally by the twiſting and untwiſting of the wire, came to reſt in a certain poſition. Two great maſes of lead were now brought within a proper diſtance of the two ſuſpended balls, and their approach produced a deviation of the arms from the points of reſt. By the extenr of this deviation, and by the times of the oſcillations when the great maſſes were withdrawn, the proportion was diſcovered between the elaſticity of the wire and the gravitation of the balls to the great maſſes; and a medium of all the obſervations was taken : By theſe experiments, the mutual gravitation of terreſtrial matter, even at conſiderable diſtances, was moſt evincingly demonſtrated; and it was legitimately deduced from them that the medium denſity of the Earth was more than five times the denſity of water. Theſe curious and valuable experiments are narrated in the Philoſophical Tranſactions for I 198. 476. The oblate form of the Earth alſo affords another proof that gravity is directed, not to any ſingular point within the Earth, but that its direction is the combined effect of a gravitation to every particle of matter. Were gravity directed to the centre, by any peculiar virtue of that point, then, as the rotation takes away 45 of the gravity at the equator, the equatorial parts of a ſluid ſphere muſt riſe one half of this, or 54, before all is in equilibrio. For, ſuppoſe CN and CQ ſfig. 33.) to be two canals reaching ſrom the pole and ſiom the equator to thæ rentre. Since the diminution oſ gravity at is obſerved to be 45, and the gravitation of every particle in CQis diminiſhed by rotation in proportion to its diſtance from the axis of rotation, the diminution occaſioned in the weight oſ the whole canal will be one half of the diminution it would ſuſtain if the weight of every particle were as much diminiſhed as that of the particle Qis. Therefore the canal preſſes leſs on the centre by 7735, and muſt be lengthened ſo much before it will balance N C, which ſuſtains no diminution of weight. Every other canal parallel to CQſuſtains a ſimilar loſs of weight, and muſt he ſimilarly compenſated. This will produce an elliptical ſpheroidal form. But the equatoreal parts of our globe are much more elevated than this; not leſs than 41,. The reaſon is thiss. When the rotation of the Earth has raiſed the cquatoreal points 744, the plummet, which at a (ſig. 33-) would have hung in the direction a D, tangent to the evolute 4 BDF, is attracted ſidewiſe by the protuberant matter toward the equator. But the ſurface of the ocean muſt ſtill be ſuch that the plummet is perpendicular to it. Thereſore it cannot retain the elliptical form produced by the rotation alone, but ſwells ſtill more at the equator; and this ſtill increaſes the deviation of the plummet. This muſt go on, till a new equilibrium is produced by a new figure. This will be conſidered aſterwardss. No more is mentioned at preſent than what is neceſſary for ſilewing that the protuberance produced by the rotation cauſes, by its attraction, the plummet to deviate from the poſition which it had acquired in conſequence of the ſame rotation. 477. By ſuch induction, and ſuch reaſoning, is eſtabliſed the doctrine of univerſal gravitation, a doctrine which is placed beyond the reach of controverſy, and has immortalized the fame of its illuſtrious inventor. Sir Iſaac Newton has been ſuppoſed by many to have aſſigned this mutual gravitation, or, as he ſometimes calls it, this attraction, as a property inherent in matter, and as the cauſe of the celeſtial phenomena; and for this reaſon, he has been accuſed oſ introducing the occult qualities of the peripatetics into philoſophy. Nay, many accuſe him of introducing into philoſophy a manifeſt abſurdity, namely, that a body can act where it is not preſent. This, they ſay, is equivalent with ſaying that the Sun attracts the planets, or that any body acts on another that is at a diſtance from it. Both of thoſe accuſations are unjuſt. Newton, in no place of that work which contains the doctrine of univerſal gravitation, that is, in his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philoſophy, attempts to explain the general phenomena of the ſolar ſyſtem from the principle of univerſal gravitation. On the contrary, it is in thoſe general phenomena that he diſcovers it. The only diſcovery to which he profeſſes to have any claim is, 1, the matter of fact, that every body in the ſolar ſyſtem is continually deſlected toward every other body in it, and that the dcſlection of any individual body A toward any other body B is obſerved to be in the proportion of the quantity of matter in B directly, and of the ſquare of the diſtance AB inverſely; and, 2d/y, that the falling of terreſtrial bodſes is juſt a particular example of this univerſal deflection. He employs this diſcovery to explain phenomena that are more particular; and all the explanation that he gives of theſe is the ſewing that they are modified caſes of this general phenomenon, of which he knows no explanation but the mere deſcription. Newton was not more eminent for mathematical genius, and penetrating judgement, than for logical accuracy He uſes the word gravitation as the expreſſion, not of a quaãlity, but of a fact; not of a cauſe, but of an event. Having eſtablithed this fact beyond the power of controverſy, by an induction ſuſficiently copious, nay without a ſingle exception, he explains the more particular phenomena, by ſhewing with what modifications, ariſing from the circumſtances of the caſe, they are included in the general fact of mutual deſlection; and, finally, as all changes of motion are conceived by us as the eſfects of force, he ſays that there is a deflecting force continually acting on every particle of matter in the ſolar ſyſtem, and that this deſlecting force is what we call weight, heavineſs. Few perſons think themſelves chargeable with abſurdity, or with the abetting of occult qualities, when they really conſider the heavineſs of a body as one of its properties. So ſar from being occult, it ſeems one of the moſt manifeſt. It is not the heavineſs of this body that is the occult quality; it is the cauſe of this heavineſs. In thus conſidering gravity as competent to all matter, Newion does nothing that is not done by others, when they aſcribe impulſiveneſs or inertia to matter. Without ſcruple, they ſay that impulſiveneſs is an univerſal property of matter. Impulſivencſs and heavineſs are on preciſely the ſame footingmere phenomena; and the moſt general phenomena that we know. We know none more general than impulſiveneſs, fo as to include it, and thus enable us to explain it. Nor do we know any that includes the phenomena of univerſal deflection, with all the modiſications of the heavineſs of matter. Whether one of theſe can explain the other is a different queſtion, and will be confidered on another occaſion, when we ſhall ſee with how little juſtice philofophers have refuſed all action at a diſtance. But it would feem that there is ſome peculiarity in this explanation of the planetary motions which hinders it from giving entire ſatisfaction to the mind. If this be the caſe, it is principally owing to miſtake; to careleſsly imputing to Newton views which he did not entertain: His doctrine of univerſal gravitation does not attempt to explain ho the operating cauſe retards the Moon's motion in the ſirſt and third quarters of a lunation; it merely narrates in what direction, and with what velocity this change is produced; or rather, it ſnews how the Moon's deflection toward the Earth, joined to her deflection to? ward the Sun, both of which are matters of fact, conſtitute this ſeeming irregularity of motion which we conſider as a diſturbance. But with reſpect to the operating cauſe oſ this general deſlection, and the manner in which it produces its eſfect, ſo as to explain that eſſfect, Newton is altogether ſilent. He was as anxious as any perſon not to be thought to aſcribe inherent gravity to matter, or to aſert that a body could act on another at a diſtance, without ſome mechanical intervention. In a letter to Dr Bentley he expreſſæs this anxiety in the ſtrongeſt terms. It is diſicult to know Newton's preciſe meaning by the word action. In very ſtrict language, it is abſurd to ſay that matter acts at all,in contact, or at a diſtance. But, if one ſould aſert that the condition of a particle a cannot depend on another porticle b at a diſtance from it, hardly any perſon will ſay that he mokes this aſſortion from a clear perception oſ the abſurdity of the contrarj propoſition. Should a perſon ſay that the mere preſence of the particle b is a ſuſſicient reaſon for a approaching it, it will be diſſicult to prove the aſertion to be abſurd. 478. Such, however, has been the general opinion of philoſophers; and numberleſs attempts huve been made to thruſt in ſome material agent in all the caſes of ſeeming action at a diſtance. Hence the hypotheſes of magnetical and electrical atmoſpheres; hence the vortexes of Des Cartes, and the celeſtial machinery oſr Eudoxus and Callippuss OF all thoſe attempts, perhaps the moſt ral and unjutifiable is. that of Leibnitz, publiied in the Leipæig Acts 1689, two years aſter the publication of Newton's Principia, and of the review of it in thoſe very acts. It may be called raſh, becauſe it truſted too much to the deference which his own comtrymen had hitherto ſiewn ſor his opinions. In this attempt to account for the elliptical motion of the planets, Leibnitz pays no regard to the acknowledged laws of motion. He aſſumes as principles oſ explanation, motions totally repugnant to thoſe laws, and motions and tendencies incongruous and contradictory to each other. And then, by the help of geometrical and analytical errors, which compenſate each other, he makes out a ſtrange concluſion, which he calls a demonſtration of the law of planetary gravitation; and ſays that he ſees that this theorem is known to Mr Newton, but that he cannot tell how he has arrived at the knowledge of it. This is ſomething very remarkable. Newton's proceſs is ſuſficiently pointed out in the Acta Eruditorum, which M. Leibnitæ acknowledges that he had ſeen. A copy of the Principia was ſent to him, by order of the Royal Society, in leſs than two months aſter the publication.It was ſoon known over all Europe. It is without the leaſt ſfoundation that the partiſans of M. Leibnitæ give him any ſhare in the diſcovery of the Iaw of gravitation. None of them has ventured to quote this diſſertation as a propoſition juſtly proved, nor to defend it againſt the objections of Dr Gregory and Dr Keil. M. Leibnitz's remarks on Dr Gregorys criticiſm were not admitted into the Acta Eruditorum, though tober 1706 they inſerted an extract ſrom a letter, containing ſome of thoſe remarks ;if poſſible, they are more abſurd and incongruous than the original diſſertation. It is worth while, as a piece of amuſement, to read the account of this diſſertation by Dr Gregory in his Aſtronomy, and the obſervations by Dr Keill in the SFournal Literaire de Ia Haye, Auguſt 1714. 479. Sir Iſaac Newton has alſo ſewn fome diſpofition to account for the planetary deſlection by the action of an elaſtic æther. The general notion of the attempt ĩs thiss. The ſpace occupied by the ſolar ſyſtem is ſuppoſed to be filled with an elaſtic fluid, incomparably more ſubtile and more elaſtic than our air. It is ſuppoſed to be oſ greater and greater denſity as we recede from the Sun, and in general, from all bodies. In conſequence of this, Newton thinks that a planet placed any where in it will be impelled ſrom a denſer into a rarer part of the æther, and in his manmer have its courſe incurvated toward the Sun. But, without making any remarks on the impoſſibility of conceiving this operation with any diſtinctneſs that can entitle the hypotheſis to be called an explanation, it need only be obſerved that it is, in its firſt conception, quite unfit for anſwering the very purpoſe for which it is employed, namely, to avoid the abſurdity of bodies acting on others at a diſtance. For, unleſs this be alIowed, an æther of different denſity and elaſticity in its diſferent ſtrata cannot exiſt. It muſt either he uniformxXx ly denſe and elaſtic throughout, or there muſt exi©t a repulſive force operating between very diſtant particles perlnps extending its influence as far as the ſolar influence extends—nay, elaſticity without an action æ à ſtnti, even between the adjoining particles, is inconceivable. What is meant by elaſticity ? Surely ſuch a conſtitution of the aſſemblage of particles as makes them recede from each other; and the abſurdity is as great at the diſtance of the millionth part of a hairs breadth as at the diſtance of a million oſ leagues. If we attempt to evade this, by ſaying that the purticles are in contact, and are elaſtic, ve muſt grant that they are compreſſible, and are really compreſſcd, otherwiſe they are not exerting any elaſtic force; thereſore they are dimpled, and can no more conſlitute a fluid than ſo many blown bladders compreſſed in a box. The laſt attempt of ihis kind that ſuall be mentioned is that oſ M. Le Sage of Geneva, put into a better ſhape by M. Prevòt, in a Memoir publilhied by the Academy oſ Berlin, under the nume of Lucrece Neutonien. This philoſopher ſuppoſes that througch every point of ſpace there is continually paſing a ſtream of æther in ævery direction, with immenſe rapidity. This will produce no eſfect on a ſolitary body; but iſ there are two, one of them intercepts part oſ the ſtrcam which would have acted on the other. Thereſore the bodies, being leſs impelled on that ſide which faces the otuęr will move toward each other. Le Suge adds ſome circumſtances reſpecting the ſtructure of the bodies, which may give a iort of progreſſion in the intenſity oſ the impulſe, which may produce a deſlection diminiſhing as the diſtance or its ſquare increaſes. But this hypotheſis allo requires that we make light of the acknowledged laws of motion. It has other inſuperable diſſiculties, and, ſo ſar from affording any explanation oſ the planetary motions, its moit triſilng circumſtance is incomparably more diſicult to comprehend, or even to conceive, than the moſt intricate phenomenon in aſtronomy. 481. Indeed this diſiculty obtains in every attemp: of. the kind, it being neecſary to conũider the combined motion of millions of budies, in order to exphin the motion of one. But ſuch hypotheſos have a worſe fault than their diſſiculty; they tranſgreſs a great rule oſ philoſophical diſquiſition,  never to admit as the cauſe of  a phenomenon any thing of which we do not know  ihe exiſtence.? Tor, even if the legitimate conſequences of the hypotheſis were agreeable to the phenomena, tlis only ſiews the pſſitility of the theory, but gives no explanation whatever. The hypotheſis is good, only as ſar as it agrees with the phenomena; we therefore underſtand the phenomena as far as we underſtand the explanation. The olſerved laws of the phenomena are as extenſive as our explanation, and the hypotheſ s is uſeleſs. But, alas, none of thoſe hypotheſes agree, in their legitimate conſequences, with the phenomena; tle. laws of motion muſt be thrown aſide, in order to employ them, and new laws muſt be adopted. This is unviſe; it were much better to give thoſe pro re natæ laws to the planets themſelves. Mr Cotes, a philoſopher and geometer of the firſt eminence, wrote a preface to the ſecond edition of the Principia, which was publiſhed in 1713 with many alterations and improvements by the author. In this preface Mr Cotes gives an excellent account of the principles oſ the Newtonian philoſophy, and many very pertinent remarks on the maxim which made philoſophers ſo adverſe to the admiſſion of attracting and repelling ſorces. Whatever may have been Newton's ſentiments in early life about the competency of an elaſtic æther to account for the planetary deſlections, he certainly put little value on it afterwards. For he never made any ſerious uſe of it for the explanation of any phenomenon ſuſceptible of mathematical diſcuſſion. He had certainly rejected all ſuch hypotheſes, otherwiſe he never would have permitted Mr Pemberton to prefix that preface of Mr Cotes to an edition carried on under his own eye. For in this preface the abſurdity of the hypotheſis of an elaſtic æther is completely expoſed, and it is declared to be a contrivance altogether unworthy of a philoſopher. Yet, when Mr Cotes dieti ſoon aſter, Sir Iſaac Newton ſpoke of him in terms of the higheſt reſpect. Alas, ſaid he, we have loſt Mr Cotes; had he lived, we ſtould ſoon have learned ſomething excellent. At preſent the moſt eminent philoſophers and mathematicians in Europe profeſs the opinion of Mr Cotes, and ſee no validity in the philoſophical maxim that bodies cannot act at a diſtance. M. de la Place, the excellem commentator of Newton, and who has given the finiſhing ſtroke to the univerſality of the inſluence of gravitation on the planetary motions, by explaining, by this principle, the ſecular equation of the Moon, which had reſiſted the efforts of all the mathematicians, endeavours, on the contrary, to prove that an action in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances reſults ſrom the very eſſence or exiſtence o matter. Some remarks will be made on this attempt of M. de la Place aſterwards. But at preſent we ſhall find it much more conducive to our purpoſe to avoid altogether this metaphyſical queſtion, and ſtrictly to follow the example of our illuſtrious Inſtructor, who clearly ſaw its abſolute inſigniſicance for increaſing our knowledge of Nature. Newton ſaw that any inquiry into the manner of aciing of the eſſicient cauſe of the planetary deſlections was altogether unneceſſary for acquiring a complete knowledge oſ all the phenomena depending on the law which he had ſo happily diſcoveredl. Such was its perſect ſimplicity, that we wanted nothing but the aſlurance of its conſtancyan aſſurance eſtabliſhed on the exquiſite agreement of phenomena with every legitimate deduction from the law. l i I ] Even Newton's perſpicacious mind did not ſee the number of important phenomena that were completely explained by it, and he thought thæt ſome would be found which required the admiſſion of other principles. But the firſt mathematicians of Europe have ac: quired moſt deſerved fame in the cultivation of this philoſophy, and in their progreſs have found that there is rot one appearance in the celeſtial motions that is inconſiſtent with the Newtonũan law, and ſcarcely a phenomenon that requires any thing elſe for its complete explanation. Hitherto we have been employed in the eſtabliſiment of a general laiv. We are now to ſhew how the motions actualiy obſcrved in the individual members of the ſolar ſyſtem reſult ſrom, or are examples of the operation of the power called Gravity, and how its effects are modiſicd, and made what we behold, by the circumſtances oſ the caſe.To do this in detail would occupy muny volumes;3 ve muſt content ourſelves with adducing one or two of the moſt intereſting examples. The ſtudent in tlis noble department of mechanical phiIoſophy will derive gieat alliſtance ſrom Mr MtLaourins Account of Sir Iſluac Neton's Diſcoveries. Dr Pembertons View of ihe Newtonian Philoſophy has alſo conſiderable merit, and is peculiarly fitted for thoſe who are leſs habituated to mathe matical diſcuſſion. The Coſinographia of the Athẽ Friſi is one of the moſt valuable works extant on this ſubject. This author gives a very compendious, yet a clear and perſpicuous account of the Newtonian doctrines, and of all the improvements in the manner of treating them which have reſulted from the unremitting labour of the great mathematicians in their aſiduous cultivation oſ the Newtonian philoſophy. He ſollows, in general, the geometrical method, and his geometry is. elegant, and yet he exhibits ſalſo with great neatneſs) all the noted analytical proceſſes by which this philoſophy has been brought into its preſent ſtate. What now follows may be called an outline of The Theory of the Celeſtial Motions. 2382. The firſt general remark that ariſes from the eſtablilment of univerſal and mutual gravitation ĩs that the common centre oſ the whole ſyſtem is not aſfected by it, and is either at reſt, or, if in motion, this motion is produced by a force which is external to the ſyſtem (98.), and acts equally and in the ſame direction on every body of the ſyſtem (229.) 483. A force has been diſcovered pervading the vhole ſyſtem, and determining or regulating the motions of every individual body in it. The problem which naturally offers itſelf firſt to our diſcuſion is, to aſcertain what will be the motion of a body, projected from any given point of the ſolar ſyſtem, in any particulur direction, and ith any porticular velocitymhat will be the form of its path, how will it move in this puth; and where will it be at ony inſiunt we chooſe to name. Sir Ifaac has given, in the 4iſt propoſtion of his firſt book, the ſolution of this problem, in rhe moſt general terms, not limited to the obſerved law of gravitation, but extænded 10 any conceivable relation between the diſ&l tances and the intenſity of the force. This is, unqueſtionably, the moſt ſublime problem that can be propoſed in mechanical philoſophy, and is well known by the name of the INVERSE PROBLEM OF CENTRIPETAL FORCES. But, in this extent, it is a problem of pure dynamics, and does not make a part of phyſical aſtronomy. Our attention is limited to the centripetal force which connects this part of the creation of God—a force inverſely proportional to the ſquare of the diſtances.. It may be ſtated as follows. Let a body P, (ſig- 52.) which gravitates to the Sun in S, be projected in the direction P N, with the velocity which the gravitation at P to the Sun would genejate in it by impelling it along PT, leſs than PS. Draw P Q perpendicular to PN. Take P O equal to twice PT, and draw O Q perpendicular to P Q, and Q R perpendicular to PS. Alſo draw Ps, making the angle QPs equal to QPS. Join 5Q, and produce 5 Q till it meet P5 in s. The body will deſcribe an ellipſis, which P N touches in P, whoſe foci are S and s5, and whoſe principal parameter is tice P R. For, draw S N perpendicular to PN. Make P O 2P0 or 4P7T, and draw O Q perpendicular to P O, and deſcribe a circle paſſing through P, O and Q. It will touch PN, becauſe P O Q was made a right angle, and therefore P Q is the diameter of the circle. We know that an ellipſe may be deſcribed by a body for its foci, and PN ſor a tangent in P, becauſe the angles are equal which PN makes with the two focal Iines. This being the caſe, we know that if P Q, OQ, and QR be drawn as directed in the foregoing conſtruction, P O Q is the circle which has the ſame curvature ith the ellipſe in P, whoſe foci are S and 5, and tangent PN, and PT is à of the chord of curvature in P, and PR is half the parameter of the ellipſec Therefore (an.) PT is the ſpace along which the body muſt be uniſormly impelled by the force in P, that it may acquire the velocity with which the body, actually deſcribing this ellipſe, paſſos through P. If this body, which we ſhall call A, thus revolves in an ellipſe, we ſhould infer that it is deſlected toward S, by a force inverſely proportional to the ſquare of its diſtance from S, and of ſuch magnitude in P, that it would generate the velocity with which the body paſſes through P, by uniformly impelling it along PT. Now, the other body (which we ſhall call P) was actually projected in the direction PN, that is, in the direction of A’s motion, with the very velocity with which A paſſes through P in the ſame direction, and it is under the influence of a force preciſely the ſame that muſt have influenced A in the ſame place The two bodies A and P are therefore in preciſely the ſame mechanical condition; in the ſame place; moving in the ſame direction; with the ſame velocity; deſlected by the ſame intenſity of force, acting in the ſame direction. Their motions in the next moment cannot be diſferent, and they muſt, at the end of the moment, be agaiu in tha ſame condition; and this muſt continue. A deſcribes a certain ellipſe; P muſt deſcribe the ſame; ſor two motions that are diſſerent cannot reſult ſrom the ſame forcæ acting in the ſame circumſtances, 484. This demonſtration is given by Sir Iſaac Newton in four lines, as a corollary from the propoſition in which he deduces the law of planetary deſlection from the motion in a conic ſection. But it ſeemed neceſſary here to expand his proceſs of reaſoning a little, becauſe the validity of the inſerence has been denied by Mr John Bernoulli, one of the ſirſt mathematicians of that age. He even hinted that Newton had taken that illogical method, becauſe he could not accommodate his 41ſt propoſition to the particular law of gravitation obſerved in the ſyſtem. And he claims to himſelf the honour of having the ſirſt demonſtrated that a centripetal force, inverſely as the ſquare oſ the diſtanee, neceſſarily produces a motion in a conic ſection. The argument by which he ſupports this bold claim is very ſingular, coming from a conſummate mathematician, who could not be ignorant of its nullity; ſo that it was not a ſerious argument, but a ick to catch the uninformed. Newton, ſays he, might with equal propriety have inſerred, from the deſcription of the logarithmic ſpiral by a body influenced by a force inverſely proportional 0 the cube of the diſtance, that a body ſo deſlected will deſeribe the logarithmic ſpiral, whereas we know that it may deſcribe the hyperbolic ſpiral. Not ſatisſicd with this triumph, he attacks Newton's proceſt in his 41ſt or general propoſition of central forces, ſaying that it is deduced ſrom principles foreign to the queſtion; and, aſter all, does not exhibit the body in a ſtate oſ continued motion, but merely informs us where it will be found, and in what condition, in any aſſigned moment. He concludes by vaunting his own proceſs as accompliſhing all that can be wanting in the problem. Theſe aſſertions are the moſt unfounded and bold vauntings of this vainglorious mathematician; and his own ſolution is a manifeſt plagiariſm from the writings of Newton, except in the method taken by him to demonſtrate the lemma which he as well as Newton premiſes. Newton's demonſtration of this lemma is by the pureſt principles of free curvilineal motion; and it is, in this reſpect, a beautiſul and original propoſition. It makes our 5 222. Bernoulli conſiders it as ſynonymous with motion on an inclined plane; with which it has no analogy. The ſolution of the great problem by Bernoulli is, in every principle, and in every ſtep, the ſame with Newtons; and the only diſſerence is, that Newton employs a geometrical, and Bernoulli an algebraical expreſſion of the proceeding. Newton exhibits continued motion, whereas Bernoulli employs the diſſerential calculus, which æſſintially exhibits only a ſucceſſion of points of the path. It is worth the ſtudent's while to read Dr Keill's Letter to John Bernoulli, and his examination of this boaſted ſoIution of the celebrated problem. But it is ſtill more worth his while to read Newton's ſolution, and the propoſitions in MfLauris Fluxions and Hermanns Phoronomia, wlich are immediately connected with this problem. This reading will greatly conduce to the ſorming a good taſte in diſquiſitions of this kind. * 485. Our occupation at preſent is much more limited. We are chieſly intereſted to ſhew that gravitation produces an elliptical motion, when the ſpace PT, along which the body muſt be uniformly impelled by the force as it exiſts in P, in order to acquire the velocity of projection, is leſs than PS. But every ſtep would have been the ſame, had we made PT equal to PS (as in fig. 52. N 2.) But we ſhould then have found that when the angle QPs is made equal to QP S, the line Ps will be parallel to S Q, ſo that S Q ill not interſect it, and the path will not have another focus. It is a parabola, of which PR is the principal parameter. 486. We ſtiall alſo find that i? PT be made greater than PS (as in fig. 52. N9 3.) the line P (making the angles QPS and ꝗr s eqbal will cut S Q on the other ſide of S, ſo that S and slare on the ſame ſide of Q. The path will be a hyperbola, of which PR is the principal parameter. 487.  The propoſitions given by M. de Moivre in No. 352. of the Philoſophical Tranſactions, and thoſe by Dr Keill in 487. This reſtriction to the conic ſections plainly follows ſrom the line PR, the third proportional to P O and PQ, being the principal parameter, whether the path be an ellipſe, parabola, hyperbola, or cirele.* It remains to point out the general circumſtunces of this elliptical motion, and their phyſical connexions. For this purpoſe, the ſollowing propoſtion is uſeſull 488. When a body deſcribes any curve line BDP A (ſig. 53.) by means oſ a deſlecting force directed to a focus S, the angle S PN, which the radius vector makes with the direction of the motion, diminiſhes, if the veIocity in the point P be leſs than what would enable the body to deſcribe a circle round S, and increaſcs, if the velocity be greater. If  The only diſſiculty in the inference of a conic ſection as the neceſſary path of a projectile inſluenced by a force in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtance from the centre, has ariſen from the practice of the algebraic analyſts, of deſining all curve lines by the relation of an abſciſſa to parallel ordinates. But this is by no means neceſſary; and all curves which encloſe ſpace, are as naturally referable to a focus, and definalile by the relation between the radii and a circular arch. An equation expreſſing the focal chord of curvature is as diſtinetive as the uſual equation, and leads us with eaſe to the chief properties of the ſigure. Therefore Let SP, the given diſtance, be a, and any indeterminate diſtance be . Let the perpendicular S N (alſo given by S P æquicurve circle, and are, reſpectively, the doubles of the angles at the circumſerence. P 5 is evidently equal to NS u. Therefore P Oꝓ is equal to NS n, and PSꝓ is leſs than NS n. Thereſore PSN is leſs than 2S n, and S PN is greater than S  n. Thereſore the angle SPN diminiſhes when P O is leſs than PS, that is, when the velocity in P is leſs than what would enable the centripetal force in P to retain the body in a circle round S. On the other hand, if the velocity in P be greater than what ſuits a circular motion round S, it is plain that P O will be greater than PS, and the angle PSꝓ will be greater than NS n, and the angle PSN greater than 25 n, and thereſore the angle SPN will be leſs than S ꝓ n, &c. 289. Applying this obſervation to the caſe of elliptical motion, we get a more diſtinct notion of its diſferent affections, and their dependence on their phyſical cauſes. In the half D AB (fig. 46.) of the ellipſe deſcribed by a planet round the Sun in iĩts focus S, the middle point of the deſlective or focal chord of curvature lies between the planet and the focus. Therefore, during the whole motion from D t0 B, along the ſemiellipſe D AB, the angle contained between the radius vector and the line of the planet's motion is continually diminiſhing. But during the motion in the ſemiellipſe, BPD, the angle is continually increaſing. It is thereſore the greateſt poſſible in D, and the ſmalleſt in B. Let the planet ſet out from its aphelion A, with its due velocity, moving in the direction AF. The velocity in A, being equal to that acquired by a uniform acceleration along ; of the parameter, is vaſtly leſs than what would make it move in the circular arch AL, of which S is the centre, and the planet muſt fall within that circle. Therefore its path will no longer be perpendicular to the radius vector, but nuſt now make with it an angle ſomewhat acute. The centripetal force therefore is now reſolvable into two forces, one of which accelerates the planet's motion, and the other incurvates its path. Its direction brings it nearer to the Sun. While in the quadrant AF B, the velocity is always leſs than what is required for a circular motion. For, if from any point F in this quadrant, FG be drawn perpendicular to the tangent, meeting the tranſverſe axis in G, and if GH be drawn perpendicular to the normal FG, H F is one half of the focal chord of curvature, and H lies between P and S. Now, it has been ſhewn that when this is the caſe, the angle S F n diminiſhes, and, with it, the ratio of S n to SF ſthis ratio is that of CB to the ſemidiameter CO, the conjugate of CF, (5 6. Ell.) Conſequently, there will be continually more and more of the centripetal force employed in accelerating the motion, and leſs employed in incurvating the path, the firſt part being Fn and the other S . When the planet arrives at B, the point H ſalls upon S, and the velocity is preciſely what would ſuſfice for a circular motion round S, if the direction of the motion were perpendicular to he radius vector. But the direction of the motion brings it ſtill nearer to S. A great part of the centripetal force is ſtill employed in accelerating the motion; and the moment the planet paſſes B, the velocity becomes greater than what might produce a circular motion round S. For H now lies beyond S from B. Therefore the angle S BN, which is now in its ſmalleſt poſſible ſtate, begins to open again; and this diminiſhes the proportion of the centripetal force which accelerates the motion, and increaſes the proportion of the incurvating force. The planet is, however, ſtill accelerated, preſerving the equable deſcription of areas. The angle S BN increaſes with the increaſimg velocity, and becomes a right angle, when the planet arrives at its perihelion P. It has been ſhewn (Ellipſe, § 4.) that the chord PI cut off from any diameter P A by the equicurve circle Pa l, is equal to the parameter of that diameter. Therefore the centre o of this circle lies beyond S. The planet, paſſing through P, is deſcribing a naſcent arch of this circle. Conſequently, the curve which it is deſeribing paſſes without a circle deſcribed round S, and the planet is now receding from the Sun. This is uſually accounted for, by ſaying that its velocity is now too great for deſcribing a circle round the Sun. And this is true, when the intenſity of the deſlecting force is conſidered. But it has been thought diſiicult to account for the planet now retiring ſrom the Sun, in the perihelion, where the centripetal force is the greateſt of all greater than what has already heen able to bring it continually nearer to the Sun. We are apt to expect that it will come ſtill nearer. But the fact is, that the planet, in paſing through P, is really moving ſo that, if the Sun were ſuddenly transferred to o, it would circulate round it for ever. But, in deſcribing the ſmalleſt portion oſ the circle Pa I, it gocs without the circle which has S for its centre, and its motion now makes an obtuſe angle with the radius vector, although it is perpendicular to a radius drawn to o. There is now a portion of the centripetal force employed in retarding the motion of the planet, and its velocity is now diminiſhed; and the angle of the radius vector and the path is now increaſed, by the ſame degrees by which they had been increaſed and diminiſhed during the approach to the Sun. At D, the planet has the ſame diſtance from the Sun that it had in B, and the ſame velocity. The angle 5 D v is now as much greater than a right angle as S BN was leſs; and at A, it is reduced to a right angle, and the velocity is again the ſame as the firſt In this way the planet will revolve for ever. It was ſiewn in § 223. that in the curvilineal motion of bodies by the action of a central force, the velocities are inverſely as the perpendiculars from the centre of forces on the lines of their directions. In the perihelion, the radius vector is perpendicular to the path. The perihelion diſtance may therefore be taken as the unit of the ſcale on which all the other velocities are meaſured. Tho other velocities may therefore be conſidered as fractions of the perihelion velocity, which is the greateſt of all In elliptical motions, the velocities in every point are as the perpendiculars drawn from the other focus on the tangents in that point. For the perpendiculars on any tangent drawn from the two foci are reciprocal. 490. Hence it appears that if a body ſets out from P, with the velocity acquired by uniſorm acceleration ulong PS, and deſcribes a parabola by means of a centripetal force directed to S, the velocity diminiſhes without limit. For the perpendicular drawn from the focus on a tangent to a parabola may be greater than any line that can be aſſigned, if the point in the parabola be taken ſuſiciently remote ſrom the vertex. 491. If the body ſet out from P with a velocity exceeding what it would acquire by uniſorm acceleration along PS, it will deſcribe a hyperbola, and its velocity will diminiſh continually. But it will never be leſs than à certain determinable magnitude, to which it continually approximates. For the perpendicular from the focus on the tangent in the moſt remote point of the hyperbola that can be aſſigned, is ſtill leſs than the perpendicular to the aſiymptote, to which the tangent continually approaches. But, when the velocity in the perihelion is leſs than that acquired by uniform acceleration along PS, there will always be a limit to its diminution by the receſs from the centre of force. For the velocity being ſo moderate, the path is more incurvated by the centripetal force; ſo tht the body is made to deſcribe a curve which has an upper apſis A, as well as a lower apſis P. The body, aſter paſſing through A at right angles to the radius ve or, is now accelerated, becauſe its path now makes an acute angle with the radius vector; and thus the velocity is again increaſed. 492. The velocity in any point of the ellipſe deſcribed by a planet is to the velocity that would enable the ſame force to retain it in a circle at the ſame diſtance, in the ſubduplicate ratio of its diſtance from the upper focus f to the ſemitranſverſe axis. That is, calling the elliptic velocity V, and the circular velocity v, ve have V': v æ P5: C A. (fig. 53.) For 488.) V}:  PO: PS. But (Ellipſe 9.) it was ſhewn that P O x CA was equal to C, PS XPs. Thereſore PO;: PSPs: CA and V::  mPs: CA, 493. The angular motion in the ellipſe is to the angular motion in a circle at the ſame diſtance, and by the action of the ſame force, in the ſubduplicate ratio of half the parameter to the diſtance from S. Take Pp, a ſmall arch of the ellipſe, and, with the centre S, and diſtance S P, deſcribe the circular arch PæV, cutting S in 2Zz. Make Pꝓ to PV as the veJocity in the ellipſe to that in the circlee. Then it is plain that Pæ is to PV as the angular motion in the ellipſe i3 to the angular motion in the circle. The angle æ Pꝓ being the complement of NPS (becauſe NP may be conſidered as coinciding with 2P) it is equal to NS P. Therefore Pæ: P S N: SP, æPQ:: PO therefore P2: P æPR: PO but PP,: PV: PO: PS therefore Pæ: PV æ PR: PS. Cor. The angular motion in the circle exceeds that in the ellipſe, when the point R lies between P and S, and falls ſhort of it when R lies beyond S. They are equal when PS is perpendicular to A C, or when the true anomaly of the planet is 90. For then R and S coincide. Here the approach to S is moſt rapid. 494. In any point of the ellipſe, the gravitation or centripetal force is to that which would produce the ſame angular motion in a circle, at the ſame diſtance from the Sun, as this diſtance is to half the parameter, that is, as PS to PR. For, by the Iaſt propoſition, when the forces in the circle and ellipſe are the ſame, the angular motion in the circle was to that in the ellipſe as PV to Pæ, which has been ſiewn to be as VPS to VPR. Therefore, when the angular velocity in the circle, and conſequently the real velocity, is changed from PV to Pæ, in order that it may be the ſame with that in the ellipſe, the centripetal force muſt be changed in the proportion of PV? to Pæ?, that is, of PS to PR. Therefore the force which retains the body in the ellipſe is to that which will retain it with the ſame angular motion in a circle at that diſtancæ as PS to PR. Theſe are the chief aſfections oſ a motion regulateã by a centripetal force in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtance from the centre oſ forcess The compariſon of them with motions in a circle gives us, in moſt caſes, eaſy means of ſtating every change of angular motion, or of approach to or receſs from the centre, by means of any change of centripetal force, or of velocity. Such changes ſrequently occur in the planetary ſpaces; and the regular elliptical motion of any individual planet, produced by its gravitation to the Sun, is continually diſturbed by its gravitation to the other planets. This diſturbance is proportional to the ſquare of the diſtance from the diſturbing planet inverſely, and to the quantity of matter in that planet directly. Therefore, before we can aſcertain the diſturbance of the Earth's motion, for example, by the action of Jupiter, ve muſt know the proportion of the quantity of matter in Jupiter to that in the Sun. This may ſeem a queſtion beyond the reach oſ human underſtanding. But the Newtonian philoſophy furniſhes us with infallible means for deciding it. Of the Quantity of Matter in the Sun and Planets. SiNCE it appears that the mutual tendency which we have called Gravitation is campetent to every particle of matter, and thereſore the graritation of a particle of matter to any maſs whatever is the ſum 6r aggregate of its gravitation to every atom of matter in that maſs, it folIows that the gravitation to the Sun or to a planet is proportional to the quantity of matter in the Sun or the planet. As the gravitation may thus be computed, when we know the quantity of matter, ſo this may be computed when we know the gravitation towards it. Hence it is evident that we can aſcertain the proportion of the quantities of matter in any two bodies, iſ we know the proportion of the gravitations toward them. 495. The tendency toward a body, of which m is . . . . m the quantity of matter and à the diſtance, is &4. It is this tendency which produces deſlection from a ſtraight line, and it is meaſured by this deſlection. Now this, in the coſe of the planets, is meaſured by the diſtance at which the revolution is perſormed, and the velocity of that revolution. We found (224.) that this combination is expreſſed by the proportional equation g3 jæ where » . .. m d is the periodic time. Therefore we have Fæ5 and, 3 conſequently, m / By this means we can compare the quantity of matter in all ſuch bodies as have others revolving round them. Thus, we may compare the Sun with the Earth, by comparing the Moons gravitation to the Earth with the Earti's gravitation to the Sun. It ill be convenient to conſider the Earth as the unit in this compariſon with the other bodies of the ſyſtem. The Sun's diſtance in miles is - -- 93726900 The Moons diſtanc - - --- 240144 The Earth's revolution (ſydereal) daysy - 365,25 The moons ſydereal revolution (days) - 27,322 93726990 x 27,32 23043 5 365,25 But this muſt be increaſed by about-⸗, becauſe the graviThereſore = 332669. tation to the Earth is tated beyond its real value by the ſuppoſition that the revulution of the Moon is perſormed round the centre of the Earth, whereas it is really performed round their bommon centre (231.) Thus increaſed, the Sun's quantity of matter may be eſtimated at 337422 times that oſ this Earth. It muſt be obſerved that this computation is not of very great accuracy. It depends on the diſtance of the Sun; and any miſtake in this is accompanied by a ſimilar miſtake, but in a triplicate proportion. Now our eſtimation of the Sun's diſtance depends entirely on the Sun's horizontal parallax, as meaſured by means of the tranſits of Venus. The error o4 oſ a ſecond in this parallax, (hich is only about 8,7 or 8,8) will induce an error oſ 4 of the whole. In like manmer, we compare Jupiter with the Earth, by comparing the gravitation of the firſt ſatellite with that of the Moon. This makes Jupiter about 313 times more maſſive than the Earth. The quantity of matter in Saturn deduced from the revolution of his ſecond Caſſinian ſatellite, is about 103 times that of the Earth. Herſchel's planet contains about 17 times as much matter as our globe, as we learn by the revolution of its firſt ſatellite. We have no ſuch means for obtaining a knowledge of the quantity of matter in Venus, Mars, or Mercury. Theſe are therefore only gueſũed at, by means of certain phyſical conſiderations which aſford ſome data for an opinion. Venus is thought to be about 2 of the Earth, Mars about , and Mercury about .. But theſe are very vague gueſſes. We judge of the Moons quantity of matter with ſome more conſidence, by comparing the influence of the Sun and Moon on the tides, and on the preceſſion of the equinoxes. The Moon is ſuppoſed aboutæ of the Earth. From this compariſon it will appear that the Sun contains nearly 800 times as much matter as all the planets combined into one maſs. Thereſore the gravitation to the Sun ſo much exceeds that of any one planet to another, that their mutual diſturbances are but inconſiderable. 496. The proportion oſ the quantities of mætter, diſcovered by this proceſs of reaſoning, is very duſcrent from what we ſhould have deduced from the obſerved bulk of the different bodies. Thus, Saturns diameter being about ten times that of the Earth, we ſiould have inferred that he contained a thouſand times as much PHSSICAL A3TRONOMY. matter, whereas he ;mains only about ro3 or 1œ4 We muſt thereſore conclude that the denſites of the Sun and planets are very diferent. Stlll tking the Earth as the unit of the ſcale, and combining the ratios oſ the bulàs and the quantities of matter, we may ſay that the denſity oſ the Sun is - - - - ,25 Yenus --- - 1,27 Eon L I Mars - - - - - E Iupiter - --- 0,292 Saturn - - - - - o, 184 Georgian Planet- - - o,212 It appears by this ſtatement that the denſity oſ the planets is leſs as they are more remote from the centre of revolution. Herſchel's planet is an exception; but a ſmall change on his apparent diameter, not exceeding half a ſecond, will perſectly reconcile them. 497. Knowing the quantity oſ matter, and the diameter of the bodies oſ the ſyſtem, we can eaſly tell the accelerative force of gravity acting on a body at their ſurſaces by article 465, that is, what velocity gravity vill generate in a ſecond of time, or how far a body vill fall in a ſecond. In like manner, we can tell the preſſure occaſioned by the weight or heavineſs of a body, as this may be meaſured by the ſcale of a ſpring ſteelyard, graduated by additions of equal known preſſures. It cannot he meaſured by a balance, which only compares æne maſ of equally heavy matter with another. Thus, the ſpace fallen through, and the apparent weight oſf a lump of matter, by a ſpring ſteelyard, will be Fall in 1. Weight, At the ſurſace oſ the Sun - 451 feet. 28,2 Earth -IN,9 I Jupiter -41,64 2,6 Saturm -1I44 o, 89 Herſchel i8,7 I, 16 Of the Mutual Diſlurbances oſ the Planetary Motions. 498. The queſtions which occur in this department of the ſtudy are generally of the moſt delicate nature, and require the moſt ſcrupulous attention to a variety of circumſtances. It is not enough to know the direction and intenſity of the diſturbing force in every point of æ planet's motion. We muſt be able to collect into one aggregate the minute and almoſt imperceptible changes that have accumulated through perhaps a long tract. of time, during which the forces are continually changing, both in direction and in intenſity, and are frequently combined with other ſorces. This requires the conſtant employment of the inverſe method of fluxions, which is by far the moſt diſicult department oſ the higher geometry, and is ſtill in an imperfect ſtate. Theſe problems have been excluſively the employment of the moſt eminent mathematicians of Europe, the only perſons who are in a condition to improve the Newtonian philoſophy; and the reſult of their labours has ſhewn, in the cleareſt manner, its ſupreme excellence, and total diſſimilitude to all the phyſical theories which have occupied the attention of philoſophers before the days of the admired inventor. For the ſeeming anomalies that are obſerved in the ſolar ſyſtem are, all oſ them, the conſequences of the univerſal operation of one ſimple force, without the interference oſ any other, and are all ſuſceptible of the moſt preciſe meaſurement and compariſon with obſervation; ſo that what we chooſe to call anomalies, irregularities, and diſturbances, are as much the reſult of the general pervading principle as the elliptical motions, of which they are regarded as the diſturbances.* 1It is in this part of the ſtudy alio in which the penetrating and inventive genius of Newton appear moſt conſpicuouſly. The ſirſt law of Kepler, the equable deſcription of areas, led the way to all the reſt, and made the detection of the law of planetary force a much eaſier taſk. But the moſt diſcriminating attention was neceſſary for ſeparating from each other the deviations from ſimple elliptical motion which reſult from the mutual gravitation of the planets, and a conſummate knowledge of dynamics for computing and ſumming up all thoſe deviations. The ſcience was yet to create; and it is chieſly to this that the firſt book of Newton's great work is dedicated. He has given the moſt beautiful ſpecimen of the inveſtigation in his theory of the lunar inequalities. Tq every one who has acquired a juſt taſte in mathematical compoſition, that theory will be conſidered as one of the moſt elegant and pleaſiug perſormances ever exhibited to the public. It is true, that it is but a commencement of a moſt delicate and diſſicult inveſtigation, which has been carried to ſucceſſive degrees of much greater improvement, by the unceaſing labours of the firſt mathematicians. But in Newton's work are to be found all the helps for the proſecution of it, and the ſirſt application of his new geometry, contrived on purpoſe; and all the ſteps of the proceſs, and the methods oſ proceeding, are pointed out—all of Newton's invention, ſud matheſi facem præeferente. It muſt be farther remarked that the knowledge of the anomalies of the planetary motions is of the greateſt importance. Without a very advanced ſtate of it, it would have been impoſſible to conſtruct accurate tables of the Iunar motions. But, by the application of this theory, Mayer has conſtructed tables ſo accurate, that by obſerving the diſtance of the Moon from a properly ſelected ſtar, the longitude may be found at ſea with an exactneſs quite ſuſficient for navigation. This method is now univerſally practiſed on board of our Eaſt India ſhips. This requires ſuch accurate theory and tables of the Moons motion, that we muſt at all times be able to determine her place within the 30th part of her own diameter. Yet the Moon is ſubject to more anomalies than any other body in the ſolar ſyſtem. But the ſtudy is no leſs valuable to the ſpeculative philoſopher. Few things are more pleaſing than the being able to trace order and harmony in the midſt of ſeeming confuſion and derangement. No where, in the wide range of ſpeculation, is order more completely eſfected All the ſeeming diſorder terminates in the detection of a claſs of ſubordinate motions, which have regular periods oſ increaſe and diminution, never ariſing to a magnitude that makes any conſiderable change in the ſimple elliptical motions; ſo that, finally, the ſolur ſyſtem ſcems calculated for almoſt eternal duration, without ſuſtaining any deviation from its preſent ſtate that will be perceived by any beſides aſtronomers. The diſply of wiſdom, in the ſelection of this law of mutual action, and in accommodating it to the various circumſtances which contribute to this duration and conſtancy, is ſurely one of the moſt engaging objects that can attract the attention of mankind. In this elementary courſe of inſtruction, we cannot give a detil of the mutual diſturbances of the planetary motions. Yet there are points, both in reſpect of doctrine and of method, which may be called elementary, in relation to this particular ſubject. It is proper to conſider theſe with ſome attention. 499. The regularity of the motions of a planet A round the Sun would not be diſturbed by the gravitation of both i0 another planet B, if the Sun and the planet A gravitate to B with equal force, and in the ſame or tirely ſrom the inequality and the obliquity of the gravitations of the Sun and oſ the planet A to B. The manner in which theſe diſturbances may be conſidered, and the grounds of computation, will be more clearly underſtood by an example. Let S (fig. 54.) repreſent the Sun, E the Earth, and J the planet Jupiter. Let it be farther ſuppoſed (which may be done without any great etror) that the Earth and Iupiter deſcribe concentric circles round the Sun, and that the Sun contains 1000 times as much matter as Jupiter. Make JS to EA as the ſquare of EJ to the ſquare of S J. Then, if we take SJ to repreſent the gravitation of the Sun to Jupiter, it is plain that E A will repreſent the gravitation of the Earth, placed in E, to Jupiter. Draw E B, parallel and equal to JJ, and complete the parallelogram E B AD. Ihe force with which Jupiter deranges the motion of the Earth round the Sun vill be repreſented by E D. For the foree E A is equivalent to the combined forces EB aud ED. But if the Sun and Earth were impelled only by the equal and parallel forces S8J and E B acting on every particle of each, it is plæin that their relative motions would not be aſſected (98.) It is only by the impulfion ariſing from the force ED that their relative ſituations will fuſtain any derangement. 500. This derangement is of two kinds, -aſfecting either the gravitation of the Earth to the Sun, or her angalar motion round- him: Let ED be conſidered as the diagonal oſ a rectangle EF DG, E G lying in the direction of the radius S E, and E F being in the direction of the tangent to the Larth's orbit. It is plain that the force EG aſiccts the Earth's gravitation to the Sun, while EF aſſects the motion round him. As EG is in the direction of the radius, it has no tendency to accelerate or retard her motion round the Sun. EF, on the other hand, does not aſfect the gravitation, but the motion in the curve only. This diſturbing force E D varies, both in direction and magnitude, by a variation in the Earth's poſition in relation to the Sun and Jupiter. Thus, n ſig. A, which repreſents the Earth as almoſt arrived at the conjunction with Jupiter, having Jupiter near his oppoſition to the Sun, the force E G greatly diminiſhes the Earth's gravitation to the Sun, and the force EF accelerates her motion round him in the order of the letters E CP O Q. In fig. B, the force E G ſtill diminiſhes the Earth's gravitation to the Sun, but E F retards her motion from O to Q. In fig. C, E G increaſes the Earth's gravitation to the Sun, and E F accelerates her motion round him. It appears very plainly that the motion round the Sun is accelerated in the quadrants QC and P O, and is retarded in the quadrants CP and OQ. We may alſo ſee that the gravitation to the Sun is increaſed in the neighbourhood of the points P and Q, but is diminiſhed in the neighbourhood of C and O, and that there is an intermediate pomt: in each quadrant where the gravitavon ſuſfers no change. The greateſt diminution of the Eartis gravitation to the Sun muſt be in C, when Jupiter is neareſt to the Earth, in the time of his oppoſition to the Sun. We alſo ſee very plainly how all theſe diſturbing Torces may be preciſely determined, depending on the proportion of ET to ES and to S I. Nor is the conſtruction reſtricted to circular orbits. Each orbit is to be conſidered in its true figure, and the parallelogram EGDFV is not always a rectangle, but has the ſide EF lying in the direction of the tangent. But we believe that the computation is found to be ſuſſiciently exact without conſidering the parallelogram E GDF as oblique. The eccentricity of Jupiter's orbit muſt not be neglected becauſe it amounts to a fourth part of the Earti's diſtance from the Sun. We have taken the Sun's gravitation to Jupiter as the ſcale on which the diſturbing forces are meaſured; but this was for the greater facility of comparing the diſturbing forces with each other. But they muſt be compared with the Eartis gravitation to the Sun, in order to learn their effect on her motions. It will be exact enough ſor the preſent purpoſe of merely explaining the method, to ſuppoſe Jupiter's mean diſtance five times the Earths from the Sun, and that the quantity oſ matter in the Sun is 1000 times that of Jupiter. Thereſore the Eurth's gravitation to the Sun muſt be 25000 times greater than to Jupiter, when the Earth is about P or Q. When the Earth is at C, her gravitation to Jupiter is increaſed in the proportion of 4' to 5°, and it is now 4555 of her Jravitation to the Sun. When the Earth is in O, her gravitation to Jupiter is 45255 of her gravitation ſo the Sun. But we are not to ſmagine that when the Earth is at C, her motion relative to the Sun is affected in the fame manner as if æ45⸗ oſ her gravimtſon were taken away. For we muſt recollect that the Sun alſo gravitates to Jupiter, or is deſlected toward him, and therefore toward the Earth at C. The diminution of the reIntive gravitation of the Farth is not io be meaſured by EA, but by EG. All the diſturbing forces EG and EF, correſponding to every poſition oſ the Earth and Jupiter, muſt be conſidered as fractions of  J, the meaſure taken for the mean gravitation to Jupiter, This is 855 of the Earths gravitation to the Sun, Meaſuring in this way, we ſhall find that when the Earth is at P or Q her gravitation to the Sun is increaſed by 555 For PS or Q8 ill, in this caſe, come in the place of E G in fig. C, and there will be no ſuch ſorce as EF. At C the Earth's gravitation is diminiſhed 21525, and at O, 4ſ55 To be able to aſcertain the magnitude of te diſturbing force in the diſferent ſituations of the Earthis but a very ſmall part of the taſk. It only gives us the momentary impulſion. We muſt aſcertain the accumulated eſfect of the action during a certain time, or along æ certain portion of the orbit of the diſturbed planet.. Fhis is the celebrated problem of three todies, as it is ealled, which has employed the utmoſt efforts of the great marhematiũians ever ſince the time that it firſt appeared in Newton's lunar theory. It can only be ſolved by approximation; and even this ſolution, except in ſome very particular caſes, is of the utmoſt diſficulty, which ſiews, by the way, the ſolly oſ all who pretend to explain the motions of the planets by the impulſions of ſuids, when not three, but millions of particles are acting àt onee. We have to aſcerrain, in the ſirſt place, the accumulated effect oſ the acceleration anũ retardation of the angular motion of the Earth round the Sun. The genera] proceſs is one of thetwo folloing. l 1l, Suppoſe it required to dètermine how far the attraction of Jupiter has made the Earth overpaſs the ruadrantal arth QC of her aunual orbit. Fhe ãarch iĩs ſuppoſed to be unfolded into a ſtraight: line, and divided into minute portions, deſcribed in equal times. At each point of diviſion is erẽcted a perpendicular ordinate qual to the aceelerating diſturbing foree EF corre ſponding to that point. A curve Iime is drawn through the extremities of thoſe ordinates. The unfolded arch being conſidered as the repreſentãtion of the time, and the ordinares as the aceelerating forces, itis plain that the area vill repreſent the acquired velocity (70) Now let another figure be conſtructed, Having an abſciſa to repreſent the time f the motion. But the ordinàtes muſt now be made proportiònal to the areas of the laſt ſigure. It is phin, from article 50, that the area of this new ſigure will repreſent, or' be proportional to the ſpaces deſcribed, in conſequence òf the action of the diſturbing force; and therefore ĩt will expreſs, nearly, the addition to the ſpace deſcribed by the undiſturbed planet, or the diminution, if the accelerations have been exceeded by the retardations. The other method is to make the unfolded arch the ſpace deſcribed, and the ordinates the accelerations, as beſfore. The area now repreſents the augmentation of the ſquare of the velocity (75.0 A ſecond ſigure is now conſtructed, having the ſame abſciſſa now repreſenting the time. The ordinates are made proportional to the ſquare roots of the areas of the firſt figure, and they will thereſore repreſent the velocities. The areas of this new figure will repreſent the ſpaces, as in the ſirſt proceſs, to be added to the arch deſcribed by the undiſturbed planet, or ſubtracted from it. 501. All this being a taſk of the utmoſt labour and difficulty, the ingenuity of the mathematicians has been exerciſed in facilitating the proceſs. The penetrating eye of Newton perceived a path which ſeemed to lead directly to the deſired point. All the lines which repreſent the diſturbing forces are lines connected with circular arches, andtherefore with the circular motion of the planet. The main diſturbing force E D is a function of the angle of commutation CSE, and EF and E G are the ſine and coſine 6f the angle DE G. Newton, in his lunar theory, has given moſt elegant examples of the ſummation of all the ſucceſſive lines EF that are drawn to every point of the arch. Sometimes he finds the ſums or accumulatèd actions of the forces expreſſed by the ſine of an arch; ſometimes by the tangent; by æ ſegment of the circular area, &c. &c. &c. Euler, D Alembert, De la Grange, Simpſon, and other illuſtrious cultivators of this philoſophy, have immenſely improved the methods pointed out and exemplified by Newton, and, by more convenient repreſentations of the forces than this elementary view will admit, have at laſt made the whole proceſs tolerably eaſy and plain. But it is ſtill only fit for adepts in the art of ſymbolical analyſis. Their proceſſes are in general ſo recondite and abſtruſe that the analyſt loſes all conception, either of motions or of forces, and his mind is altogether occupied with the ſymbols of mathematical reaſoning. 502. The ſecond part of the taſk, the aſcertaining the accumulated eſfect of the force EG, is, in general, much more diſficult. It includes both the changes made on the radius vector S E, and the change made in the curvature of the orbit. The department of mathematical ſcience immediately ſubſervient to this purpoſe, is in a more imperfect ſtate than the quadrature of curves. The proceſs is carried on, almoſt entirely by means of converging ſerieſes. We cammot add any thing here that tends to make it plainer. The lunar theory of Newton, with the commentary of Le Seur and Jacquier, commonly called the Jeſuit? Commentary, gives very good fxamples of the methods which muſt be followed in this proceſs. We muſt refer to the works of Euler, Clairaut, pitor and Saturn, &e. and content ourſelves with mereſy pointing out ſomo of the more generall and obvious conſequances of this mutual action of the planets. La Lande has given in his aſtronomy a very good ſynopſis of the moſt approved method. In the Tracts Phyſical and Mathematical, by Dr Matthew Stewart, and in his Eſſay on the Diſtance of the Sun, are ſome beautiful ſpecimens of the geometrical ſolutions of theſe problems. 503. When we conſidering the motion of an inferior planet, diſturbed by its gravitation to a ſuperior planet, we ſee that the inferior planet is retarded in the quadrants CP and O Q, and accelerated in the quadrants P O and  C of its ſynodical period. Its orbit is more incurvated in the vicinity of the points P and Q, and its curvature is diminiſhed in the vicinity of the points O and C, and moſt of all in the vicinity of C in the line of conjunction with the ſuperior planet. Therefore, if the aphelion and perihelion of the inferior planet ſhould chance to be near the line JCS O of the ſynodical motion, theſe pointt will ſeem to ſhift forward. For, the gravitation of the inferior planet to the Sun being diminiſhed, it will not be able ſo ſoon to bend its path to a right angle with the radius vector. On the other hand, ſhould the apſides of the inferior orbit be near the line PS Q, the increaſe of the inferior planet's gravitation to the Sun muſt ſooner produce this eſſect, and it will amive ſooner at its aphelion or perihelion, or thoſe points will Teem to come weſtward aud to meet it. And thus, in every ſynodical revolution, the apſides of the inferior planet will twice advance and twice retreat, as if the elliptical orbit ſifted a little to the eaſt ward or weſtward. But, as the diminution of the inferior planets gravitation to the Sun is much greater when it is in the line CS O than the augmentation of it when in the line P 8 Q, the advances of the apſides, in the courſe of a Tynodical period will exceed the retreats, and, on the whole, they will advance. The perturbations of the motion of a ſuperior planet by its gravitation to an inferior, are in general oppoſite, both in kind and in direction, to thoſe of the inferior planet. Thereſore, in general, their apſides retreat. All theſe derangements, or deviations from the ſimple elliptical motion, are diſtinctly obſerved in the heavens; and the calculated effect on each planet correſponds with what is obſerved, with all the preciſion that can be wiſhed for. It is evident that this calculation muſt be extremely complicated, and that the effect depends not oly on the reſpective poſitions, but alſo on the quantities of matter of the different planets. For theſe reaſons, as Jupiter and Saturn are much larger than any of the other planets, theſe anomalies are chiefly owing to theſe two planets. The apſides oſ all the planets are obſerved. to advance, except thoſe oſ Saturn, which ſenſibly retreat, chiefly by the action of Jupiter. The apſides of the planet diſcoyered by Dr Herſchel doubtleſs retreats conſiderably, by the action of the great planets Jupiter and Saturn. It might be imagined that the vaſt number of comets, which are almoſt conſtantly without the orbits of the planets, would cauſe a general advance of all the apſides. But theſe bodies are ſo far oſf, and probably contain ſo little matter, that their action is inAenſible. 504. The aliernate accelerations and retardations of the planets Mercury, Venus, the Earth, and Mars, in conſequence of their mutual gravitations, and their gravitations to Jupiter, nearly compenſate each other in every revolution; and no eſfects of them remain aſter a long tract of time, except an advance of their apſides. But there are peculiarities in the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, which occaſion very ſenſible accumulations, and have given conſiderable trouble to the aſtronomers in diſcovering their cauſes. The period of Saturn's revolution round the Sun increaſes very ſenſibly, each being about 7 hours longer than the preceding. On the contrary, ihe period of Jupiter is obſerved to diminiſ about half as much, that is, about 15 hours in each revolution. This is owing to the particular poſition of the aphelions of thoſe two planets. Let ABP C (ſig: 55.) be the elliptical orbit of Jupiter, A being the aphelion and P the perihelion. Suppoſe the orbit a b 4c of Saturn to be a cirele, having the Sun S in the centre, and let Saturn be ſuppoſed to be in a. Then, becauſe Jupiter employs more time (about 140 days) in moving from A to C than in moving from C to P, he muſt retard the motion of Saturn more than he accelerates him, and Jupiter muſt be more accelerated by Saturn than he is retarded. The contrary muſt happen if Satum be in the oppoſite part ꝓ of his orbit. Aſter a tract of ſome revolutions, all muſt be compenſated, becauſe there will be as many oppoſitions of Saturn to the Sun on one ſide of the tranſverſe diameter of Jupiter's orbit as on the other. But if the orbit of Saturn be an ellipſe, as in fig. 55. B, and if the aphelion a be 90 degrees more advanced in the order of the ſigns than the aphelion A of Jupiter, ĩt is plain that there will be more oppoſitions of Saturn hile Jupiter is moving over the ſemiellipſe A CP, than while he moves over the ſemiellipſe P B A, for Saturn is about 400 days longer in the portion b a c of his orbit; and therefore Saturn will, on the &hole, be retarded, and Iupiter accelerated. Now, it is a fact that the aphelion of Saturn is 70 degrees more advanced on the ecliptic than that of Jupiter. Therefore theſe changes muſt happen, and the retardations of Saturn muſt exceed the accelerations. They do ſo, nearly in the proportion of 353 to 352. This exceſs will continue for about 2000 years, when the angle ASꝓ will be 90 degrees complete. It will then begin to decreaſe, and will continue decreaſing for 16000 years, after which Saturn will be accelerated, and IJupiter will be retarded. The preſent retardation of Saturn is about 2, or a day’s motion, in a century, and the concomitant acceleration of Jupiter is about half as much. S8ee Mem. Acad. Par. 1746.) M. de Ia Place has happily ſuccceded in account3C2 ing for ſeveral irregularities in this gradual change oſ the mean motions oſ theſe two planets, which had conſiderably perplexed the aſtronomers in their attempts to aſcertain their periods and their maximum by mere obſervation. Theſe were accompanied by an evident change in the elliptical equations of the orbit, indicating a change of eccentricity. M. de la Place has ſ=iewn that all are preciſe conſcquences of univerſal gravitation, and depend on the near equality of ſive times the angular motion of Saturn to twice that of Jupiter, while the deviation from perſfect equality of thoſe two motions introduces a variation in theſe irregularities, which has a very long period (about 877 years). Ile has at laſt given an equation, which expreſſes the motions with ſuch accuracy, that the calculated place agrees with the modern obſervations, and with the moſt ancient, without an error exceeding . (See Mem. Acad. Par. 1785.) 505. In conſequence of the mutual gravitation of the planets, the node oſ the diſturbed planet retreats on the orbit of the diſturbing planet. Thus, let EX (fig. 56.) be the plane of the diſturbing planets orbit, and let AB be the path of the oiher planet, approaching to the node N. As the diſturbing planet is ſomewhere in the plane EX, its attraction for A tends to make A appronch that plane. We may ſuppoſe the oblique attraction reſolved into two forces, one of which is parallel to EK, and the other perpendicular to it. Let this Iaſt be ſuch that, in the time that the planet A, if not diſturbed, would move ſrom A to B, the perpendicular force would' cauſe it to deſcribe the ſmall ſpace AC. By the combined action of this force A C with the motion AB, the: planet deſcribes the diagonal AD, and croſſes the plane EK in the point u. Thus the node hus ſhifted from N to n, in a direction contrary to that of the planet's motion. The planet now proceeds in the lne n æ, getting to the other ſide of the plane EK. The attraction of the diſturbing planet now becomes oblique again to the plane, and is partly employed in drawing A (now in ay toward the plane. Let this part of the attraction be again repreſented by a ſmall ſpace a c. This, compounded with the progreſſive motion a b, produces a motion in the diagonal a d, as if the planet had come, not from n, but ſfrom N', a point ſtill more to the weſtward. The node ſeems again to have ſhiſted in antecedentid ſignorum. And thus it appears that, both in approaching the node, and in quitting the node, the node itſelf ſhifts its place, in a direction contrary to that of the motion of the diſturbed planet. . It is farther obſervable that the inclination of the diſturbed orbit increaſes while the planet approaches the node, and diminiſhes during the ſubſequent receſs from it. The original inclination ANF becomes A n E, which is greater than ANE. The angle A n E or a nK is aterwards changed into a N'K, wſhich is leſs than a n K. In this manner we perve that when a planet, having croſſed the eclipũe, 7occds on the other ſide of it, the node reccdes, tht ĩ, the planet moves as if it had come from a node ſituated farther weſt on the ecliptic; and all the while, the inclination of the orbit to the ecliptic is diminiſhing. When the planet has got 90° eaſtward from the node which it quitted, it is at the greateſt diſtance from the ecliptic, and, in its farther progreſs, it approaches the oppoſite node. Its path now bends more and more ſoward the ecliptic, and the inclination of its orbit to the ecliptic increaſes, and it croſſes the ecliptic agaim, in a point conſiderably to the weſtward of the point where it croſſed it before. The conſequence of this modification of the mutual action of the planets is, that the nodes oſf all their orbits in the ecliptic recede on the ecliptic, except the node of Jupiters orbit JJ (ſig- 57.), which advances on the ecliptic EX, by retreating on the orbit SS of Satum, from which Jupiter ſuſfers the greateſt diſturbance *. 506. We have hitherto conſidered the ecliptic as a permanent circle of the heavens. But it now appean that the Earth muſt be attracted out of that plane by the other J—— * As this motion oſ the nodes, and that of the apſides formerly mentioned, hecome ſenſible by continual accumultion, and as they are equally ſuſceptible of accurate meaſur and compariſon as the greater gravitations which retain the revolving bodies in their orbits, Mr Machin, profeſſor of aitronomy at Greſham College, propoſed them as the ſitteſt phenomena for inſorming us of the diſtance of the Sun. In other planets. As we refer every phenomenon to the ecliptic by its latitude and longitude in relation to the apparent path oſ the Sun, it is plain that this deviation of the Sun from a fixed plane, muſt change the latitude of all the ſtars. The change is ſo very ſmall, however, that it never would have been perceived, had it not been pointed out to the aſtronomers by Newton, as neceſſarily following from the univerſal gravitation of matter. The ecliptic (or rather the S8un's path) has a ſmall irregular motion round two points ſituated about 75 degrees weſtward from our equinoctial points. 507. The comets appear to be very greatly deranged in their motions by their gravitation to the planets. The Halleyan comet has been repeatedly ſo diſturbed, by paſſing near to Jupiter, that its periods were very conſiderably altered by this action. A comet, obſerved in 1770 by Lexel, Proſperin, and other accurate aſtronomers, has been ſo much deranged in its motions, that its orbit has been totally changed. Its mean diſtance, period, and perihelion diſtance, calculated from good obſervations, which Matthew Stewart made a trial of this method, employing chiefly the motion of the lunar apogee, and has deduced aæ much greater diſtance than what can be fairly deduced from the tranſit of Venus. Notwithſtanding ſome overſights in the ſummations there given of the diſturbing forces, the concluſion ſeems unexceptionable, and the Sun's diſtance is, in all which Lad been continued during three months, agreed with all the obſervations within 1 of a degree. In its uphelion, it is a ſmall matrer more remote than Jupiter, and muſt have been ſo near him in 1767 (about  oſ its dũſtance ſrom the Sun) that its gravitation to Jupiter muſt have been thrice as great as that to the Sun. Moreover, in its revolution following this appearance in 1770, namely on the 23d of Auguſt 1777, it mu©t have come vaſtly nearer to Jupiter, and iĩts gravitation to Jupiter muſt have exceeded its gravitation to the Sun more than 200 times. No wonder then that it has been diverted into quite a diſerent path, and that aſtronomers cannot tell what is become of it. And this, by the way, ſuggeſts ſome ſingular and momentous reflections. The number of the comets is certainly great, and their courſes are unknown. They may ſrequently come near the planets. The comet of 1764 has one oſ its nodes very cloſe to the Earth's orhit, and iĩt is very poſſible that the Earth and it may chance to be in that part oſ their reſpective orbits at the ſame time. The eſfect of ſuch vicinity muſt be very remarkable, probably producing ſuch tides as would deſtroy moſt of the habitable ſurface. But, as its continuance in that great proximity muſt be very momentary, by reaſon of its great velocity, the eſfect may not be ſo great. When the comet of 1770 was ſo near to Jupiter, it was in aphelio, moving ſlowly, and therefore may have continued ſome conſiderable time there. Yet it does not appear that it produced any derangement in the motion of his ſatellites. We muſt thereſore conl clude that either the comet did not continue in the path that was ſuppoſed, or that it contained only a very ſmall quantity of matter, being perhaps little more than a denſe vapour. Many circumſtances in the appearance of comets countenance this opinion of their nature. As they retire to very great diſtances from the Sun, and in that remote ſituation move very ſlowly, they may greatly diſturb each other's motion. It is therefore a reaſonable conjecture oſ Sir Iſaac Newton that the comet of 1680, at its next approach to the Sun, may really fall into him altogether. Of the Lunar Inequalities. 508. OF ãll the heavenly bodies, the Moon has attracted the greateſt notice, and her motions have been the moſt ſcrupulouſly examined: and it may be added, that of them all ſhe has been the moſt refractory. It is but within theſe few years paſt that we have been able to aſcertain her motions with the preciſion attained in the caſes of the other planets. Not that her apparent path is contorted, like thoſe of Mercury and Venus, running into loops and knots, but becauſe the orbit is continually ſiifting its place and changing its form; and her real motion; in it are accelerated, retarded, and deflected, in a great variety of ways. While the aſcertaining the place of Jupiter or Saturn requires the employment of five or ſix equations, the Moon requires at leaſt forty to attain the ſome exactneſs. The corrections introduced by thoſe equations are ſo various, both in their magnitude and in their periods, and have, of conſequence, been ſo blended and complicated together, that it ſurpaſſed the power of obſervation to diſcover the greateſt part of them, becauſe we did not know the occaſions which made them neceſſary, or the phyſical connexion which they had with the aſpects of the other bodies of the ſolar ſyſtem. Only ſuch as aroſe to a conſpicuous magnitude, and had an evident relation to the ſituation of the Sun, were ſiſhed out from among the reſt. 509. From all this complication and embarraſſment the diſcovery of univerſal gravitation has freed us. We have only to follow this into its conſequences, as modified by the particular ſituation of the Moon, and we get an equation, which muſ be made, in order to determine a deviation from ſimple elliptical motion that muſt reſult from the action of the Sun. This alone, followed regularly into all its conſequences, gives, all the great equations which the ſagacity of obſervers had diſcovered, and a multitude of other corrections, which no ſagacity could ever have detected. Diſcimus hinc tandem quã couſi argentea Phœbe Paſſibus haud æquis eat, cur ſubdita nulli Hactenus aſtronomo, numerorum fræna recuſat Obvia conſpicimus, nubem pollente mathesi. We have ſeen (232.) that ſince the Moon accompanies the Earth in its revolution round the Sun, we muſt onclude that ſe is under the influence oſ that force which deſlects the Earth into that revolution. If, in every inſtant, the Moon were impelled by preciſely the ſame force which then impels the Earth, and if this force were alſo in the ſame direction, the Moon's motion relative to the Earth would not ſuſtain any change (98.) She would deſcribe an accurate ellipſe having the Earth in the focus, and would deſcribe areas proportional to the times. But neither of theſe conditions are agreeable to the real ſtate of things. The Moon is ſometimes nearer to the Sun, and ſometimes more remote from him than the Earth is, and is therefore more or leſs attracted by him; and though the diſtances of both from the Sun are ſometimes equal (as when the Moon is in quadrature) the direction of her gravitation to the Sun is then conſiderably different from that of the Earths gravitation to him. Theſe circumſtances change conſiderably all her motions relative to the Earth. But, ſince the planetary force follows the preciſe inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances, we can tell what its intenſity is in every poſition of the Moon, in what direction it acts, and what deviation it will produce during any interval of time. We may proceed in the following manner. 510. Let S (fig 59.) repreſent the Sun, E the Eartl, moving in the arch AEB. Let the Moon be ſuppoſed to deſcribe round the Earth the circle CB OA. Join ES and MS, and let SM cut the Earth's orbit in N. TLaſtly, Let ES be taken as the meaſure oſ the Earth's gravitation to the Sun, and as the ſcale on which we eſtimate the diſturbing ſorces. To learn the magnitude and direction of the force wlich diſturbs the Moons motion when ſhe is in any point M oſ her orbit, gravitating to the Sun in the direclion MS, we muſt inſtitute the ſollowing analogy MS:ES =ES: M G. Then it is evident that if the Moons gravitation to the Sun be repreſented by ES vhen ſhe is in the points A or B, equally diſtant with the Earth, M G will repreſent her gravitation to the Sun vhen ſhe is in M; for it is to ES in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances ſfrom him. Now this force M G, heing neſther equal to ES, nor in the ſame direction, muſt change or diſturb the Moons motion relative to the Earthh. We may ſuppoſe MG to reſult from the combined action of two forces MF and M H ſthat is, MG may be the diagonal of a parallelogram M F G II), of which one, MF, is parallel and equal to ES. Were the Earth and Moon urged by the forces ES and MF only, their relative motions would not be aſſiected (98.) Thereſore M H alone diſturbs this relative motion, and may be taken for its indication and meaſure. ] The diſturbing force may be otherwiſe repreſented, by varying the conditions on which the parallelogram MVF GH is formed. It may be formed on the ſuppoſition that one ſide oſf the parallelogram ſhall have the direction ſolVing M G for the purpoſes of calculation, and accordingly has been moſt generally employed by the great geometers who have cultivated this theory. But the method followed in this outline was thought more elementary, and moſt illuſtrative of the eſſects. The magnitude and direction oſ this diſturbing force depends on the form oſ the parallelogram MF G H, and conſequently on the proportion of MF and MG, and on their relative poſitions. We may obtain an ealy expreſſion of the force M H by the conſideration that the rate of increaſe of MS' is double of the rate of increaſe of MS. When a line increaſes by a very ſmall addition, the ratio of the increment oſ the line to the line is but the half of that of the ſquare to the ſquare. Thus, let the line MS be ſuppoſed 100, and ES ioI, diſfering by one part in a hundredc We have M S  r1oooo, and ES æ 1c201, diſfering by very nearly two parts in a hundred; the error of this ſuppoſition being only one part in ten thouſand. Suppoſe M S æ 1000, and ES = roo1, diſfering by one part in a thouſand. Then M S? æ 1000000, and E S æ 1002001, diſfering from MS' by two parts in a thouſand very nearly, the error of the ſuppoſition being only one part in a million, &c. &e. Now the greateſt diſference that can occur between ES and MS is at new and ſull Moon, when the Moon is in C or O. In this caſe E C is nearly the 3590th part of LS, and we have E S: OS: æ 399: 539135, or  399: 392,026; and therefore, in ſuppoſing ES to O80 as 390 to 392, we commit an error of no more than 20 of 455, that is à4⸗, ViZ. leſs than one part in fiſteen thouſand, in the moſt unfavourable circumſtances. Therefore the diſference between NS (or ES) and M G may be ſuppoſed equal to MD, without any ſenſiblo error, that is, to the double of NM, the difference of NS and MS. Therefore MG—NS =2MN very nearly, and M G—MSB, that is, S G=3 MN very nearly. We may alſo take MI for M H without any ſenſible error, and may ſuppoſe E Iæ3 MN. For the lines MF, IP, H G, being equal and parallel, and S P nearly coinciding with S G, from which it never deviates more than &, E I will nearly coincide with EH, æSG, =3 MN nearly. 511. Theſe conſiderations will give us a very ſimple manner of repreſenting and meaſuring the diſturbing force in every poſition of the Moon, which will have no error that can be of any ſigniſicance. Moreover, any error that inheres in it, is completely compenſated by an equal error of an oppoſite kind in another point of the orbit. Therefore Let us ſuppoſe that the portion of the Earth's path round the Sun ſenſibly coincides with the ſtraight line A B (fig. 60.) perpendicular to the line OCS, paſſing through the Sun, and called the line of the srziGiES, as AB is called the line of the QUADRATURES. Let M D croſs AB at right angles, and produce it to R ſo that MP=æ32MN. Join RE, and drawv MI parallel to it. MI will, in all caſes, have the poſition and magnitudẽ correſponding to the diſturbing force. Or, more ſimply, make EI=3 MN, taking the point I on the ſame fide of AB with M, and drawv MI. MI is the diſturbing force. 512. This force M I may be reſolved into two, viz. ML, having the direction of the Moon's motion, and ME, perpendicular to her motion, that is, MX lying in the direction of the radius vector M E, and ML having the direction of the tangent. The force M L affects the Moon's angular motion round the Earth, either accelerating or retarding it, while the force M K either augments or diminiſhes her gravitation to the Earth. The diſturbing foree M I may alſo be reſolved into MR æ3 MN, and RI, or ME; that is, into a force always proportional to MN, and in that direction, and another force in the direction of the Moon's gravitation to the Earth. This is uſeful on another occaſion. 513. When the Moon is in quadrature, the point I coincides with E, becauſe there is no MN. In this caſe, therefore, the force M L does not exiſt, and MK coincides with M E. The diſturbing force MI is now wholly employed in augmenting the Moons gravitation to the Earth. The gravitations of the Earth and Moon to the Bun are equal, but not parallel. If ES expreſſes the magnitude of the Moons gravitation t0 the Sun, then ME will expreſs (on the ſame ſcale) the augmentation in quadratures of the Moon's gravitation to the Earth, occaſioned by the obliquity of the Sun's action. It is corvenient to take this quadrature augment of the Moon's gravitation to the Earth as the unit of the ſcale on which all the diſturbing forces are meaſured, and to calculate what ſraction oſ her whole gravitation it amounts to. 514. Let G expreſs the Moons gravitation to the Sun, g her gravitation to the Earth, and g the increaſe oſ this givitation. Alſo let 5y and m be the length of a ſydereal vear and of a ſydereal month. In order to learn in what proportion the Moon's gravitation to the Earth is aſſected by the diſturbing force, it will be convenient to lnow what proportion its increment in quadrature has to the whole gravitation.. We may thereſore inſtitute the following proportions. : l D dES EB G:igs=p , ;  * 5: G=æ EB: ES. Therefore ll ES XEB EBXES j 3 : 87 lirã m 5m: 5y. The  ES, EB3290 : 7  573;65 m]  æia very nearly. Thus we ſee that the Moon's gravitation to the Sun is more than twice her gravitation to the Earth. The eonſequence of this is, that even when the Moon is in conJunction, at new Moon, between the Earth and the Sun, her path in abſolute ſpace is æoncave towarꝗ the Sun, and convex The IMoon's mean gravitation to the Earth is thereſore to its inerement in the quadratures by the action of the Sun, in the duplicate ratio of the Eartis period round the Sun to the lunar period round the Earth. This is very nearly in the proportion of 179 to 1. Her gravitation Is increaſed, when in quadrature, about 45. This will diminiſh the chord of curvature and increae the curvature in the ſame proportion. 515. In order to ſee what change it ſuſtains in any other poſition of the Moon, ſuch as M, join ED, and draw toward the Earth. Even there ſie is deflected, not toward rhe Earth, but toward the Sun. This is a very curious, and ſeemingly paradoxical aſſertion. But nothing is better eſtabliſied. The tracing the Moon's motion in æbſolute ſpace is the completeſt demonſtration of it. It is not a looped curve, 2. one, at firt thinking, would imagine, but a line always concave toward the Sun. Indeed ſcarcely any things can be more unlike than the real motions of the Moon are to what we ſirſt imagine them to be. At new Moon, ſhe appears to be moving to the leſt, and we ſee her gradually paſſing the ſtars, leaving them to the right; and, calculating from the diitance 240000 miles, and the angular motion, 2bout half a cegree in an hour, we ſhould ſay that ſie is moving to the leſt at the rate of 38 miles in a minute. But the fact is that ſhe is then moving to the right at the rate of 1100 miles in a minute. But as the Earth, from whence we view her, in i moving at the t of ſ1a milesi in a niz, the Moon i is a D Q pependicular to EM. It is plain that D Q is the ſinc of the angle D E Q, which is twice the angle OLQ or CEM, that is, twice the Moon's diſtance ſrom the neareſt ſyzigy. QL is the coſine of the ſame angle. The triangles M D Q and EIK are ſimilar. EI is equal to 1 MD. Therefore EXæ13 M Q, =1ME  13EQ, uſing the ſiun 4 when DEm is leſs than 990, or CEM is leſs than 45°, and the ſign when CEM is greater than 45,. Thereſore M Kæ 3ME + i13EQ. Thereſore, i? M E be equial to i11 E q, that is, i? ME be 3 E Q, MX is reduced to nothing, or the force MI is then perpendicular to the radius vector, or is a tangent to the circlee The angle CEM, or the arch CM, has then its ſecant EI equal to thrice its coſine M N. This arch is 54 44. There are therefore ſour points in the circular orbit diſtant 54°044 from the line of the ſyZigies, where the Moons gravitation to the Earth is not aſfected by the action of ihe Sun. Iſ the arch CM exceed this, the point vill Iie within the orbit, as in ig. 60. 2. indicating an augmentation of the Moon's gravitation to the Earth. At B, 13E Q=I3EM, and thereſore 13 E Q 3EMæ LEM, as beſore. 516. At O and at C, 13E Q +3EMæ2EM. Thereſore, in the ſyzigies, the diminution oſ the Moons gravitation to the Earth is double of the augmentation i . I of jt in quadratures, or it is T 89 he Earth. of her gravitation to 577. With reſpect to the force ML, it is evidently = 13D Q or 13 of the ſine of twice the Moon's diſtance from oppoſition or conjunction. It augments from the ſTyæigy to the octant, where it is a maximum, and from thence it diminiſhes to nothing in the quadrature. In its maximum ſtate, it is about 5 of the Moons gravitation to the Eorth. 518. It appears, by conſtructing the ſigure for the different poſitions of the Moon in the courſe of a lumtion, that this forco M L retards the Moon's motion round the Earth in the ſirſt and third quarters C A and O B, hut accelerates her motion in the ſecond and Iaſt quarters A O and B C. Thus, in ſig. 60, ML leads from M in a direction oppoſite to that of the Moon's motion eaſtward from her conjunction at C to her firſt qu drature in A. In ſig. 60. 3. M L lies in the direction of her motion; and it is plain that M L will be ſir larly ſituated in the quadrants C A and OB, as alſo in the quadrants A O and BC. All theſe diſturbing forces depend on the proportion of LB to ES. Therefore, while Il 5 remains the ſame, the diſturbing forces will change in the ſame proportion with the Moon's diſtance from the Earth. 519. But Iet us ſuppoſc that ES changes in the courſe of the Eart’s motion in her elliptical orbit. Then, did the Sun continue to act with the ſame force as beſore, ſtill the diſturbing force would change in the jro3E portion oſ E S, becoming ſmaller as ES becomes greater, becauſe the proportion of E B to ES becormes ſmailer. But, when ES increaſes, the gravitation to the Sun diminiſhes in the duplicate ratio oſ ES. Therefore the diſturbing ſorce varies in the verſe proporũon of E S, and, in genemnl, is æ- 5 Therefore, as the Earth ES is nearer to the Sun about 4'; in January than in July, iĩt ſollows that in January all the diſturbing foros vill be nearly ,'ę greater than in Iuly. What has now been ſaid muſt ſuſfice for an account of the ſorces which diſturb the Moon's motion in the difſorent purts of a circular orbit round the Earth. The ſame ſorces operate on the Moon revolving in her true elliptical orbit, but varying, with the Moons diſtance from the Earth. They operate in the ſame manner, producing, not the ſame motions, but the ſame changes of motion. 520. It would ſeem now that it is not a very diſicult matter to compute the motion and the place of the Moon ſor any particular moment. But it is one oſ the moſt diſſicult problems that have employed the tulents of the firt mathematicians of Lurope. Sir Iſaac Newton has treated this ſubject with his uſual ſuperiority, in his Principles of Natural Philoſophy, and in the ſcparate Eſſlay on the Lunar Theory. But he only began the ſubject, and contented himſelſl with marking the principal topics oſ inveſtigation, peinting out the roads that were to be held in each, and furnihiing us with the mathematics and the methods which were to be ſollowed. In all theſe particulars, great improve ments have boen made by Euler, D Alembert, Clairaut, and Muyer of Gottingen. This laſt gentleman, by a moſt ſagacious examination and compariſon of the data furniſhed by obſervation, and a judicious employment of the phyſical principles of Sir Iſaac Newton, has conſtructed equations ſo exactly ſitted to the various circumſtances of the caſe, that he has made his lunar tables correſpond with obſervation, both the moſt ancient and the moſt recent, to a degree oſ exactneſs that is not exceeded in any tables of the primary plancts, ard ſar ſurpaſing any orher tables of the lunar motions. We can, with propriety, only make ſome very general obſervations on the eſſects of the continued action oſ the diſturbing forces. . 521. In the ſyzigies and quadrature, the combined force, ariſing ſrom the Moons natural gravitation to the Earth and the Suns diſturbing force, is directed to the Earth. Thereſore the Moon will, notwithſtanding the diſturbing force, continue to deſcribe areas proportional to the times. But as ſoon as the Moon quits thoſe ſtations, the tangential force M L begins to operate, and the combined force is no longer directed preciſely to the Earth. In the octants, where the tangential force is at ts maximum, it cauſe;s the combined force to deviate about half a degree from the radius vector, and rhereſore conſiderably affects the angular motion. Let the Moon ſet out from the ſecond or fourth octant, with her mean angular velocity. Therefore M L, then at its maximum, increaſes continually this velocity, which augments, till the Moon comes to a ſyzigy. Here the accelerating force ends, and a retarding force begins to act, and the motion is now retarded by the ſame degrees by which it was accelerated juſt beforee At the next octant, the ſum of the retardations from the ſyZigy is juſt equal to the ſum of the accelerations from the preceding octant. The velocity of the Moon is now reduced to its mean ſtate. But her place is more advanced by 37 than it would have been, had the Moon not been affected by the Sun, but had moved from the ſyzigy with her mean velocity. Proceeding in her courſe from this octant, the retardation continues, and in the quadrature the velocity is reduced to its loweſt ſtate; but here the accelerating ſorce begins again, and reſtores the velocity to its mean ſtate in the next octant. Thus, it appears that in rhe octants, the velocity is always in its medium ſtate, attains a maximum in paſiing through a ſyzigy, and is the leaſt poſſible in quadrature. In the ſirſt and third octant, the Moon is 37 eaſt, or a-head, oſ her mean place; and in the ſecond and fourth,is à5 much to the weſtward of it; and in the ſyzigies and quadratures her mean and true places are the ſame, Thus, when her velocity diſſers, moſt from its medium ſtate, her calculated and obſerved places are the ſame, and where her velocity has attained ĩts mean ſtate, her calculated and obſerved places diſſor moit widely. This is the caſe with all aſtronomical equations. The motions are computed ſirſt in their mean ſtate; and when the changing cauſes increaſe to a maximum, and then diminiſh to nothing, the eſfect, which is a change of place, has attained its maximum by continual addition or deduction. 522. This alternate increaſe and diminution of the Moons angular motion in the courſe of a lunation was firſt diſcorered, or at Ieaſt diſtinguiſhed from the other irregulurities of her motion, by Tycho Brahè, and by him called the Equation of varRIarioN. The deduction of it from the principle of univerſal gravitation by Sir Iſaac Newton is the moſt elegant and perſpicuous ſpecimen of mechanical inveſtigation that is to be ſeen. The addreſs which he has ſhewn in giving ſenſible repreſentations and meaſures of the momentary actions, and of their accumulated reſults, in ũll parts of the orbit, are peculiarly pleaſing to all perſons of a mathematical taſte, and are ſo appoſite and plain, that the inveſtigation becomes highly inſtructive to a beginner in this part of the higher mathematies. The late Dr Mathew Stewart, in his Tracts Phyſical and Mathematical, ſollowing Newton's example, has given ſome very beautiful examples of the ſame method. 523. We have hitherto conſidered the Moon's orbit as circular, and muſt now inquire whether its ſorm will ſuſſcr any change. We mey expect that it will, ſince we ſce a very great diturbing force diminiſhing ĩts terreitiial gravity in the ſyzigies, and increaſing it in the quadratures. Let us ſuppoſe the Moon to ſet out from a point 35°16 ſhort of a quadrature. The force M &, which we may call a centripetal force, begins to act, increaſing the deſlecting force. This muſt render the orbit more incurvated in that part, and this change will be continued throngh the whole of the arch extending 35° 16' on each ſide of the quadrature. At 35° 16 eaſt of a quadrature, the gravity recovers its mean ſtate; but the path at this point now makes an acute angle with the radius vector, which brings the Moon nearer to the Earth in paſſing through the point of conjunction or oppoſition. Through the whole of the arch Væ, extending 54° 44' on each ſide of the ſyZigies, the Moon's gravitation is greatly diminiſhed; and therefore her orbit in this place is flattened, or made leſs curve than the circle, till at v, 5° a4' caſt of the ſyzigy, the Moons gravity recovers its mean ſtate, and the orbit its mean curvature. 524. In this manner, the orbit, from being circular, becomes of an oval ſorm, moſt incurvated' at A and B, and leaſt ſo at O and C, and having its longeſt diameter lying in the quadratures; not exactly however in thoſe points, on account of the variation of velocity which we have ſiewn to be greateſt in the ſecond and fourth quadrants. The longeſt diameter lies a ſmall matter ſiort of the points A and B, that is, to the weſtward of them. Sir Iſaac Newton has determined- the proportion oſ the two diameters oſ this oval, viz. AB æ 70 and O C æ 69. It miay ſeem ſtrange that the Moon comes neareſt to the Earth wlhen hor gravity is moſt diminiſhed; but this is owing to the incurvation of the orbit in the neighbourhood of the quadratures. 525. The Moon's orbit is not a circle, but an ellipſis, having the Earth in one of the foci. Still, however, the above aſſertions will apply, by always conceiving a circle deſcribed through the Moon's place in the real orbit. But we muſt now inquire whether this orbit alſo ſuſfers any change of ſorm by the action of the Sun. Let us ſuppoſe that the line of the apſides coincides vith the line of ſyzigies, and that the Moon is in apogee. Her gravitation to the Earth is diminiſhed in conjunction and oppoſition, ſo that, when her gravitation in perigee is compared with her gravitation in apogee, the gravitations diſfer more than in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtance. The natural forces in perigee and apogee are inverſely as the ſquares of the diſtance. If the diminutions by the Sun's action were alſo inverſely as the ſquare of the diſtance, the remaining gravitations would be in the ſame proporfion ſtil. But this is far from being the caſe here; for the diminutions are directly as the diſtance, and the greateſt quantity is taken from the ſmalleſt ſorce. Therefore the ſorces thus diminiſhed muſt dier in a greater proportion than before, that is, in a greater ratio than the inverſe of the ſquare of the diſtances. * Let the Moon come ſrom the apogee of this diſturbed orbit. Did hier gravity increaſe in the due proportion, mne would come to the proper perigee. But ĩt increaſes in a greater proportion, and will bring the Moon nearer to the ſocus; that is, the orbit will become more eccentric, and its elliptical equation will increaſe along with the eccentricity. Similar eſects will reſult in the Moons motion from perigee to apogee. Her apogean gravity being too much diminiſhed, ſhe will go farther off, and thus the eccentricity and the equation of the orbit will be increaſcd. Suppoſe the Moon to change when in apogee, and that we calculate her place ſeven days after, when ſhe ſiould be in the vicinity of the quadrature. We apply her elliptical equation (about  20) to her mean motion. If we compare this calculation with her real # Thus, let the following perigee and apogee diſtances be compared, and the correſponding gravitations with their diminutions and remainders. Perigee. Mean. Apogee. Diſtancs - - --- 8 1I0 I2 Gravitations ---- I44 100 64 Diminutions ---- 2 23 3 Remaining gravities --142 975 6I Now 12: 8 = 142:63, 11. Therefore 142 is to 6I in a much real place, we ſhall ſind the true place almoſt 2 behind the calculation. We ſhould ſind, in like manner, that in the laſt quadrature, her calculated place, by means of the ordinary equation of the orbit, is more than 2 behind the true or obſerved place. The orbit has become more eccentric, and the motion in it more unequable, and requires a greater equation. This may riſe to 7 40, inſtead of & 20, which correſponds to the mean form of the orbit. But Iet us next ſuppoſe that the apſides of the orbit lie in the quadratures, where the Moon's gravitation to the Earth is increaſed by the aclion of the Sun. Were ĩt increaſcd in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtunces, the new gravities would ſtill be in this duplicate proportion. But, in the preſent caſe, the greateſt addition vill be made to the ſmalleſt forcee The apogee and perigee gravities thercſore will not diſer ſuſſiciently; and rhe Moon, ſetting out ſfrom the apogee in one quadrature, ill not, on her arrival at the oppoſite quadrature, come ſo near the Earth as ſhe otherwiſc would hove done. Or, ſhould ſic ſct out ſrom her perigee in one quadrature,. ſile will not go far enough from the Earth in the oppoſite quadrature; that is, the eccentiicity of the orbit will, in both caſes, be diminiſhed, and, along with it, the equation correſponding Our calculations for her place in the adjacent oppoſition or conjunction, made with the ordinary orbital equation, will be faulty, and the crrors will be oſ the oppoſite kind to the former. The equation neceſſary in the preſent cae will not exceed 5°3'. In all intermediate poſitions of the apſides, ſimilar anomalies will be obſerved, verging to the one or the other extreme, according to the poſition of the line of the apſides. The equation pro expediendo calculo, by Dr Halley, contains the corrections which nmuſt be made on the equation of the orbit, in order to bring it into the ſtate which correſponds with the preſent eccentricity of the orbit, depending on the Sun's poſition in relation to its tranſverſe axis. 526. All theſe angmalies are diſtinctly obſerved, agreeing with the deductions from the effects oſ univerſal gravitation with the utmoſt preciſion. The anomaly itſelf was diſcovered by Piolemy, and the diſcovery is the greateſt mark of his penetration and ſagacity, becauſe it is extremely diſficult to find the periods and the changes of this correction, and it had eſcaped the obſervation of Hipparchus and the other eminent aſtronomers at Alexandria during three hundred years of continued obſervation. Ptolemy called it the Equation of EVEC TIoN, becauſe he explained it by a certain ſhifting of the orbit. His explanation, or rather his hypotheſis for directing his calculation, is moſt Ingenious and reſined, but is the leaſt compatible with other phenomena oſ any of Ptolemys contrivances, 527. The deduction of this anomaly from its phyſical principles was a ſar more intricate and diſſicult taſk than the varation which equation had furnimed. It is however accomplithed by Newton in the completeſt muanner. It is an intereſting caſe of the great zrętlem of ihree odies, which has employed, and contſues to employ, the talents and beſt efforts of the great mathematicians. In , Mr Muchin gave a pretty theorem, which ſeemed to promiſe great aſſiſtance in the ſolution of this problem:. Newton had demorſtrated that a body, deſlcted by a centripetal ſorce directæd to a fſixed point, moved ſo that the radius vector deſcribed areas proportional to the times. Mr Machin demonſtrated that if deſloted by ſorces dirccted to two ſixed points, the triangle connecting it with them (which may be called the paona vectrix) alſo deſcribed ſolids proportional to the times. Little help has been gotten from it. The equations founded on it, or to which it Ieads, are of inextricable complexity. 528. Not only the form, but alſo the poſition of the Iunar orbit, muſt ſuſſtr a clhiange by the action oſ the Sun. It was demonſtrated (226.) that if gravity decreaſed faſter than in the proportion of , the apſides of an orbit will advance, but will retreat, if the gravitation decreaſe at a ſlower rate. Now, we huve ſeen that Lile the Moon is within 553 45 oſ the ſyzigies, the gravity is diminiſhed in a greater proportion than that of - Thereſore the apſides which lie in this part oſ the ſynodical revolution muſt advance. For the oppoſite reaſons, while they lic within 355 16 of the quadratures, they muſt recede. But, ſince the diminution in ſyzigy is double oſ the augmentation in quadrature, and is continued through a much greater portion of the orbit, the apſides muſt, in the courſe of a complete lunation, advance more than they recede, or, on the whole, thcy muſt advance. They muſt advance moſt, and recede leaſt, when near the ſyZzigies; becauſe at this time the diminution of gravity by the diiturbing force bears the greateſt proportion to the natural diminution of gravity correſponding to the elliptical motion, and becauſe the augmentation in quadrature will then bear the ſmalleſt proportion to it, becauſe the conjugate axis of the ellipſe is in the line of quadrature. The contrary muſt happen when the apſides are near the quadratures, and it will be found that in this caſe the receſs will exceed the progreſs. In the octants, the motion of the apſiles in conſiquentia is equal to their mean motion; but their place is moſt diſtant from their true place, the difference being the accumulated ſum of 1he variations. . But, ſince in the courſe oſ a complete revolution of the Earth and Moon round the Sun, the apſides take every poſition with reſpect to the line of the ſyzigies, they will, on the whole, advance. Their mean progreſs is about three degrees in each revolution. 529. It has been obſerved, already, that the inveſtigation of the eſitcts of the force M X is much more diſſicult than that of the eſſects of the force M L. This Iaſt, only treating o acceleration and retardation, rarely employs more than the direct method of fluxions, and the ſinding of the ſimpler fluents which are expreſſed by circular arches and their concomitant lines. But the very elementary part of this ſecond inveſtigation engages us at once in the ſtudy oſ curvature and the variation of curvature; and its ſimpleſt proceſs requires inſinite ſerieſes, and the higher orders of luxions. Sir Iſaac Newton has not conſidered this queſtion in the ſame ſyſtematic mimner that he has treated the other, but has generally arrived at his concluſions by more circuitous helps, ſuggeſted by circumſtances peculiar to the caſe, and not ſo capable of a general application. He has not even given us the ſtops by which he arrived at ſome of his concluſions. His excellent commentators Le Seur and Iaquier have, with much addreſs, ſupplied us with this information. But all that they have done has been very particular and limited. The determination of the motion of the lunar apogee by the theory of gravity is found to be only one half oſ what is renlly obſerved. This was very ſoon remarked by Mr Muchin, but without being able to amend it; and it remained, for many years, a ſort of blot on the doctrine of univerſal gravitation. 530. As the Newtonion mathematics continued to improve by the united labours of the ſirſt geniuſes of Europe, this inveſtigation received ſucceſſive improvements alſo. At laũt, M. Cliiraut, about the year 1743, conſidered the problem of theſe bodies, mutually gravitating, in general terms. But, ſinding it beyond rhe reach oſ our attainments in geometry, unleſs conſiderably limited, he conſined his attention to a caſe which ſuited the intereſting caſe of the lunar motions. He ſuppoſcd one of the three bodies immenſely larger than the other two, and at a very great diſtance from them; and the ſmalleſt of the others revolving round the third in an ellipſe little diſferent from a circle; and limited his attention to the diſturbances only of this motion.With this limitation, he ſolved the problem of the lunar theory, and conſtructed tables of the Moon's motion. But he too found the motion of the apogee only one half of what is obſervedl.Euler, and D'Alembert, and Simpſon, had the ſame reſult; and mathematicians began to ſuſpect that ſome other force, beſides that of a gravitation inverſely as the ſquare oſ the diſtance, had ſome ſhare \ in theſe motions. At Iaſt, M. Clairaut diſcovered the ſource of all their miſtakes and their troublee. A term had been omitted, which had a great influence in this particular circumſtance, but depended on ſome of the other anomalies of the Moon, with which he had not ſuſpected any connexion. He found that the diſturbances, which he was conſidering as relating to the Moon's motion in the ſimple ellipſe, ſiould have been conſidered as relating to the orbit already aſfected by the other inequalities. When this was done, he found that the motion of the elſely what is obſerved to obtain. Euler and D Alemhert, who were employed in the ſame inveſtigation, acceded without ſcruple' to M. Clairauts improvement of his analyſis; and all are now ſatisſied with reſpect to the competency of the principle of univerſal gravitation to the explanation of all theſe phenomena of the lunar motions. 538. In the whole of the preceding inveſtigation, we have conſidered the diſturbing force of the Sun as acting in the plane of the Moon's orbit, or we have conſidered that orbit as coinciding with the plane of the ecliptic. But the Moons orbit is inclined to the plane of the ecliptic nearly 5, and therefore the Sun is ſeldom in its plane. His action muſt generally have a tendency to draw the Moon out of the plane in which ſhe is then moving, and thus to change the inclination of the Moon's orbit to the ecliptic. But this oblique force may always be reſolved into two others, one of which ſhall be in the plane of the orbit, and the other perpendicular to it. The firſt will be the diſturbing force already conſidered in all its modifications. We muſt now conſider the effect of the other.* 532. æ It is very diſficult to give ſuch a repreſentation of the lunar orbit, inclined to the plane of the ecliptic, that the lines which repreſent the diſſerent aſſections of the diſturbing forc: PHYSICAL ASTRONOMY. 532. Let ACBO ſſig. 61.) be the moon's orbit cutting the ecliptic in the line NN of the nodes, the half NM AN, being raiſed above the ecliptic, and the other hal? N B ON being below it. The clotted circle js the orbit, turned on the line NN till it coincide with the plane of the ecliptic. C, O, A and B are, as formerly, the points of ſyzigy and quadrature. Let the Moon be in M. Let AEB be the interſection of a plane perpendicular to the eclipticc. Drav Mæ perpendicular to the plane AE B, and therefore parallel to the ecliptic, and to OC. Take EI equal to 3 Mn, and join MI. MI is the Suns diſturbing force 1I.), and EM meaſures the augmentation of the Moons gravitation when in quadrature. It is phin that MI is in a plane paſſing through ES, and interſecting the lunar orbit in the line M E, and the ecliptic in the line E I. MI therefore does not lie in the plane of the lunar orbit, nor in that of the ecliptic, but is between them both. The ſorce M I may therefore be conceived as reſolvable into two forces, one of which lies in the Moon's orbit, and the other is perpendicular to it. This reſolution will be effected, if we draw Ii upward from the ecliptic, till it meet the plane oſ the lunar orbit perpendicularly in i. Now may appear detached from the planes of the orbit and ecliptic, and thus enable us to perceive the eſficiency of them, and the nature of the effect producedl. The moſt attentive conſideration by the reader is neceſſary for giving him a diſtinc: Now join Mi, and complete the parallelogram Mi Im, having MI for its diagonal. The force M I is equivalent to Miĩ lying in the plane of the Moon's orbit, and M m perpendicular to it. By the force Mi the Moon is accelerated or retarded, and has her gravitation to the Earth augmented or diminiſhed, while the ſorce Mm draws the Moon out of the plané$e NCM; or that plane is made to ſhift iĩts poſition, ſo that ĩts interſection NN Thifts its place a little. The inclination of the orbit to the ecliptic alſo is aſected. Let a plane Ià7 G be drawn through Iĩ perpendicular to the line NN oſ the nodes. The line E G .is perpendicular to this plane, and therefore to the lines GI and Gi. Alſo Ii G is a right angle, becauſe I7 was drawn perpendicular to the plane Mi GE. Nov, if EM be conſidered as the radius of the tables, Ma is the ſine of the Moons diſtance from quadrature. Call this 2. Then E Iæ3. Alſo making EI radius, IG is the ſine oſf the nodes diſtance from the line of ſyzigy. Call this s. Alſo, IG being made radius, Iiĩ or Mm is the ſine of the inclinution of the orbit to the ecliptic. Call this i. Thereſore we hve EM: EIæR: 39 EI: IG=æR:⸗ IG: Mmi æR: i Thereſore EM: Mmæ R: 375i and Mm=æzEM x u . Thus we have obtained an expreſſion oſ the ſorce M m, which tends to change the poſition and inclination of the orbit. From this expreſion we may draw ſeveral concluſions which indicate its diſferent eſfects. Cor. 1. This force vaniſhes, that is, there is no ſuch force when the Moon is in quadrature. For then q, or the line M æ, is nothing. Now 5 being one of the nu. . ii merical factors of the numerator of the fraction the fraction itſelf has no value. We eaſily perceive the phyſical cauſe oſ the evaneſcence of the force M m when M comes into the line of quadraturee When this happens, the whole diſturbing force has the direction AE, the then radius vector, and is in the plane of the orbit. There is no ſuch force as M m in this ſituation of things, the diſturbing force being wholly employed in augmenting the Moons gravitation to the Earth. 2. The force M m vaniſhes alſo when the nodes are in the ſyzigy. For there, the factor s in the numerator vaniſhes. We perceive the phyſical reaſon of this alſo. For, when the nodes are in the ſyzigies, the Sun is in the plane of the orbit; or this plane, if produced, paſſes through the Sun. In ſuch caſe, the diſturbing force is in the plane oſ the orbit, and can have no part, Mm acting out of that plane. 3. The chieſ varieties of the force M m depend however on 5, the ſine of the node's diſtance from ſyZigy. For in every revolution, 7 goes through the ſame ſeries oſ ſucceſſive values, and 7 remains nearly the ſame in all revolutions. Thereſore the circumſtance which will moſt diſtinguiſh the diſferent lunations is the ſituation of the node. 53. This ſorce bends the Moon's path roward the ecliptic, when the points M and I are on the ſame ſide of the line of the nodes, but bends it away from the ecliptic when N lies between I and M. This circumſtance kept firmly in mind, and conſidered with care, will explain all the deviations occaſioned by the force M m. Thus, in the ſituation of the nodes repreſented in the figure, let the Moon ſet out from conjunction in C, moving in the arch CM A O. All the way from C to A, the diſturbing force MI is below the elevated half NMN of the Moon's orbit between it and the ecliptic, and thereſore the ſforce M m pulls the Moon out oſ the plane of her orbit toward the eclipticc. The ſume thing happens during the Moon's motion ſfrom N to C. This will appear by conſtructing the ſame kind of parallelogram on the diagonal MI drawn ſrom any point between N and C. When the Moon has paſſed the quadrature A, and is in M, the force MI' is both above the ecliptic, and above the elevated half of the Moon's orbit. This will appear by drawing M'g perpendicular to EN, and joining 2I. The line M'ę is in the orbit, and gI is in the ecliptic, and the triangle M' g I ſtands elevated, and nearly perpendicular on both planes, ſo that M'I' is above them both. In this caſe, the ſorce M m in pulling the Moon out of the plane of her orbit, ſeparates her from it on that ſide which is moſt remote from the ecliptic; that is, cauſes the path to approach more obliquely to the eclipticc. The figure 61. B will illuſtrate this. NT is the ecliptic, and M N' is the orbit, both ſeen edgewiſe, as they would appear to an eye placed int, (fig. 61.) in the line N N produced beyond the orbit. The diſturbing force, acting in the direction M'I, may be reſolved into Mp in the direction of the orbit plane, and M' m perpendicular to it. The partt M'm, being compounded with the ſimultaneous motion M'q, compoſes a motion M r, which interſects the ecliptic in . When M' in fig. 61. gets to M, the path is again bent toward the ecliptic, and continues ſo all the way ſrom N to B, where it begins to act in the ſame manner as in M' between A and N. 535. By the action of this lateral force, the orbit muſt be continually ſhiſting its poſition, and its interſection with the ecliptic; or, to ſpeak more ãccurately, the Icon is made to move in a line which does not lie all in one plane. In imagination, we conceive an orbital material line, ſomewhat like a hoop, of an elliptical ſhape, all in one plane, paſſing through the Earth, and, inſtead oſ conceiving the Moon to quit this hoop, we ſuppoſe the hoop itſelf to ſhiſt its poſition, ſo that the arch in which the Moon is in any moment takes the direction of the Moons motion in that moment. Its interſection with the ecliptic (perhaps at a conſiderable diſtance from the point occupied by the Moon) ſhiſts accordingly. This hoop may be concelved as having an axis, perpendicular to its plane, paſſing through the Earth. This axis will incline to one ſide from the pole of the ecliptic about ſive degrees, and, as the line NN oſ the nodes ſiiſis round the ecliptic, the extremity of this axis will deſcribe a cirele round the pole oſ the ecliptic, diſtant ſrom it about 50 all round, jut as the axis of the Earth deſcribes a circle round the pole of the ecliptic, diſtant ſrom it about 233 degrees. 536. When the Moon's path is bent toward the ecliptic, ie muſt eroſs ĩt ſooner than ſie would otherviſe have done. The node will appear to meet the Moon, that is, to ſhiſt to the veſtward, in antecedenti ſignorum, or to recede. But if her path be bent more away from the ecliptic, ſie muſt proceed farther beſore ſe croſs ĩt, and the nodes will ſLiſt in eonſequenti2, that is, will advance. Ccr. 1. Thereſure, iſ the nodes have the ſituntion repreſented in the ſigure, in the ſecond and ſourth quadrant, the nodes muſt retreat while the Moon deſcribes the arch NCA, or the arch NOB, that is, while ſhe paſſes from a node to the next quadrature. But, while the Moon deſcribes the arch AN, or the arch BN, the force which pulls the Moon ſrom the plane of the orbit, cauſes her to paſs the points N or N beſore ſie reach the ecliptic, and the node thereſure advances, while the Moon moves from quadrature to a node. It is plain that the contrary muſt happen when the nodes are ſituated in the ſirſt and third quadrants. They will advance while the Mocn proceeds ſfrom a node to the next quacrature, and recede while ſle proceeds ſfrom a quadrature to the next node. Cor. 2. In each ſynodical revolution of the Moon, the nodes, on the whole, retreat. For, to take the example repreſented in the figure, all the while that the Moon moves from N to A, the line M lies between the orbit and ecliptic, and the path is continually inclining more and more towards it, and, conſequently, the nodes are all this while receding. They advance while the Moon moves from A to N. They retreat while ſhe moves from N to B, and advance while ſie proceeds from B to N. The time therefore during which the nodes recede exceeds that during which they advance. There vill be the ſame difference or exceſs of the regreſs of the nodes when they are ſituated in the angle CE A. It is evident that the exceſs of the arch NC A above the arch BN or AN, is doubſe of the diſtance N C of the node from ſyzigy. Therefore the retreat or weſterly motion of the nodes will gradually increaſe as they paſs from ſyæigy to quadrature, and again decreaſe as the node paſſes from quadrature to the ſyzigy. Cor. 3. When the nodes are in the quadratures, the lateral forcee M m is the greateſt poſſible through the whole revolution, becauſe the factor  in the formula si . 2 is then equal to radius. In the ſyzigies it is r nothing. The nodes make a complete revolution in 68034 2t 55' 18, but with great inequality, as appears from what has been ſaid in the preceding paragraphs. The exact determination of their motions is to be ſeen in Newtons ample of dynamical analyſiss. The principal equation amounts to 1° 39' 45 at its maximum, and in other ſituations, it is proportional to the ſine of twice the arch NC. The anual regreſs, computed according to the principles oſ the theory, does not diſer two minutes oſ a degree from what is actually obſerved in the heavens. This wonderſul colncidence is the great boaſt of the doctrine of univerſal gravitation. At the ſame time, the peruſal of Newton's inveſtigation will ſnew that ſuch agreement is not the obvicus reſult of the happy ſimplicity of the great regulating power; we ſall there ſee many abſtruſe and delicate circumſtances, which muſt be conſidered and taken into the account beſore we can obtain a true ſtatement. This motion of the nodes is accompanied by a variation of the inclination of the orbit to the eclipticc. The inclination increaſes, when the Moon is drawn from the ecliptic while leaving a node, or toward it in approaching a node. It is diminiſhed, when the Moon is drawn toward the ecliptic when leaving a node, or from it in approaching a node. Thereſore, when the nodes are ſituated in the firſt and third qudrants, the inclination increaſes while the Moon paſſes ſrom a node to the next quadrature, but it diminiſies till ſie is 9 from the node, and then increaſes till Mie reaches the other node. Therefore, in each revolution, the inclination is inercaſed, and becomes continually greater, while the node recedes from the quadrature to the ſyzigy; and it is the greateſt poſible when the nodes are in the line of the ſyzigies, and it is then nearly 5° 18 355. When the nodes are ſituated in the ſecond and fourth quadrants, the inclination of the orbit diminiſhes while fhio Moon paſics ſfrom the node to the goth degree; it ĩs increaſedſfrom thence to the quudrature, and then diminiſhes till the Moon reaches the other nodee While the nodes are thus ſituated, the inclination diminiſhes in every revolution, and is the Icaſt of all when the node is in quadrature, and the Moon in ſyigy, being then nearly 40 58, and iĩt gradually increaſes again till the nodes reach the line of ſyzigy. While the nodes are in the quadratures, or in the ſyzigies, the inclinationis not ſenſibly changed during that revolution. Such are the general eſfects of the lateral force M m, that appear on a ſlight conſideration of the circumſtances of the cale A more particular account of them cannot be given in this outline of the ſcience We may juſt add, that the deductions from the general principle agree preciſely vith obſervation. The mathematical inveſtigation not only points out the periods of the different inequalities, and their relation to the reſpective poſitions of the Sun and Moon, hut alſo determines the abſolute magnitude to which each of them riſes. The only quantity deduced ſrom mere obſervat©on is the mean inclination oſ the Moon's orbit. The time of the complete revolution of the nodes, and the magnitude and law of variation of this motion, and the change of inclination, with all its varieties, are deduced ſrom the theory of univerſal gravitation. 539. There is another caſe of this problem which ĩs conſiderably diſerent, namely, the ſutellites of Dr Herſchel's planet, the planes of whoſe orbits are nearly perpendicular to the orbit oſ the planet. This problem ofſers ſome curious caſcs, which deſerve the attention of the mechanician; but as they intereſt us merely ꝗ5 objects oſ curioſity, they have not yer been conſidered. 530. There is ſtill another conſiderable derangement oſ the lunar motions by the action of the ſun. We lave ſeen that, in quadrature, the Moon's gravitation to the Eorth is augmenied5,, and that in ſyZigy it is diminihed 35. Taking the whole ſynodical revolution together, this is equivalent, nearly, to a diminution of I æ or 435 Taut ĩs to ſuy, in conſequence of the Suns action, the general gravitation of the Moon to the Earth is - 5 leſs than iſ the Sun were away,. Iſ the Sun were away, thereſore, the Moons gruvitation would be 73 greater than her preſent mean gravitation., The conſcquence would be, that the Moon would come nearer to the Earth. As this would be done without any change on her velocity, and as ſie now will be retained in a ſmaller orbit, ſhe will deſcribe it in a proportionally leſs time; and we can compute exielly how near ſhie would come before this increaſed gravitation will be balanced by the velocity (224.0 We muſt conclude from this, that the mean diſtance and the mean period of the Moon which we obſerve, are greater than her natural diſtance and potiod, : From this it is plain that if any thing ſhall increaſe or diminiſh the action of the Sun, it muſt equally Increaſc or diminiſh the diſtance which the Moon aſſumes from the Earth, and the time of her revolution at that diſtance. Now there actually is ſuch a ehange in the Sus action. When the Earth is in perihelio, in the beginning of January, ſhe is nearer the Sun than in July by 1 part in 30; conſequently the ratio of E M to ES is increaſed by ſ5, or in the ratio of 30 to 31. But her gravitation (and conſequently the Moon's) to the Sun is increaſed %, or in the ratio of 30 to 32. Thereſore the diſturbing force is increaſed by 1 part in 10 nearly. The Moon muſt therefore retire farther from the Earth 1 part in 1790. She muſt deſcribe a larger orbit, and employ a greater time. We can compute exactly what is the extent of this change. The ſydereal period of the Moon is 27 7' 43, or 39343 This muſt be increaſed 574, becauſe the Moon retains the ſame velocity in the enlarged orbit. This will make the period 39365, which exceeds the other 22'. The obſerved diſſerence between a lunation in January and one in July ſomewhat exceeds 25 This, when reduced in the proportion of the ſynodical to the periodieal revolution, agrees with this mechanical concluſion with great exactneſs, when the computation is made witlr due attention to every circumſtance that can affect the concluſion. For it muſt be remarked that the computation here given proceeds on the legitimacy oſ aſſuming a general diminution of ;5 of the Moons gravitation as equivalent to the variable change of gravity that really takes place. In the particular circumſtances oſ the caſe, this is very nearly exact. The true method is to take the average of all the diſturbing forces M K through the quadrant, multiplying each by the time of its action. And, here, Euler makes a ſagacious remark, that, iſ the diameter oſ the Moon's orbit had gxceeded its preſent magnitude in a very conſiderable proportion, it would ſcarcely have been poſſible to aſſign the period in which ſhe would have revolved round the Earth; and the greateſt part oſ the methods by which the problem has been ſolved could not have been employed. 541. There ſtill remains an anomaly oſ the lunar motions that has greatly puzzled the cultivators oſ phyſical aſtronomy. Dr Ilalley, when comparing the ancient Chaldean obſervations with thoſe of modern times, in order to obtain an accurate meaſure oſ the period of the Moon's ręvolution, found that ſome obſervations made by the Arabian aſtronomers, in the cighth and ninth centuries, did not agree with this meaſure. When the lunar period was deduced from a compuriſon of the Chaldean obſervations vwith the Arabian, the period was ſenſibly greater than what was deduced ſrom a compariſon of the Arabian and the modern obſervations; ſo that the Moon's mean motion ſeems to have accelerated a little. This concluſion vas conſirmed by breaking each oſ theſe long intervals into partss When the Chaldean and Alexandrian obſervations were compared, they gave a longer period than the Alexandrian compared with the Arabian of the eighth century; century; and this Iaſt period exceeded what is deduced from a compariſon of the Arabian with the modern obſervations; and even the compariſon oſf the modern obſervations with each other ſiews a continued diminution. This conjecture was received by the mechanical philoſophers with heſitation, becauſe no reaſon could be aſſigned for the acceleration; and the more that the Newtonian philoſophy has been cultivated, the more conſidently did it appear that the mean diſtances and periods could ſuſtain no change from the mutual action of the planets. Nay, M. de la Grange has at laſt demonſtrated that, in the ſolar ſyſtem as it exiſts, this is ſtrictly true, as to any change that will be permanent: all is periodical and compenſatory. Yet, as obſervation alſo improved, this acceleration of the Moons mean motion became undeniable and conſpicuous, and ĩt ĩs now admitted by every aſtronomer, at the rate of about 11 in a century, and her change of longitude increaſes in the duplicate ratio oſ the times. Various attempts have been made to account for this acceleration. It was imagined by ſeveral that it was owing to the reſiſtance of the eeleſtial ſpaces, which, by deminiſhing the progreſſive velocity oſ the Moon, cauſed her to ſall within her preceding orbit, approaching the Earth continually in a ſort of elliptical ſpiral. But the frec motion of the tails of comets, the rare matter of vhich ſeems to meet with no ſenſible reſiſtance, rendered this explanation unſatisfactory. Others were diſpoſed to think that gravity did not operate inſtantaneouſly through the wlole extent of its influence. The application of this principle did not ſeem to be obvious, nor ĩts eſfects to be very clear or deſinite. ll At laſt, M. de la Place diſcovered the cauſe oſ this perplexing fact; and in a diſcrtation read to the Royal Academy of Sciences in 1785, he ſiews that ihe acceleration of the Moo's mean motſon neceſſſuĩly ſiſes ſrom a ſmall change in the eecentricity of the Tartvs orbit round the Sun, which ĩs now diminiſhing, and wiſl continue to diminiſh for many centuries, by the mutual gravitation of the planets. He was led to the diſcovery by obſerving in the ſeries which ex jreſes the increaſe of the Iunar period by the diſturbing force oſ the Sun a ſeries formed of ſimes and coſmes of the Moon's angular motion and their multiples) a term equal to1; of her angular motion multiplied by the ſquare of the eccentricity of the Eartl's orbit. Conſequently, when this ecentricity becomes ſmuller, the natural period of the Moon is leſs enlarged by the Suns action, and therefore, iſ the Earth's eccentricity continue to diminiſh, ſo will the lunar period, and this in a duplicate proportion. Without entering into the diſcuſſion of this analyſis, which is abundantly complicated, we muy ſee the general eſſect of a diminution oſ the Earth's eccentricity in this manner. The ratio of the cube oſ the men diſtance of the Earth from the Sun to the cube of her perihelion diſtance is greater than the ratio of the cube of her aphelion diſtance to that of the mean diſtance. Hence it follows that the increaſe of the mean lunar period, during the ſmaller diſtances of the Earth from the Sun, is greater than its diminution, during her greater diſtances; and the ſum of all the lunations, during a complete revolution of the Earth, excecds the ſum of the lunations that would have happened in the ſame time, had the Earth remained at her mean diſtance ſrom the Sun. Therefore, as the Earths eccentricity diminiſhes, the lunar period alſo diminiſhes, approximating more and more to her period, undiſturbed by the change in the Su's action. M. de Ia Place ſind⸗ the diminution in a century æ 11,135, which differs little from that aſumed by Mayer from a compariſon of obſervations. This centuriãl change of angular velocity muſt produce a change in the ſpace deſcribed, that is, in the Moons longitude, in the duplicate proportion of the time, as in any uniformly accelerated motion. Thereſore 11',135 multiplied by the ſquare of the number of centuries forward or backward, will give the correction of the Moons longitude computed by the preſent tables. La Place finds that, in going back to the Chaldean obſervations, we muſt employ another term (nearly ; of a ſecond) multiplied by the cube of the number of centuries. With theſe corrections, the computation of the Moons place agrees with all obſervations, ancient and modern, with moſt wonderful accuracy; ſo that there no longer remains any phenomenon in the ſyſtem which is not deducible from the Newtonian gravitation. 542. We ſhould, before concluding this account of tention to the motions of the other ſecondary plnetsl and particularly of Iupiter's ſatellites, ſeeing that the exact knowledge of their motions is almoſt as conducive to the improvement of navigation and geography as that of the Iunar motions. But there is no room for this diſcuſſion, and we muſt reſer to the diſiertations of Wargentin, Proſperin, La Place, and others, who have ſtudied the operation of phyſical cauſes on thoſe little planets with great aſſiduity and judgement, and with the greateſt ſucceſs. The little ſyſtem oſf Jupiter and his ſatellites has been of immenſe ſervice to the philoſophical ſtudy of the whole ſolar ſyſtem. Their motions are ſo rapid, that, in the courſe of a few years, many ſynodical periods are accompliſhed, in which the perturbations ariſing from theit mutual actions return again in the ſame order. Nay, ſuch ſynodical periods have heen obſerved as bring the whole ſyſtem again into the ſame relative ſituation of ĩits diſerent bodies. And, in caſes where this is not accurately accompliſhed, the deſiciency Introduces a ſmall diſſerence between the perturbations of any period and the correſponding perturbations of the preceding one; by which means another and much longer period is indicated, in which this diſference goes through all its varieties, ſelling to a maximum and again diminiſhing to nothing. Thus the ſyſtem of Jupiter and his ſatellites, as a ſort of epitome of the great ſolur ſyſtem, has ſuggeſted to the ſagacious philoſo;her the proper waꝶ of ſtudying the great ſyſtem, namely, by luling oui ſor ſimila periods in it: anomalies, and by boldly aſerting the reality of ſuch correſponding equations as can bſewn to reſult from the operation of univerſal gravitation. The fact is, that we have now the moſt demonſtrative knowledge of many ſuch periods and equations, which could not be deduced ſfrom the obſervations of muny thouſand yeors. In the courſe of this inveſtigation, M. de Ia Grange has made an important obſervation, which he has demonſtrated in the moſt incontrovertible manner, namely, that it neceſſarily reſults from the ſmall eccentricity of the planetary orbit/etheir ſmall inclination to each otherthe immenſe bulk of the Suand from the planets all moving in one directionthat all the perturbations that are obſerved, nay all that can exiſ in this ſyſtem, are periodical, and are compenſated in oppoſite points of every period. He ſhews alſo that the greateſt perturbations are ſo moderate, that none but an aſtronomer will obſerve any difference between this perturbed ſtate and the mean ſtate of the ſyſtem. The mean diſtances and the mean periods remain for ever the ſame. In ſhort, the whole aſſemblage will continue, almoſt to eternity, in a ſtate fit for its preſent purpoſes, and not diſtinguiſhable from its preſent ſtate, except by the prying eye oſ an aſtronomer. Cold, we think, muſt be the heart that is not affected by this mark of beneficent wiſdom in the Contriver of the magnificent fabric, ſo manifeſt in ſelecting for its onnecting principle a power ſo admirably fitted for continuing to anſwer the purpoſes of its firſt formation. And he muſt be little ſuſceptible of moral impreſſion who oes not ſeel himſelf highly obliged to the Being who has made him capable of perceiving this diſplay of wiſdom, and has attached to this perception ſentiments ſo pleaſing and delightful. The extreme ſimplicity oſ the conſtitution of the ſolar ſyſtem is perhaps the moſt remarkable feature of its beauty. To this circumſtance are we indebted for the pleaſure aſſorded by the contemplation. For it is this alone that has allowed our limited underſtanding to acquire ſuch a comprehenſive hody of wellſounded knowledge, far exceeding, both in extent and in accuracy, any thing attained in other paths of philoſophical reſcarch. But we have not yet ſeen all the capabilities of this wonderſul power of nature. Let us therefore ſtill follow our excellent leader in a new path of inveſtigation. Of ihe Figures of the Planets. 544. Sir Iſaac Newton, having ſo happily explained all the phenomena of progręſſive motion exhibited by the heavenly bodies, by ſhewing that they are all, without exception, modified examples oſ deſlection towards one another, in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances, was induced to examine the other motions obſerved in ſome of thoſe bodies, to ſee what modiſication theſe motions received by the influence of univerſal gravitatiom The Sun, and ſeveral planets turn round their axes. The ſtudy of celeſtial mechaniſm is not complete, till we ſee whether this kind of motion is in any way influenced by gravitation. It does not appear, at ſirſt conſideration, that there can be any great myſtery in the mere rotation oſ a body round its axis. It ſeems to be one of the ſimpleſt mechanical queſtions,. But the fact is juſt the oppoſite. Beſore the rotative motion that we obſerve in our Earth can be ſecured; in the way in which we ſee it actually perſormed, adjuſtments are neceſſury, which are very abſtruſe, and required all the ſagacity of Newton to diſcover and appreciate; and it ĩs acknowledged that this is the depurtment of phyſical aſtronomy where his acuteneſs of diſcernment appears the moſt remarkable. It is alſo the claſs of phenomena in which the eſſects of univerſal gravitation are moſt convincingly ſeen. For this reaſon, ſome more notice will be taken of the rotation of the planets, and of its conſequences, than is uſually done in our elementary treatiſes. But, as in the other departments, ſo here, it is only the more ſimple and ęeneral facts that can be conſidered. To go a very ſmall ſtep beyond theſe, engages us at once in the moſt diſficult problems, which have occupied and ſtill occupy the firſt mathematicians of Europe, and require all the reſources of their ſclence. Such diſcuſſion, however, would be unſuitable heree. But without ſome attempt of this kind, ve muſt remain ignorant of the mechaniſm of ſome phemomena, more familiar and important than many of thoſe hich we have already diſcuſfed. ſcribes a circle, to which this axis is perpendicular. Now we know that a particle oſ matter cannot deſcribe a circele, unleſs ſome deſecting force retain it in the periphery. In colierent maſcs, this retaining force is ſupplied by the coheſion. But even this is a limited thing. A ſtone may be ſo briſkly whirled about in a ſling that the cord ill break. Grindſtones are ſometimes whirled about in our manuſactures with ſuch rapidity that they ſplit, and the pieces ſly oſſ with prodigious ſoree. Iſ matters be Iying Iooſe on the ſurface of a revolving planet, their gravitation may be inſuſſicient to retain them in that velocity oſ rotation, In every caſe, the force which actually retains ſuch looſe bodies on the ſurface can be found only in their weight; and part oſ it is thus expended, and they continue to preſs the ground only with the remainder. If the velocity oſ rotation be increaſed to a certain degree, it may require fhe whole weight oſ the body for its ſupply. If the vẽlocity ſtill increaſe, the body is not retained, but thrown ofi. IF this Earth turned round in B84 minutes, things lying on the equator might remain there; but they would not preſs the ground, nor ſtretch the thread oſ a plummet. For this is preciſely the time in which a planet would cſrculate round the Earth, cloſo to the ſurface, moving about 17 times ſaſter than a cannon bal. The weight of the body, deſlecting it 16 ſcet in a ſecond, juſt keeps it in the circumſerence oſ a circle cloſe to the Turface oſ the Earth. The Earth, turning as fuſt, will have the planet always immediately above the ſame point of ĩts ſurface; and the planet will not appear to have any weight, becauſe it will not deſcend, but keep hovering over the ſame ſpot. If the rotation were ſtill ſwifter, every thing would be thrown oſf, as we ſee water ſlirted from a mop briſkly whirled round. 545. As things are really adjuſted, this does not happen. But yet there is a certain meaſurable part of the weight of any body expended in keepng it at reſt, in the place where it lies loofe. At the equator, a body Iying on the ground deſcribes, in one ſecond, an arch of 1528 feet nearly. This deviates from the tangent nearly 5 of an inch. This is very nearly 45 par of 167, feèt, the ſpace through which gravity, or its heavineſs, would cauſe a ſtone to fall in that time. IIence we muſt infer that the centriſfugal tendency ariſing from rotation is 44 of the ſenſible weight oſf a body on the equator, and ,45 of its real weight. Were this Lody therefore taken to the pole, it would manifeſt a greater heavineſs. If, at the equator, it drew out the ſcale of a ſpring ſteelyard to the diviſion 288, it would draw it to 289 at the pole. 546. M. Richer, a French mathematician, going to Cayenne in 1672, was directed to make ſome aſtronomical obſervations there, and was provided with a penduJum clock for this purpoſe. He found that his clock, which had been carefully adjuſted to mean time at Paris, Ioſt above two minutes every day, and he was obliged t ſorten the pendulum,'; of an inch beſore it kept right time. Hence he concluded that a lieavy budy dropped at Cayenne would not fall 1953 inches in a ſecond. It would fall only about 1927. Richer immediately wrote an account of this very ſingular diminution of gravity. It was ſcouted by almoſt all the philoſophers of Europe, but has been conſirmed by many repetitions of the expeFment. Here then is a direct prooſ that the heavineſs of a body, whether conſidered as a mere preſure, or as an accelerating force, is employed, and in part expended, in keeping bodies united to a whirling planet. 547. Theſe conſiderations are not new. Even in ancient times, men of reſlection entertained ſuch thoughts. The celebrated Roman general Polybius, one of the moſt intelligent philoſophers of antiquity, is quoted by Strabo, as ſaying that in conſequence of the Earti's rotation, every body was made lighter, and that the globe itſelf ſwelled out in the middle. Were it not ſo, ſays he, the waters of the ocean would æll run to the ſhores of the torrid zone, and leave the polar regions dry. Dr Hooke is the firſt modern philoſopher who profeſed this opinion. Mr Huyghens, however, is the firſt who gave iĩt the proper attention. Occupied at the time of Richers remark with his pendulum clocks, he took great intercſt in this obſervation at Cayenne, and inſtantly perceived the true cauſe of the retardation of Richers clock. He perceived that pendulums muſt vibrate more ſlowly, in proportion as their ſituation removes them farther from the axis of the Earth; and he aſſigned the proportion of the retardation in diſferent places. 548. Reſuming this ſubject ſome time aſter, it occurred to him, that unleſs the Earth be protuberant all around the equator, the ocean muſt overſlow the lands, increaſing in depth till the height of the water compenſated for its diminiſhed gravity. IIe conſiders the condition of the water in a canal reaching from the ſurface of the equator to the centre of the Earth (ſuppoſe the canal CQ, fig. 33.) and there communicating with a canal CN reaching from the centre to the pole. The water in the laſt muſt retain all its natural gravity, becauſe its particles do not deſcribe circles round the axis. But every particle in the column C Q reaching to the ſurface of the equator muſt have its weight diminiſhed in proportion to its diſtance ſfrom the centre of the globe. Therefore the whole diminution will be the ſame as if each particle loſt half as much as the outermoſt particle loſes. This is very plain. Therefore theſe two columns cannot balance each other at the centre, unleſs the equatoreal column be longer than the polar column by 4; (for the extremity of this column loſes ,4 of its weight by the centrifugal force employed in the rotation). Being an excellent and Zealous geometer, this ſubject ſeemed to merit his ſerious ſtudy, and he inveſtigated the form that the ocean muſt acquire ſo as to be in equiliprio. This he did by inquiring what will be the poſition of a plummet in any latitude. This he knew muſt be perpendiculor to the ſurface of ſtill water. On the ſuppoſition of gravity directed to the centre oſ the Earth, and equal at all diſtances from that centre, he conſtructed the meridional curve, which ſiould in every point have the tangent perpendicular to the direction of a plummet determined by him on theſe principles. 549. At this very time, another circumſtance gave a peculiar intereſt to this queſtion of the ſigure oſ the Earth. The magnificent project oſf meaſuring the whole arch of the meridian which paſſes through France was then carrying on. (8ee § 267.) It ſeemed to reſult from the compariſon of the lengths of the diſferent portions of this arch, that the degrees increaſed as they were more ſoutherly. This made the academicians employed in the meaſurement conclude that the Earth was of an egę-like ſhape. This was quite incompatible with the reaſoning of Mr Huyghens. The conteſl was carried on for a long while with great pertinacity, and ſome of the ſirſt mathematicians of the age abetted the opinion of thoſe aſtronomers, and the honour oſ France was made a party in the diſpute. The opinion of Mr Huyghens, the greateſt ornament of their academy, could not prevail; indeed his inſerences were ſuch, in ſome reſpects, that even the impartial mathematicians were diſſatisſied with them. The form which he aſigned to the meridian was very remarkable, conſiſting oſ two paraboloidal curves, which had their vertex in the poles, and their branches interſected each other at the equator, there forming an angu7K lar ridge, elevated about ſeven miles above the inſcribed ſphere. No ſuch ridge had been obſerved by the navigators of that age, who had oſten croſed the equator. Nor had any perſon on ſhore at the line obſerved that two plummets near each other were not parallel, but ſenſibly approached each other. All this was unlike the ordinary gradations of nature, in which we obſerve nothing abrupt. 550. While this queſtion was ſo keenly agitated in France, Mr Newton was engaged in the ſpeculations vhich have immortalized his name, and it was to him an intereſting thing to know what form of a whirling planet was compatible with an equilibrium of all the forces which act on its parts. He therefore took the queſtion up in its moſt ſimple form. He ſuppoſed the planet completely ſluid, and thereſore every particle is at liberty to change its place, if it be not in perſect equilibrium. The particles all. attract one another with a force in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtance, and they are at the ſame time actuated by a centrifugal tendency, in conſequence of the rotation; or, to expreſs it more accurately, part of thoſe mutual attractions is employed in eeping the particſes in their diſferent circles of rotation. He demonſtrated that this was poſſible, if the globe have the form of an elliptical ſpheroid, compreſſed at the poles, and protuberant at the equator , part of the axis. He alſo pointed out the phenomena by which this may be cede ſrom the equator to the poles, ſiewing that the increments of ſenſible gravity are as the ſquares of the ſines of the latitude. This can eaſily be decided by experiments with nice pendulum clocks. He ſiewed alſo that the remaining gravity, on diſſerent parts of the Earths ſurface, is inverſely proportional to the diſtance from the centre, vhen eſtimated in the direction of the centre, &c. &c. His demonſtration of the preciſe elliptical ſorm conſiſts in proving two things: Iſt, That on this ſuppoſition, gravity is always perpendicular to the ſurſace of the ſpheroid: 2d, That all rectilincal canals leading from the centre to the ſurface will balance one another. Therefore the ocean will maintain ĩts form. It was ſome time before the philoſophy of Newton could prevail in France over the hypotheſis oſ the French philoſopher Des Cartes; and the great mathematiciun Bernoulli endeavoured to ſhew that the oblong ſorm of the Larth which had been demonſtrated (he ſays) by the meaſurement of the degrees, was the eſfect oſ the preſſure of the vortices in which the Earth was carried about. 551. Mr Hermann, a mathematician of moſt reſpectable talents, took auother view of the queſtion of the figure of the Earth. Newton had demonſtrated in the moſt convincing manner that purticles gravitated to the centre of ſimilar ſolids, or portions of a ſolid, with forces proportional to their diſtances from the centre. Hermann availed himſelf of this, and of another theorem of Newton ſounded on it, viz. that ſuperſicial gravity in different Iatitudes is inverſely as the diſtance from the centre. But he obſerved that Newton had by no means demonſtrated the elliptical form, but had merely aſſumed it, or, as it were, gueſſed at it. This is indeed true, and his application is made by means of the vulgar rule oſ falſe poſition. Hermann thereſore ſet himſelſ to inquire what form a fluid will aſume when turning round an axis, its particles ſituated in the ſame diameter gravitating to the centre proportionally to their diſtance, yet exhibiting a ſuperſicial gravity in different parts inverſely as the diſtance from the centree He found it to be an ellipſe, with ſuch a protuberancy, that the r. lius of the cquator is to the ſemiaxis in the ſubduplicate ratio of the primitive equatoreal gravity to the remaining equatoreal gravity. This gives the ſame proportion of the axes which had been aſſigned by Huyghens, though accompanied by a very diſferent form. He then inverted his proceſs, and demonſtrated the perpendicularity of gravity to the ſurſace, the equilibrium of canals, and ſome other conditions that appeared indiſpenſable; and he found all right. This conſirmed him in his theory, and he found fault with Dr D. Gregory, the commentator of Newton, for adhering to Newton's form of the ellipſe. He deſied them to point out any fault in his own demonſtration of the Both of theſe propoſitions are eaſily inferred from Art. 463, and need not be particularly inſiſted on in thLi: place, 1he elliptical ſigure, and conſidered this as ſuſicient for proving the inaccuracy of the Newtonũn conjecture, for it could get no higher name. 552. By very ſlow degrees, the French academicians began to acknowledge the compreſſed form of the Earth, and to reexamine their obſervations, by which it had ſeemed that the degrees increaſed to the ſouthward. They now affected to ſind that their meaſurement had been good, but that ſome circumſtances had been overlooked in the calculations, which ſould have been taken into the account. But they were not aware that they were now vindicating the goodneſs of their inſtruments and of their eyeſight at the cxpence oſ their judgement. All theſe things made the problem oſ the figure oſ the Earth extremely intereſting to the great mathematical philoſopherss Newton took no part in the further diſcuſſion, being ſatisſied with the evidence which he had for his own determination of the preciſe ſpecies of the terraqueous ſpheroid. His philoſophy gradually acquired the aſcendancy; but the compariſon made of the degrees of the meridian argued a ſmaller ellipticity than he had aſſigned to the Earth, on the ſuppoſition of uniform denſity and primitive ſluidity. Ile had however ſuſficiently pointed out the varieties of ellipticity which might ariſe from a difference of denſity in the interior parts. Theſe were acquieſced in, and the mathematiglans ſpeculated on the ways by which the obſervations and the theory of univerſal gravitation might be adapted to each other. But, all this while, the original problem was conſidered as too difficult to be treated in any caſe remarkably deviating from a ſphere, and even this caſe was ſolved by Newton and his followers only in an indirect manner. 553. The ſirſt perſon who attempted a direct general ſolution was Mr James Stirling. In 1735 he communicated to the Royal Society of London two elegant propoſitions (but without demonſtration), which determine the form of a homogeneous ſpheroid turning round its axis, and which, when applied to the particular caſe of the Earth, perfectly coincided with Newtons determination. In 1737 Mr Clairaut communicated to our Royal Society, and alſo to the Royal Academy at Paris, very elaborate and elegant performances on the ſame ſubject, which he afterwards enlarged in a ſeparate publication. This is the completeſt work on the ſubject, and is full of the moſt curious and valuable reſearch, in which are diſcuſſed all the circumſtances which can aſfect the queſtion. It is alſo remarkable for an example of candour very rare among rivals in literary fame. The author, in extending his memoire to a more complete work, quits his own method of nveſtigation, though remarkable for jts perſpicuity and neatneſs, for that of another mathematician, becauſe it was ſuperior; and this with unaffected acknowledgement of its ſuperiority. The reſults nian theory, making the equatoreal diameter to the polar diameter as 231 to 230, though it is agreed by all the mathematicians that Newton's method had a chance oſ being inaccurate. So true is the ſaying oſ Daniel Bernoulli, when treating this ſubject in his theory of the the tides,  The ſugacity of that great man (Neavton) ſa  clearly through a miſi ahat others can ſcarcely diſiover s through a microſcope.” Mr Stirling had ſaid that the revolving ſigure was not an accurate elliptical ſpheroid, but approached infinitely near to it. Mr Clairaut's ſolutions, in moſt caſes, ſuppoſe the ſpheroid very nearly a ſphere, or ſuppoſe lines and angles equal which are only very nearly ſoo. Without this allowance, the treatment of the problem ſeemed impracticable. This made Mr Stirlings aſſertion more credited; and we apprehend that it became the general opinion that the ſolutions obtainable in our preſent ſtate of mathematical knowledge were only approximations, exact indeed, to any degree that we pleaſe, in the caſes exhibited in the figures of the planets, but ſtill they were but approximations. 554. But in 1740, Mr MrLaurin, in a diſſertation on the tides, which ſhared the prize given by the Academy of Paris, demonſtrated, in all the rigour and elegance of ancient geometry, that an homogeneous elliptical ſpheroid, oſ any eccentricity whatever, if tumming in a proper time round its axis, will ſor ever preſerve its ſorm. He gave the rule for inveſtigating this form, anũ the ratio oſ its axes. His final propoſitions to this purpoſe are the ſame that Mr Stirling had communicated without demonſtration. This performance was much admired, and ſettled all doubts about the figure of a homogeneous ſpheroid turning round its axis. It is indeed equally remarkable for its ſimplicity, its perſpicuity and its elegancee Mr MeLaurin had no occaſion to proſecute the ſubject beyond this ſimple caſe. Proceeding on his fundamental propoſitions, the mathematical philoſophers have made many important additions to the theory. But it ſtill preſents many queſtions of moſt diſficult ſolution, yet intimately connected with the phenomena of the ſolar ſyſtem. n this elementary outline of phyſical aſtronomy, we cannot diſcuſs thoſe things in detail. But it would be a capital defect not to include the general theory of the ſigure of planets which turn round their axes. No more, however, will be attempted than to ſhew that a homogeneous elliptical ſpheroid will anſwer all the conditions that are required, and to give a general notion of the change which a variable denſity will produce in this figure. The  The ſtudent will cõnſult, with advantage, the original diſſertations of Mr Clairaut and Mr MeLaurin, and the great additions made by the laſt in his valuable work on Fluxions. The Coſnographia of Friſius alſo contains a very excellent epitome The ſollowing lemma from Mr MLaurin muſt be premiſcd. 555. Let ALBQ and aebq (fig- 64. No. 1.) be two concentric and ſimilar ellipſes, having their ſiorter axes A B and a b coinciding. Let P a L toũch the interior ellipſe in the extremity a oſ the ſhorter axis, to. vhich let PK, a chord of the exterior ellipſe be parallel, and thereſore equal. Let the chords a f and a g of the interior ellipſe make equal angles with the axis, and join their extremities by the chord ſę perpendicular to ĩt in i Draw PF and P G purallel to a ſ and a 5, and draw FH and PI perpendicular to P K. Then, PF together with P G are equal to twice a i, when PF and P G lie on diſſerent ſides of P . But if they are on the ſame ſile (as PV and P G) then 2a i is equal to the diſerence of P F and P G. Draw K# parallel to P G or a 5, and thereſore equal to PF, being equally inclined to KP. Draw the diameter M Cæ, biſecting the ordinutes Kt, P G, and a g, in m, s5, and 2, and cutting PX in n By ſimilarity oſ triangles, we have Km: Kn=s: Pn, =az:aC, æag: al. Thereſore chanique Celoſte of La Place contains ſome very curious and recondite additionss. A work of F. Boſcovich on the Figure of the Earth has peculiar merit. This author, by employing geometrical expreſſions of the acting forces, wherever it can he done, gives us very clear ideas of the ſubject. Therefore Km +P5: Kn +P næmuag: a, and Ki (rPF) +HPG: 2P Kkæaog:245, and PF +-PG: 205922PK:20h; and, by ſimilarity of triangles, we have PH 4PI: 20i m2PK: 20l. But 2 æ2a5. Therefore P H 4 P Iæ2 ai, and PIPH æ2aqai. 556. Let the two planes AG gB (ſig. 63.) AEæB, interſecting in the line AB, and containing a very ſmall angle G AE, be ſuppoſed to comprehend a thin elementary wedge or ſlice of a ſolid conſiſting of gravitating matter. If two planes GP E, FPD, ſtanding perpendicularly on the plane A Dà B, contain a very fmall angle EP D, they ill comprehend a ſlender, or elementary pyramid of this ſlice, having its vertex in P, and a quadrilateral baſe GEDFVF. If two other planes g, ſd, be dravn from another point 2, reſpectively parallel to the planes GPE, fpd, they will comprehend another pyramid, having its ſides parallol to thoſe of the other, and containing equal angles, and the elementary pyramids F PE, f? e, may thereſore be conſidered as ſimilar. The baſe gedf is not indeed always parallel and ſimilar to G E DF. But ſor each of them may be ſubſtituted ſpherical ſurſaces, having their centres in P and in 4, and then they will be ſimilar. The gravitation of a particle P to the pyramid GPD is to the gravitation of » to the pyramid gꝓd as any ſide P D oſ the one to the homologous ſide » d of the other. This is evident, by what was ſiewn in § 462. The ſame proportion will hold when the abſolute gravitation in the direction of the axis of the pyramid is eſtimated in any other direction, ſuch as P . For, drawing ꝓ n parallel to Pm, and the perpendiculars Dmi;, d n, it is plaim that the ratio P D: p d æP m:  n; =Dm: d n. This propoſition is of moſt extenſive uſe. For we thus eſtimate the gravitation of a particle to any ſolid, by reſolving ĩt into elementary pyramids; and having found the gravitation to each, and reduced ithem all to one direction, the aggregate of the reduced forces is the whole gravitation of the particle eſtimated in that direction. The application of this is greatly expedited by the following theorem. 558. Two particles ſimilarly ſituated in reſpect of ſimilar ſolids, that is to ſay, ſituated in ſimilar points of homologous lines, have their whole gravitations proportional to any homologous lines oſ the ſolids. For, we can draw through the two particles ſtraight lines ſimilarly poſited in reſpect of the ſolids, and then draw planes paſſing through thoſe lines, and through ſimilar points of the ſolidss The ſections of the ſolids made by thoſe two planes muſt be ſimilar, ſor they are ſimilarly placed in ſimilar ſolidss We can then draw other planes through the ſame two ſtraight lines, containiug with the former planes very ſmall equal angles. The ſections of theſe two planes will alſo be ſimilar, and there vill be comprehended between them and the two former planes ſimilar ſlices of the two ſolids. j We can now divide the ſlices into two ſerieſes of ſimilar pyramids, by drawing planes ſuch as GP E, g⸗e, and FPD, fp d, of fig. 63. the points P and 4 being ſuppoſed in diſferent lines, related to each of the two ſolids. By the reaſonings employed in the laſt propoſition, it appears that when the whole of each ſlice is occupied by ſuch pyramids, the gravitations to the correſponding pyramids are all in one proportion. Therefore the gravitation compounded of them all is in the ſame proportion. As the whole of each of the two ſimilar ſlices may be thus occupied by ſerieſes of ſimilar and ſimilarly ſituated pyramids, ſo the whole of each of the two ſimilar ſolids may be occupied by ſimilar ſlices, conſiſting of ſuch pyramidss. And as the compound gravitations to thoſe ſlices are ſimilarly formed, they are not only in the proportion of the homologous lines of the ſolids, but they are alſo in ſimilar directions. Therefore, finally, the gravitations compounded of theſe compound gravitations are ſimilarly compounded, and are in the ſame proportion as any homologous lines of the ſolids. Theſe things being premiſed, we proceed to conſider the particular caſe of elliptical ſpheroids. 559. Let AEBQ, ae bq (ſig. 64.) be concentric and ſimilar ellipſes, which, by rotation round their ſhorter axis Aa b B, gencrate ſimilar concentric ſpherolds. We may notice the following particulars. 560. (al) Apurticle r, on the ſurface of the interior ſpherold, has no tendency to move in any direction in conſequence of ĩts gravitation to the matter contained between the ſurſaces of the exterior and interior ſpheroids. For, drawng through r the ſtraight line Pr1G, it is an ordinate to ſome diameter CM, which biſects it in 5. The part rt comprehended by the interior ſpheroid is alſo an ordinate to the ſame diameter and is biſected in . Thereſore Pr is equal to 7G. Now r may be conceived as at the vertex of two ſimilar cones or pyramids, on the common axis ? r G. By whut was demonſtrated in art. 462. & 557, it appears that the gravitation of  to the matter oſ the cone or pyramid whoſe axis is 7 P is equal and oppoſite to the gravitation to the matter contained in the fruſtum of the ſimilar cone or pyramid, whoſe axis is ?G. As this is true, in whatever direction Pr G be drawn through r, it follows that r is in equilibrio in every direction, or, it has no tendency to move in any direction. 561. (?) The gravitations of two particles ? and ꝓ (ſig. 64. No. 2.) ſituated in one diameter P C, are proportional to their diſtances P C, 4 C, ſrom the centre. For the gravitation of ꝓ is the ſame as iſ all the matter betecn the ſurfaces AE D Q and a elq were a-v ated on ſimilar ſolids; and P C and ? C are homologous lines of thoſe ſolids; and the propoſition is true, by 5558. 562. () All particles equally diſtant from the plane of the equator gravitate towards that plane with equal ſorces. Let P be the particle (ſig. 64. No, i.) and Pa a line perpendicular to the axis, and parallel to the equator E Q. Let Pd be perpendicular to the equator. Let a eb q be the ſection of a concentric and ſimilar ſpheroid, having its axis a b coinciding with AB. Drawing any ordinate fg to the diameter a b of the interior ellipſe, join a f and a g5, and draw  F and P G paralle] to a f and a g, and therefore making equal angles with P. Let fg cut a b in i; and draw FH, GI, perpendicular to PI. The lines PF and ? GC may be conſidered as the axes oſ two very ſlender pyramids, comprehended between the plane of the figure and another plane interſecting it in the line P a L and making with it a very minute angle. Theſe pyramids are conſtituted according to the conditions deſcribed in art. 556. The lines a f, s g are, in like manner, the axes of two pyramids, whoſe ſides are parallel to thoſe of PV and PG. The gravitation oſ P to the matter contained in the pyramids P F and P G, and the gravitation of a to the pyramids a f and a g, are as the lines PF, PG, af, and ag™, reſpectively. Theſe gravitations, eſtimated in the direction P d, a C, perpendicular to the equator, are as the lines PH, PI, ai, ai, reſpectively. Now it has been ſhewn 555.) that PH 4 P Iare equal to a i +a i. Thereſore the gravitations of P tę this puir of pyramids, when eſtimated perpendicularly to the equator, is equal to the gravitation of a to the correſponding pyramids lying on the interior ellipſe a f bq. It is evident that by carrving the ordinate ſg along the whole diameter from b to a, the lines a ſ, a z, uill diverge more and more (always equally) from a b and the pyramids of which theſe lines are the axes, will thus occupy the whole ſurface of the interior ellipſe. And the pyramids on the axes  F and P G, will, in like manner, occupy the whole of the exterior ellipſe. It is alſo evident that the whole gravitation of P, eſtimated in the direction P à, ariſing from the combined gravitations, to every pair of pyramids eſtimated in the ſame direction, is equal to the whole gravitation of a, ariſing ſrom the combined gravitation to every correſponding pair of pyramids. That is, the gravitation of P in the direction P d to the whole of the matter contuined in the elementary ſlice of the ſpherold comprelirnded between the two planes which interſect in the line Pa I, is equal to the gravitation oſ a to the marter contained in that part of the ſame ſlice which lies within the interior ſpheroid. But this is not conſined to that ſlice which has the ellipſe AE B Q for one of its bounding planes. Let the ſpheroid be cut by any oiher plane paſing through the lipſe, and that it is concentric with and ſimilar to the ellipſe formed by the interſection of this plane with the interior ſpheroid a æ b 7. They are concentric ſimilar ellipſes, although not ſimilar to the generating ellipſes AEB Q and a b7. Upon this ſection may another ſlice be ſormed by means of another ſection through Pal, a little more oblique to the generating ellipſe AE B Q. And the ſolidity of this ſection may, in like manner, be occupied by pyramids conſtituted according to the conditions mentioned in art. 558. From what has been demonſtrated, it appears that the gravitation of P to the whole matter of this ſlice, eſtimated in the direction perpendicular to Pa I, is equal to the gravitation of a to the matter in the portion of this ſlice contained in the interior ſpheroid. Hence it follows that when theſe ſlices are taken in every direction through the line P a L, they will occupy the whole ſpheroid, and that the gravitation of P to the matter in the whole ſolid, eſtimated perpendicularly to Pa L, is equal to the gravitation of a to the matter that is contained in the interior ſpheroid, eſtimated in the ſame manner. This gravitation will certainly be in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the equator of the two ſpheroids. For the ſlices which compoſe the ſolid, all paſſing through the generating ellipſe AE B Q, may be taken in pairs, each pair conſiſting of equal and ſimilar ſlices, equally inclined to the plane of the generating ellipſe. The gravitatons to each ſlice of a pair are equal, and cqually inclined to the plane A E B Q. Thereſore they compoſe a gravitation in the direction which biſects the ængle contained by the ſlices, that is, in the direction oſ the pline AE B Q, and parallel to its axis AB, or perpendicular to the equator. From all this it follows, that the gravitation of P to the whole ſpheroid, when eſtimated in the direction P à4 perpendicular to the plane oſ its equator, is equal to the gravitation of a to the interior ſpheroĩd a e b , vhich is evidently in the ſame direction, being directed to the centre C. In like manner, the gravitation of another particle (in the line P a L), in a direction perpendicular to the equator of the ſpheroĩd, is equal to the gravitation of a to the interior ſpheroid a e b ; for P may be conceived as on the ſurface of a concentric and ſimilar ſpheroid. When thus ſituated, it is not aſſected by the matter in the ſpheroidal ſtratum without it, and thereſore its gravitation is to be eſtimated in the ſame way with that of the particle P. Conſequently the gravitation of P and of P, eſtimated in a direction perpendicular to the equator, are equal, each being equal to the central gravitation of a to the ſpheroid a ?b ?2. Thereſore all particles equidiſtant from the equator gravitate equally toward it. 563. (d) By reaſoning in the ſame manner, we prove that the gravitation of a particle P in the direction Pa, perpendicular to the axis A B, is equal to the gravitation of the particle d to the concentric ſimiſar ſpheroid àæ 78; and thereſore all particles equidiſtant from the axis gravitate equally in a direction perpendicular to it. 564. (e The gravitation of a particle to the ſpherold, eſtimated in a direction perpendicular to the equator, or perpendicular to the axis, is proportional to its diſtance from the equator, or from the axis. For the gravitation of P m the direſtion P d is equal to the graũ tion of a to the ſheroid a eb q, is to the gravitation oſ A to ALEBQ as a C to AC (558) Therefore the gravitation of P in the diretica P is to the gravitation of A to the ſpherold AEBQ as a C to AC, or as Pà to AC; and the ſame may be proved of any other parvitation of a to the ſpheroid a æb q. But the gravitaticle. The gravitation of A ĩs to the gravitation of any particle as the diſtance AC is to the diſtance of that particle. All particles therefore gravitate towards the equator proportionally to their diſtances from it. In the ſame manner, it is demonſtrated that the gravitation of Eto the ſpheroid in the direction E C perpendicular to the axis, is to the gravitation of any particle P in the fame direction as E C to Pa, the diſtance of that particle from the axis. Thereſore, &c. 565. (F) We are now able to aſcertain the directlon and intenſity of the compound or abſolute gravitaton of any particle P. Yor this purpoſe let A repreſent the gravitation of the particle A in the pole, and E the gravitation of a particle E on the ſurſace oſ the equator; alſo let the force with vhich P is urged in the direction P à be expreſitd by the ſymbol 4, P 4, and let f, Pa expreſs its tendency in the direction ? a. We have f P d: A= d: AC and A:EAE and E: f, Pa æE C: Pu. Thereſore ſ, P df, Pa mPdx AXEC: ACXE XPa. Now make dC: d v=A X EC: IL x AC, and draw P v. We have now f, Pd: f, Pa mP d x d C: ' a x àd », =Pd x Pa: Pa x dv, æP d: d v. ? is thereſore urged by two forces, in the directions P d and Pa, and theſe forces are in the proportion of P and àd v. Therefore the compound force has the direction P . Morcover, this compound force is to the gravity at the pole, or the gravitation of the particle A, as Pv to A C. For the ſorce Pv is to the force P d as Pv to P 4; and the ſorce P d is to A as Pd to AC. Therefore the force P v is to A a5 P v to AC. In like manner, it may be compared with the foree at E Make a C:a n=E x CA: A x CE. We ſll then have f, Pa: f, P d æ Pa: a u;3 and the ſorce in the direction P a, when compounded with that in the direction P d, ſorm a force in the direction  æ, and having to the force at I the proportion oſ P u to EC. Thus have we obtained the direction oſ gravitation for any individual purticle on the ſurſace, and its magni3 tude when compared with the ſorces at A and at E, which are ſuppoſed known. 566. ~ DBut ĩt is neceſſary to have the meaſure of the accumulated ſorce or preſſure occaſioned by the grovitation of a column or row of particles. Draw the tangent ET, and take any portion of it, ſuch as ET, to repreſent the gravitation of the particle E loin CT, cutting the perpendicular 5 in à. Since the gravitations of particles in one diameter are as their diſtances from the centre (561.) d 3 will expreſs the gravitation of a particle . Thus, the gravitation of the whole column E C vill be repreſented by the area of the triangle CET, and the gravitation of the part E d, or the preſſure exerted by it at d, is repreſented by the area E T2 d. We may alſo conveniently expreſs the preſſure of the column E C at C by/—, and, in : AC like manner,  expreſſes the un of the coIumn AC, or the preſiure exerted by it at C. Should we expreſs the gravitution of E by a line ET equal to EC, the weight of the whole column E C would be expreſſed by n. , and that of the portion E C ac x1Q9 Ve , or by its equ⸗ aE haꝶææ Ed by ſee alſo that whatever value we aſſign to the ſorce E, the gravitations or preſſures of the columns E C and E d are proportional to E C?, and E CC—4d C, or to I.C and Ed x d Q. This remark will be ſfrequently reſerred to. 567. From theſe obſervations it appears that the two columns A C and E C will exert equal or uncqual preſſures at the centre C, according to the adjuſtment of the forces in the direction of the axis, and perpendicular to the axis. IF the ellipſe do not turn round an axis, then, in order that the ſluid in the columns A C and E C may preſs equally at C, we muſt have A X ACæE X EC, or AC: ECæE: A. The gravitation at the pole muſt be to that at the equator as the radius of the equator to the ſemioxis. But we ſhall find, on examination, that ſuch a proportion of the gravitations at A and E cannot reſult ſolely from the mutual gravitation of the particles of a homogeneous ſpheroĩd, and that this ſpheroid, if ſluid, and at reſt, cannot preſerve its ſorm. 568. The ſix preceding articles aſcertain the mechanical ſtate of a particle placed any where in a homogeneous ſpheroid, inaſmuch as it is aſſected ſolely by the mutual gravitation to all the other particles. We are now to inquire what conditions oſ ſorm and gravitating force will produce an exact equilibrium I every particle of an elliptical ſpheroid of gravitating ſluid when turning round its axis. For this purpoſe, it s neceſſary, in the firſt place, that the direction oſ gravity, aſfected by the centriſugal force of rotation, be every where perpendicular to the ſurface of the ſpheroid, otherwiſe the waters would flow oſf toward that quarter to which gravity inclines. Secondly, all canals reaching ſrom the centre 19 the ſurface muſt balance at the centre, otherwiſe the preponderating column will ſubſide, and preſs up the other, and the form of the ſurface will change. And, Iaſtly, any particle of the whole maſs muſt be in equilibrio, being equally preſſed in every direction. Theſe three conditions ſeem ſuſſicient for inſuring the equilibrium of the whole. 569. Theſe conditions will be ſecured in an elliptical fluid ſpheroid of uniform denſity turning round its axis, if the gravity at the pole be to the equatoreal gravity, diminiſhed by the centrifugal force ariſing from the rotation, as the radius of the equator to the ſemiaxis. We ſhall firſt demonſtrate that in this caſe gravity will be every where perpendicular to the ſpheroidal ſurface. Let ꝓ expreſs the polar gravity, æ the primitive equatoreal gravity, and c the centrifugal force at the ſurface of the equator, and let e©c, =, be the ſenſible gravity remaining at the equator. Then, by hypotheſis, we have ?:55 CE: CA. Conſidering the ſtate of any individual particle P on the ſurface of the ſpheroid, we perceive that that part of its compound gravitation which is in a direction perpendicular to the plane of the equator is not afſected by the rotation. It ſtill is therefore to the force ꝓ at the pole as P à to AC (564.) But the other conſtituent of the whole gravitation of I, which is eſtimated perpendicular to the axis, is diminiſhed by the centriſugal force of rotation, and this diminution is in portion to this primitive conſtituent of iĩts whole gravitation. Thercſore ĩts remaining gravity in a direction perpendicular to the axis is ſtill in the proportion of its diſtance ſrom it. And this ĩs the caſe with every individual particle. Euch particle therefore may ſtill be conſidered as urged only by two forces, one oſf which is perpendicular to the equator and proportional to its diſtance ſrom it, and the other is perpendiculor to the axis and proportional to its diſtance ſrom it. Therefore, if we drav a line P v u, ſo that d C may be to dv as ꝓ x E C to 1 x AC, Pv will be the direction of the compound force of gravity at P, as aſſccted by the rotation. But, by hypotheſis : s æ L C: AC; rhereſore P X EC: s Xx ACEC: AC, aud EC: ACZædaC :d v, =P u: ? v. But (Ellipſe 7) if ? u be to P v as EC to AC, the line ? v u is perpendicular to the tangent to the ellipſe in the point , and therefore to ihe ſpheroidal ſurſace, or to the ſurface oſ the ſtill ocean. Thus, then, the ſirſt condition is ſecured, and the ſuperſicial waters oſ the ocean will have no tendency to move in any direction. Having thereſore aſcertained a ſuitable direction oſ the aſiccted gravitation of P, we may next inquire into its intenſity. 570. The ſenſible gravity of any ſuperſicial particle P is every where to the polar gravity as the line P u (the normal terminating in the axi:) to the radius of meridional curvature at the pole; and ĩt ĩs to the ſenſible gravity at the equator as the portion P oſ the ſame normal terminating in the equator is to the radius of meridional curvature at the equator. For it was ſiewn (565.) to be to the force at E as P u to EC. If, therefore, the radius of the equator be taken as the meaſure of the gravitation there, ? u will meaſure the ſenſible gravitation at P. And ſince the ultimate ſituation of the point æ, vhen P is at the pole, is the centre of curvature of the ellipſe at A, the radius oſ curvature there will meaſure the polar gravity. That ĩs, the ſenſible gravity at the equator is to the gravity at the pole, as the radius of the equator to the radius of polar curvature. By a perfectly ſimilar proceſs of reaſoning, it is proved that if the gravity at the pole be meaſured by AC, the gravity at P is meaſured by Po, and at the equator by the radius of curvature of the ellipſe in E. 571. Cor. 1. The ſenſible gravity in every point P of the ſurface is reciprocally as the perpendicular C? from the centre on the tangent in that point. For every where in the ellipſe, C: X Pu = CE, and C? X PvCA;, as is well known. 572. Cor. 2. The central gravity of every ſuperſicial particle P, that is, its abſolute gravity Pu or Po eſtimated in the direction P C, is inverſely proportional to its diſtance from the centre, that is, the central gravity at P is to the central gravity at E as EC to PC, and to the polar gravity as AC to P C. For, if the graVity P v be reduced to the direction P C by drawing vo viy. Nov, it is well known that Pę xX P C is every where 2/ AC; and, in like manner, P  x ? CæE C. Thereſore ⸗, or P 4, are every where reciprocally as PC. Ience it ſollows that the ſenſible increment of gravity in procecding ſtom the equator to the pole iĩs very nearly as the ſquare oſ the ſine of the latitude; ſor, without entering on a more curious inveſtigation, ĩt is pluin that the increments of gr.vity, when ſo minute in compariſon with the whole gravity, are very nearly as the decrements of the diſtance. Now, in a ſpheroid very little compreſſed, theſe decrements are in that proportion. It may be demonſtrated that in the latitude where ſin. =}, namely, lat. 35°16, the gravity is the ſame as to a perfect ſphere oſ the ſame capacity, having for its radius the ſemidiameter oſ the ellipſe in that point. It is alſo a diſtinguiſhing property of this latitude that, if this ſemidiameter be produced, the gravitation of a particle, at any diſtance in this direction, ĩis the ſame as to a perfect ſphere of the ſame capacity. This is not the caſe in any other dircction. 573. Cor. 3. Laſtly, the force eſtimated in the direction P4 is to the force in the direction Pa as E C x Pd to AC x Pa. For we had (64.) 4, P d: ſ, Pa =AX ECX IPàd: E X AC X I'u, which, by ſubſtituting ꝓ and 5 for A and E, it becomes 2 xX E C x Pd: s x AC X Pa, =EC x P d: AC x Pa. Hitherto we have conſidered only the particles on the furface of the ſpheroid. But we muſt know the condĩtion oſ a particle any where within it. 574. A particle 4, in any intermal point of a diameter, has its ſenſible gravity in the direction perpendicular to the ſurface of a concentric and ſimilar ſpheroĩd paſſing through the particle. For the gravity at  is compounded of forces perpendicular to the axis and to the equator, and proportional to the diſtances ſrom them, and therefore proportional to the ſimilar forces acting on the particle P (558.) Therefore the compound force of ? will be parallel, and in the ſame proportion, to the compound force Pv of P, and muſt therefore be perpendicular to the tangent oſ the ſurface in . ;t ĩs as Pv. 575. Cor. Hence we muſt infer that if there were a cavern at ꝓ, containing water, the ſurface oſ this ſtill water would be a part of the ſpheroidal furface a e b ꝗ. Should this cavern extend all the way to æ or a, the water ſould arrange itſel? according to this ſurface; or, if e r& be a pipe or conduit, the water in it ſhould be ſtill, except ſo far as it is aſſected by the preſſures of the columns A a and Pꝓ and Eæ (theſe preſſures will be proved to be equal). It would ſeem, from theſe premiſes, that iſ the elſiptical ſpheroid conſiſt of different ſiuids, which do not mix, and which dier in denſity, they will be diſpoſed ing ſurſaces Mall be ſimilar. The proof of this ſeems the ſame with what is recelved ſor a demonſtration oſ the horizontal ſurface of the boundary between water and oil contained in a veſſel. Accordingly, this has been ſuppoſed by many reſpectable writers, as a thing that needed no other proof. But this is by no means the caſe. It can be ſtrictly demonſtrated that the denſcr ſluids occupy the loveſt place, and that the ſtrata become leſs and leſ eccentric as we approach the centre, where the ultimate evaneſcent figure may be denominated a ſpherical point. It may be ſeen, even at preſent, that they cannot be ſimilar, unleſs homogeneous. For, without this condition, it cannot be generally demonſtrated that the gravitation oſf a particle  to the equator, and to the axis, is as the diſtance from them, which is the foundation oſ all the ſubſequent demonſtrations. 576. In the next place, all rectilineal eolumns, extending friom the centre to the ſurface, will balance in the centre. For, drawing vo, vę' perpendicular to PC, it is pluin that Po and ꝓ repreſent the gravities of P and ꝓ eſtimated in the direction P C. Now Pr: p æ P C:  C. Thereſore the gravitation of the whole coIumn, or the preſſure on C, is repreſcuted by ræ2RC 566.) Now, in the ellipſe Po x  CæCA, a conſtant quantity. Thereſore the preſſure of every eolumn at C is the ſame. In likz manner, the preſſure of the columns C» and Ca are equal, and ihereſore alſo the preſſures of ? 4, Eæ, and A a, at ꝓ, ?, and' a, are all equal. 577. Laſtly, any particle of the fluid is equally preſſed in every direction, and if the whole were ſluid, would be in equilibrio, and remain at reſt. To prove this, let P» (ſig. 64. 3.) be a column reaching from P to the ſurface, and taken in any direction, but, firſt, in one of the meridional planes, of which AD is the axis, and E Q ihe interſection by the equatoreal plane. In the tangent Aa take Aa equal to LC, and Aæ equal to AC. Draw a Ce and æ Cæ to the tangent E: at the equator. It is evident that E  A C, and E:  E C. Through 2 and P draw the lines  L, NPæ, parallel to EC, and the lines  Nę, IPò parallel to AB. Draw alſo IKE: parallel to EC. Since, by hypotheſis, the whole forces at A and E are inverſely as AC and EC, Aã and Eæ are as the forces acting at A and E. Conſequently, the weights of the columns F D, LZ, and K I, will be repreſented by the areas F ſa D, L1æZ, and KtIL (566.) All the preſſures or forces which act on the particles of the column 2 P may be reſolved into forces acting parallel to A C, and forces acting parallel to EC, and the force acting on each particle is as its diſtance from the axis to which it is directed ſ564.) Therefore the whole force with which the column 2 P is preſſed in the direction AC is to the force with which the columm OP is preſſed in the ſame direction, as the number of particles in P to the numher in OP, that is, as  P to OP. But there is only a part of this force employed in preſſing the particles in the direction of the canal. Another part merely preſſs the ſluid to the ſide of the caml 2 P. Draw O g perpendicular to 2 P. The force acting in the direction AC on any particle in 2 P is to its eſſicacy in the direction 2 P as OP to gP, that is, as  P to OP Therefore, the preſſure which the particle P ſuſtains in the direction 2 P, ſrom the action of all the particles in ?P in the direction AC, s preciſely equal to the preſſure it ſuſtains from the action of the column OP, acting in the ſame direction AC. But ĩt has heen iewn 566.) that the preſure of OP in the direction AC is preciſely the ſame with the weight of the column LZ, which weight is repreſented by the area LIæZ. In the very ſame manner, the whole preſure on P in the direction  P ariſing from the preſure of each of the particles in 2 P in the direction E C, is preciſely the ſame with the preſſure on P, ariſing from the preſſure of the column NDT in this direction E C, that is, it is equal to the weight of the column FD, which ĩs repreſented by the area Ffã D. Becauſe E is equal to E C, we have FQ2 D æ : 7 LO  ( Cr CD  = Lp L.o r0 x O m and in 2 2 2? Iike manner, Kæ2 Læ 1O 29; . But O X Om: IO xX OiæEC: AC, and thereſore FO, D: KæL=EC: AC but Kæ2L: KEIL m AC: EC md Frſd D: F ęi DæAC: EC, therefore Ffd D: KEIL=EC X AC: AC XEC, that is, in the ratio of equality. Now the area æ/L repreſents the weight of the column KI, or the preſſure exerted in the direction AC by the column IO. Thus it appears that when the forces acting on the particles in the column ꝓP are eſtimated in the direction of the canal, the preſſure exerted on the particle P is equal to the united preſſures of the columns OP and IO acting in the direction A C, that is, to the preſſure of the fluids in the canal IP in its own direction. Therefore the ſluid in the canal IP will balance the fluid in the canal 2P, and the particle P will have no tendency to move in either direction. And, ſince this is equally true, vhatever may be the direction of the canal P, or P æ, it ſollows that the particle P is equally preſſed in every direction in the plane of the ſigure, and would remain at reſt, if the whole ſpherold were ſluid. But now let the canal Pæ be in a plane di? ent ſfrom. a meridional plane (as in fig. 64. 4.) In whatever direction * The ſtudent muſt not confound this with a compoſition of two preſſures or forces N P and OP, compoſing a preſſure or force  P. There is no ſuch compcſiiion in the preſent caſe. Tt is only meant that the preſſure in the direction 2 P ariſing from the gravitation of the particles in the canal, is the ſame, in reſpect of magnitude, with the preſſure in rhe direetion tion P& is diſpoſed, a plane may be made to paſs thugh it, perpendicular to the plne E? Qq oſ the equator of the ſpleroid. Let 2 Iie be this plane. Its ſection with the ſpheroĩd will be an ellipſe, ſimilar to the generating ellipſe AED Q, as is well known. Let the meridional ſection AE B Q paſs through the point  oſ the canal 2 P. It will cut the ſection e Iqi in a line IPi perpendicular to its interſection æeq with the equator of the ſpheroid, and thereſore parallel to the axis a cò of the ſection, if it do not colncide with this axis. Let CDE be the ſemidiameter of the generating ellipſe which paſſes through the interſection D of Ii and fq; and drav PZ parallel to DC, and Pæ parallel to æq cutting a cb in æ, and jon æZ and c C. It is plain that the plane paſſing through the axis A B of the ſpheroid and the axis a b of the ſection e Iqĩ is perpendicular to that ſection ſſor it biſects æq, which is a chord of the equatereal circle Læ Qq), and that the planes Dæ C and  æZ are parallel, and the angles at ? and æ right angles. Let us now conſider the forces which act on the particles of fluid in the canal  P. They are, as before, all reſolvable into two, one of them parallel to AC, and the other perpendicular to it. Thus, the particle P is urged by a force in the direction PD parallel to AC, and proportional to its diſtance PD from the equator of the ſpheroid. It is alſo urged by a force in the direction PZ perpendicular to AC, and proportional to its diſtance PZ. This force PZ may be reſolved into P æ and æ7. The &orce æZ. remains the ſame, for all the particles in the vanal 4P, æ Z being equal to e C. But the force Z is always proportional to the diſtance of the particle in the canal  P ſrom the axis a c b of the ſection  Iqi. It is alſo to the axipetal force in the direction P Z as P æ to PZ. Moreover, it has been ſiewn (573.) that the force in the direction PZ is to the force in the direction P D in the ratio of AC x PZ to EC x PD, that is (on account of the ſimilrity oſ the ſections AE BQ and a e bq), as a  x PZ to e x P D. Thereſore the ſorce in the direction Pæ is to the force in the direction P D as a ſ x P2Z to e  X P D. Wherefore, ſince from theſe elements it has been proved already that the whole preſſure on P in the canal 4 P, lying in the plane AE B Q, is equal to the preſſure of the canal IP, it follows that the preſſure of the canal  P, lying in the plane a ebq is alſo equal to the preſſure of the canal IP. Thus it now appears that the particle P is urged in every direction with the ſame force by the ſluid in any rectilineal canal whatever reaching to the ſurface. It is thereſore in equilibrio; and, as it is taken at random, in any part of the ſpheroid, the whole fluid ſpheroid is in equilibrio. We alſo ſee that the whole force with which any particle P is preſſed in any direction whatever is to the preſſure at the centre C as the rectangle IPi to A C-. For that is the proportion of the preſſure of the canal TP to that of the canal AC; and all canils termnating in the centre exert equal preſſures. 578. It ia now demonſtrated that a maſs of uniformly denĩe matter, inſluenced in every particle by gravitation, and ſo conſtituted that an equilibrium oſ force on every perticle is neceſſary ſor the maintenance of its form, may exiſt, with a motion of rotation, in the form of an elliptical ſpheroid, if there be a proper adjuſtment between the proportion of the two axes and the time of the rotation. Whatever may be the proportion oſ the axes of an oblate ſpheroid, there is a rapidity of rotation which will induce that proportion between the undiminiſhed gravity at the pole and the diminiſhed gravity on the ſurface of the equator, which is required for the preſervation of that form. But it has not been proved that a fluũd ſphere, when ſet in motion round its axis, muſt aſſume the form of an elliptical ſpheroid, but only that this is a poſſible form. This was all that Newton aimed at, and his proof is not free from reaſonable objections. The great mathematicians ſimce the days oſf Newton have done little more. They have not determined the figure that a ſluid ſphere, or a nucleus covered with a fluid, muſ aſſume when ſet in motion round its axis. But they have added to the number of conditions that muſt be implemented, in order to produce another hind of aſſurance that an elliptical ſpheroid  Montucla ſays (Vol. IV.) that M. le Gendre has demonſtrated that an elliptical ſpheroid is the only poſſible form for a homogeneous ſluid turning round its axis. ſpheroĩd will anſwer the purpoſe, and by this limitatiom have greatly increaſed the dũſiculty oſ the queſtionn. M.Clairaut, who has carried his ſcruples farther than the reſt, requires, beſides the three conditions which have been ſewn to conſiſt with the permanence of the elliptical ſorm, that it alſo be demonſtrated, 1mo, That a canal of any form whatever muſt every where be in equilitrio: 2d,, That a canal of any ſiape, reaching from one part of the ſurface, through the maſs, or along the ſurface, to any other part, ſhall exert no force at its extremities: 3ſi;, That a canal oſ any form, returning into itſelf, ſiall be in equilibrio through its whole extent. 579. I appreliend that in the caſe of uniform denſity, all theſe conditions are involved in the propoſition in art. 577.)0 For we can ſuppoſe the canal » P of fig. 64N° 4. to communicate with the canal Pà. It has been ſnewn that they are in equilibrio in P. The canal 48 may branch oſf from P3. Theſe are in equilibrio in the point 4. The canal 3 may branch off at 3, and they will be ſtill in equilibrio, and the canal 21 will be in equilibrio with all the foregoing. Now theſe points of derivation may be multiplied, till the polygonal canal 2 P 43 21 becomes a canal of continual curvature of any form. In the next place, this canal exerts no force at either end. For the equilibrium is proved in every ſtate of the canal  Pit may be as ſhort as we pleaſe it may be evaneſcent, and actually ceaſe to have any length, without any interruption of the equilibrium. Therefore, Tſherefre, there is no force exerted at iĩts extremity to diſturb the form of the ſurſace. It may be ohſerved that this very circumſtance proves that the direction of gravity is perpendiculr to the ſurſface. And it muſt be obſerved that the perpenicularity of gravity to the ſurface is not employed in demonſtrating this propoſition. The whole reſts on the propoſitions in art. 562. 563. and 564, both of which we owe to Mr MſLaurin. 580. Flaving now demonſtrated the competency of the elliptical ſpheroũd for the rotation of a planet, we proceed to inveſtigate the preciſe proportion of diameters which is required for any propoſed rotation. For example, What protuberancy oſ the equator will diſſuſe the ocean of this Earth uniformly, conſiſtently with a rotation in 23, 56' o4, the planet being uniſormly denſe? Let & and æ expreſs the primitive gravity of a particle placed at the pole and at the ſurſace of the equator, ariſing ſolely from the gravitation to every particle in the ſpheroid, and let  repreſent the centrifugal tendency at the ſurface of the equator, ariſing from the rotation. We ſhall have an elliptical ſpheroid of a permanent form, if AC be to EC as e¢c is to ꝓ (569.0 We muſt therefore find, firſt of all, what isthe proportion of 4 to e reſulting from any proportion of A C to E C. To accompliſh this in general terms with preciſion, appeared ſo diſficult a taſk, even to Newton, that he avoidad it, and took an indirect method, which his ſogacity ſhewed him to be perfectly ſafe; and even this was diſſicult, It is in the complete ſolution of this problem that the genius of MLaurin has ſhewn itſelſ moſt, remarkable both for acuteneſs and for geometrical elegnnce. It ĩs not exceeded (in the opinion of the ſirſt mathematicians] * by any thing of Archimedes or Apollonius. For ihiis reaſon, it is to be regreted that we have not room for the ſeries of beautiſul propoſitions that are neceſſary in his method. We muſt take a ſhorter courſe, limited indeed to ſpheroids of very ſmall eccentricity (whereas the method of MrLaurin extends to any degree of eccentricity), but, with this limitation, perfectly exact, and abundantly eaſy and ſimple. It is, in its chief ſteps, the method followed by M, Boſcovich. 580. Let AE B Q (ſig. 65.) repreſent ithe terræſtrial ſpheroid, nearly ſpherical, and let Aæ Bę and Ea Qò repreſent the inſcribed and circumſeribed ſpheress With the axis and parameter A B deſcribe the parabola ATG, drawing the ordinates B DF, ECH, c, Deſcribe alſo the curve line A IL G, ſuch, that we have, in every point of it, AB: ADZDF: DI; AB: ACCH; CL, &c. Our firſt aim ſhall be to find an expreſſion and valuæ oſ the polar gravity. We may conceive the ſpheroid as a ſphere, on which there is ſpread the redundant matter contained between the ſpherical and the ſpheroidal ſurfaces, ſaces. We know the gravitation oſ the polar particle A 10 the ſphere, and now want to have the meaſure oſ its gravitation to this redundant matter. Suppoſe the ſigure to turn round the axis A B. The ſemiellipſis AE B will generate a ſpheroĩdal ſurſace; the ſemicirele Ae B will generate a ſpherical ſurface, and the intercepted portions Pꝓ, Eæ, &c. of the ordinates will generate ſlat rings of the redundant matter. As the deviation ſrom a ſphere is ſuppoſed very ſmall (Eæ not exceeding the 500dth part of E Q), we may ſuppoſe, without any ſenſible error, that Ap is the diſtance of A from the whole oſ the ring generated by P&. Proceeding on this aſſumption, we ſay that the gravitation of A to the rings generated by P, Eæ, &c. is proportional to the portions FI, H L, &c. of the correſponding ordinates DF, CH, &c., and that the gravitation of A to the whole redundant matter may be expreſſed by the ſurface AFH G L IA comprehended between the lines AF  G and ATLG. For, the abſolute gravitation oſ A to the ring Pæ is directly as the ſurface of the ring, and inverſcly as the fquare oſ its diſtance from A. Now, the ſurface of the ring is as its breadth, and its circumference jointly. Its breadth Pꝓ, and alſo its circumference, being proportional to D&, the ſurface is proportional to D2. The abſolute gravitation is therefore proportional to n». ?r This may be reſolved into forces in the directions AD 20d D4. The force in the direction Dꝓ is balanceà by an equal force on the other ſide of the axis. Therefore, to have the gravitation in the direction of the axis, the value oſ the abſolute gravitation in the direction Amuſt be reduced in the proportion of Ap to AD. It D&?' x ADDp x AD therefore becomes Z; x a;3 DZXxg or, which is the ſame thing, D”? x AD X A? But Ap ApABX AD, and ApæADB xX AD.. Alſo D = AD x D B. Thereſore the value laſt found beAD X DB X AD X Ap comes -D2D or the ſame thing with Since AB is a conſtant quantity, the gravitation in the direction AC , which is equal to, to the ring generated by P» is proportional to D B x Ap. It is very obvious that DF, CH, B G, &c. are reſpectively equal to Ap, Ae, AB, &c. Therefore the gravitation to the matter in the ring generated by P⸗ is proportional to DB x DVF. Now, by the conſtruction of the curve line ALG, wve have AB: ADDVF: DI therefore AB: DBæDVF: IF and ABXIFæDEBEXDF Therefore, ſince AB is conſtant, IF is proportional to DB x DF, that is, to the gravitation to the ring generated by P⸗. Thereſore the gravitation to the whole redundant matter may be repreſented by the ſpace AHGL A. Let æ be the periphery of a circle of which the radius is . The circumference of that generated by Evill be æ }X Cæ, and its ſurface æ æ x Cæ xX Eæ, and the abſolute gravitation to it ĩs /7] , that is, æ This, when reduced to the direction A C, becomes zEX E 2 AL that is, ſ or E2A: And becauſe A æ2AC, and L n = : CH, æ2 Aæ, the reduced gravitation becomes This being the meaſure or repreſentative of the gravitation to the material ſurface or ring generated by E., the gravitation to the whole redundant matter contained between the ſpherox and the inſcribed ſphere will be repreſented by E multiplied by the ſpace comprehended between the curve lines A F G and AL G. We muſt ſind the value of this ſpace. The parabolic ſpace AH GB A is known to be =3 AB X BG, m3 AB. The ſquare of DI is proportional to the cube of B D. For, by the conſtruction of the curve AB': AD /DF: DI?, and DI' AD: x DF AD DF AD⸗ AD: DS5V à5 à5à8h =%F Therefore DI is proportional to AD?, and the area ABGLA is HAB X BG, m3 AB. Take this from the parabolic area A B,, and there remains A AB ſor the value of A L GH A. This is equal to 35 A C. Now, the gravitation of A to the redundant matter was mewn to be = AL G H A x  tã This now becomes 5 AC x z aut or , æ x Ee. Such is the gravitation of a particle in the pole of the ſpheroid to the redundant matter ſpread over the inſcribed ſphere. The gravitation of a particle ſituated on the ſurface of the equator to the ſame redundant matter is not quite ſo obvious as the polar gravity, but may be had with the ſame accuracy, by means of the following conſiderations. 581. Let ABab (ſig: 66.) repreſent an obſate ſpheroid, formed by rotation round the ſhorter axis B b of the generating ellipſe, and vieeà by an eye ſituated in the plane of its equator. Let AE a æ be the circumſeribed ſphere. This ſpheroid is deficient from the ſphere by two meniſcuſes or cups, generated by the rotation of the lunulæ AEa BA and Aeab A. : Now ſuppoſe the ſame generating ellipſe A Ba b A to turn round its longer axis A a. It will generate an oblong ſpheroid, touching the oblate ſpheroid in the whole circumference of one elliptical meridian, viæ. the meridian A B a  A which paſſes through the poles A and of this oblong ſpheroid. ſt touches the equator of the oblate ſpheroid only in the points A and , and has the diameter diameter Aa ſor its axis. This oblong ſpheroĩd ĩs otherwiſe wholly within the oblate ſpheroid, leaving between their ſurfaces two meniſcuſes of an oblong form. This may be better conceived by ſirſt ſuppoſing that both the ſpheroĩds and alſo the circumſcrbed ſphere are cut by a plane P G gꝓ, perpendicular to the axis Aa of the oblong ſpheroid, and to the plane of the equator of the obInte ſpheroidc Now ſuppoſe that the whole figure makes the quarter oſ a turn round the axis B of the oblate ſpheroid, ſo that the pole a of the oblong ſpheroid comes quite in front, and is at C, the eye oſ the ſpectator being in the axis produced. The equator of the oblong ſpheroid will now appear a cirele O Bę b O, touching the oblate ſpheroid in its poles B and b. The ſection of the plane P ꝓ with the circumſcribed ſphere will now appear as a circle ? R»ꝓr. Its ſection with the oblate ſpheroid will appear an ellipſe R G'r g' ſimilar to the generating ellipſe ABab, as is well known. And its ſection with the oblong ſpheroid will now appear a circle IG'i g parallel to its equator OB b. P& is equal to P&, and G”~ to Gg. Thus it appears that as every ſection of the oblate ſpheroid is deſicient from the concomitant ſection of the circumſcribed ſphere by the want of two lunulæ R P r G and R& rg, ſo it excecds the concomitant ſection oſ the oblong ſpheroid by two lunulæ GRZI and G rę'i. It is alſo phin that if theſe ſpheroids diſfer very little from perſect ſpheres, as when E B does not exceed 75 of Ee, the deficiency of each ſection G g from the concomitant ſection oſ the circum3P ſcribed ſphere is very nearly equal to its exceſs above the concomitant ſection oſ the inſcribed oblong ſpheroidIt may ſaſely be conſidered as equal to one half of the ſpace contained between the circles on the diameters P ? and. G'g, * in the ſame way that we conſidered the lunula APE Bæp A of ſig. 65. as one half of the ſpace contained between the ſemicircles Ae B and a E b. From this view of the ſigure, it appears that the gravitation of a particle a in the equator of the oblate ſpheroĩd to the two cups or meniſcuſes RPr G and R rę, by which the oblate ſpherold is leſs than the circumſcribed ſphęre, may be computed hy the very ſame method that we employed in the Iaſt propoſition. But, inſtead of computing (as in laſt propoſition) the gravitation of a to the ring generated by the revolution & PG (ſig. 66.), that is, to the ſurſace contained between the two circles RP rꝑ and IG ig, we muſt employ only the two Iunulæ? RPrGR and R rg R. In this way, we may account the gravitation to the deſicient matter (or the deficiency of gravitation) to be one halſ of the quantity determined by that propoſition, and therefore = 4 7 X E e of ſig. 655. The laſt propoſition gave us the gravitation to all the matter by which the ſpheroid exceeded the inſcribed ſphere. The preſent propoſition gives * For the circumſcribed circle is to the ellipſe as the ellipſe to the inſcribed circlee When the extremes differ ſo little, the geometrical and arithmetical mean will differ but the gravitation to all the matter by which iĩt falls ſhort of the circumſcribed ſphere. 582. We can now aſcertain the primitive gravitation at the pole and at the equator, by adding or ſubtracting the quantities now ſound to or from the gravitation to the ſpheres. Let  be the radius of the ſphere, and ær the circumference of a great circle. The diaj r meter is 2 7r. The area oſ a great circle is 5 and the whole ſurſace oſ the ſphere is 2  ?, and its ſolid contents is  æ r. Thereſore, ſince the gravitation to a ſphere of uniſorm denſity ĩs the ſome as if aſl ĩts matter were collected in jts centre, and is as the quantity of matter directly, and as the ſquare of the diſtance r inverſely, the gravitation to a ſphere will be proportional xr3 2 1 a E to that is, to J æ r. Now * I beg leave to mention here a cireumſtance which ſhould have been taken notice of in art. 464, when the ſirſt principles of ſpherical attractions were eſtabliſhed. It was ſhiewn that the gravitation of the particle P to the ſpherical ſurface generated by the rotation of the arch AD'T is equal to its gravitation to the ſurface generated by the rotation of B DT. Therefore if P be inſinitely near to A, ſo that the ſurſace generated by A D'T may be conſidered as a point or ſingle particle, the gravitation to that particle is equal to the gravi1ation to all the reſt of the ſurface; that is, it is one ha'f of Now let AEB Q (ſig. 65.) be an oblate ſpheroid, whoſe poles are A and B. The gravity of a particle A to the ſphere whoſe radius is AC is 3 X AC, æ/3 p x EC3 æ xEe, or 3x EC57 xX Ee. Add to this its gravitation ſ, æ X E , to the redundant matter. The ſum is evidently ; #æ xX EC/67 x Ee. The gravitation oſ the particle L on the ſurface of the equator to a ſphere whoſe radius is EC is 7  x EC. From this ſubtract its deficiency of gravitation, vi.  x E, and there remains the equatoreal primitivè gravity æ 20 x EC  æ x Ee. Therefore, in this ſpherold, the polar gravity is to the equatoreal gravity as 37 xX EC2VSr æ xX Eæ to 3 75X EC42  x Eæ, or (dividing all by 3 ) as EC; Eæ to EC Eæ, or (becauſe Eæ is ſuppoſed to be very ſmall in cOmpariſon with E C) as EC to EC4L e. In general terms, let  repreſent the mean gravity,  the polar, and æ the equatoreal gravity, 7 the radius oſ the inſeribed ſphere, and æ the elevation E e of the equator above the inſcribed ſpheree We have, for a general expreſſion of this proportion oſ the primitive the whole grevitation. If we ſuppoſe P and A to coincide, that is, make P one of the particles oſ the ſurface, its gravitation to the ſpherical ſurface will be only one haelf of what it was when it was without the ſurface; and if we ſuppoſe P adjoining to A internally, it will exhibit no gravitation at tive gravitutions, ꝓ: f =r 4 ; æ: r, or (becauſe  is very ſmall in compariſon with r), : e ær : r4æ. This laſt is generally the moſt convenient, and it is exact, iſ r be tuken for the equatoreal radius. 583. Had the ſpheroid been prolate (oblong) the ſame reaſoning would have given us : r: r +4 æ. lli may add here that the gravitation at the pole of an oblong ſpheroĩd, the gravitation at the equator oſ an oblate ſpheroid (having the ſame axes) and the gravitation to the circumſeribed ſphere, on any point of its ſurface, are proportional, reſpectively, to :r + æ3 37 +æ0; and àr 55. 584. It now appears, as was ſormerly hinted (567.) that we cannot have an elliptical ſpheroid of uniform denſity m Many queſtions occur, in which we want the gravitation of a particle ' ſituated in the direction of any diameter CP ſhg- 65.) Draw the conjugate diameter CM, and ſuppoſe the ſpheroid cut by a plane paſſing through CM perpendicular to the plane of the ſigure. This ſection will be an ellipſe, of which the ſemiaxes are CM and CE (r 4æ). A circle whoſe rudius is the mean proportional between CM and CE has the ſame area with this ſection, and the gravitation to this circle will be the ſame (from a particle placed in the axis) with the gravitation to this ſection. Thereſore, as the angle PCM is very nearly a right angle, the gravitation of im which the gravitation at the pole is to that at the equator as the equatoreal radius to the polar radius. This vould make 4: =r: rx, a ratio five times greater than that which reſults from a gravitation proportional 0. Thus have we obtained, with ſuſficient accuracy, the ratio of polar and equatoreal gravity, unaffected by any external force, and we are now in a condition to tell what velocity of rotation will ſo diminiſh the equatoreal gravitation that the remaining gravity there ſhall be to the polar gravity as A C to EC. 585. Let c be taken to repreſent the centrifugal tendency generated at the ſurface of the equator by the rotation of the planet round its axis, and let the other ſymbols be retainedl. The ſenſible gravity at the equator is et, the polar gravity ꝓ, and the exceſs of the equatoreal radius above the ſemiaxis r is æ. ] We have ſhewn (582.) that the primitive gravities at the pole and the equator are in the ratio of r to r; æ, P to the ſpheroid will he the ſame with its polar (or axicular) gravitation to another ſpheroid, whoſe polar ſemiaxis is P C, and whoſe equatoreal radius is the mean proportional between CM and CE. This is eaſily computed.. If the arch P E be 35° 16, a ſphere having the radius P C has the ſame capacity with the ſpheroid A E B Q (vhen Eæ is very ſmall). and the ellipticity = , that is, Four times the primitive gravity at the equator is to five times the centrifugal force of rotation as the ſemiaxis to the elevation of the equator above the inſcribed ſphere. 586. It is a matter of obſervation that the dimin nution of equatoreal gravity by the Earth's rotation in 23 56' 5 is nearly ,55. Thereſore 4 X 289: 5r: x = 231F7: I, very nearly. This is the ratio deduced by Newton in his indirect, and ſeemingly incurious, method. That method has been much criticiſed by his ſcholars, as if it could be ſfuppoſed that Newton was ignorant that the proportionality employed by him, in a rough way, was not neceſſurily involved in the mature of the thing. But Newton knew that, in the preſent caſe, the error, if any, muſt be altogether inſignificant. He did not demonſtrate, but aſſumed as granted, that the form is elliptical, or that an elliptical form is competent to the purpoſe. His juſtneſs of thought has/ęœen ſo repeatedly veriſied in many caſes as abſtruſe as this, that it is unreaſonable to aſcribe it to conjecture, and it ſould rather, as by Dan. Bernoulli, be aſcribed to his penetration and ſagacity. He had ſo many new wonders to communicate, that he had not time for all the lemmas that were requiſite for enabling inſerior minds to trace his ſteps of inveſtigation. 587. When conſidering the aſtronomical phenomena, ſome notice was taken of the attempts which have been made to decide this matter by obſervation alone, by meaſuring degrees of the meridian in diſferent latitudes. But ſuch irregularity is to be ſeen among the meaſures oſ a degree, that the queſtion is ſtill undecided by this method. All that can be made evident by the compariſon is that the Earth is oblate, and much more oblate Wnon the ellipſe of Mr Hermann; and that the medium deduction approaches much nearer to the Newtonian form. When we recollect that the error of one ſecond in the eſtimation of the latitude induces an error of more than thirty yards in the meaſure of the degree, and that the form of this globe is to be learned, not from the lengths of the degrees, but from the differences of thoſe lengths, it muſt be clear that, unleſs the lengths, and the celeſtial arc correſponding, can be aſcertained with great preciſion indeed, our inference oſ the variation of curvature muſt be very vague and uncertain. The peruſal of any page of the daily obſervations in the obſervatory of Paris will ſiew that errors of 5 in declination are not uncommon, and errors of 2 are very frequent indeed.* So many circumſtances may alſo affect the meaſure of the terreſtrial arc, that there is too much leſt to the judgement and choice of the obſerver, in drawing his concluſions. The hiſtory of the ſirſt meaſurement oſ the French meridian by Caſſini and La Hire is a proof of this. The degrees ſeemed to increaſe to the ſouthwardthe obſervations were aſfirmed to be excellentand for ſome time the Earth was held to be an oblong ſpheroid. Philoſophy prevailed, and this was allowed to be impoſible;jvet the obſervations were ſtill held to be faultleſs, and the blame was laid on the neglect of circumſtances which ſhould have been conſideredl. It was afterwards found that the deduced meaſures * I mention particularly the daily obſervations of the Pariſian Obſervatory, becauſe the French aſtronomers are dilſpoſed to reſt the queſtion on the obſervations of their own acade micians, who have certainly ſurpaſed all the aſtronomers of Europe in the extent of their meaſurement of degrees. I ſee no reaſon for giving their obſervations made in diſtant places a greater accuracy than what is to be found in the Royal Obſervatory, with capital inſtruments, ſixed up in the moſt ſolid manner. i did not agree with ſome others of unqueſtionable authority, but would agree with them iſ the corrections were leſt out;they were leſt out, and the obſervations declared excellent, becauſe agreeable to the doctrine of gravitation.* 588. The theory oſ univerſal gravitation aſſords another means of determining the form of the terraqueous globe directly from obſervation. Mr Stirling ſays, very juſtly, that the diminution oſ gravity deducible from the remark of M. Richer, and conſirmed by many ſimilar obſervations, gives an inconteſlible prooſ, both of the rotation of the Euth, and oſ its oblate ſigure. It could not be of an oblate ſizure, and have the ocean uniſormly diſtributed, * They were reconciled with the doctrine of gravitation by attributing the enlargement of the ſouthern degrees to the action of the Pyrenean mountains, and thoſe in the ſouth of France, upon the plummets. But it appears clearly, by the examination of theſe obſervations by Proſeſior Celſius, that the obſervations were very incorrect, and ſome of them very injudiciouſly contrived (Sce Phil. Tran.  457..a1d 386.) The palpuble inaccuracies gave ſuch latitude for adjuſtment that it was eaſy for the ingenious Mr Mairan to combine them in ſuch a manner as to deduce from them inferences in ſupport of opinions altogether contradictory oſ thoſe of the academyHave we not a remarkable example of the doubtfulneſs of ſuch meaſures, in the meaſurement of the Lapland degree 2 diſtributed, without turning round ĩts axis; and iĩt could not turn round its axis withont inundating the equator, unleſs it have an oblate form, accompmied with diminiſhed equatoreal gravity. By the Newtonian theory, the increments oſ gravity as we approach the poles are in the duplicate ratio of the ſines oſ the Iatitudle. The increments of the length of a ſeconds pendulum will have the ſame proportion. Nothing can be aſcertained by obſervation with greater nccuracy than this. For the London artiſts can make clocks which do not vary one ſecond from mean motion in three or ſour days. We need not meaſure the chance in the length of the pendulum, à very delicate ta—but the change oſ its rate of vibration by a change of plce, which ĩs eaſily done; and we can thus aſcertain the force oſ gravity without an error of one part in 86300. This ſurpaſſts all that can be done in the meaſurement of an angle. Accordingly, the ellipticities deduced from the experiments with pendulums are vaſtly more conſiſtent with ench other, and it were t0 be wiſhed that theſeexperiments were more repeated. We have but very fow of them. 589. Yet even theſe erperiment: are not without anomalies. Since, from the nature oſ the experiment, we cannot aſribe theſe to errors of obſervation, and the doctrine oſ univerſal gravitation ĩs eſtabliſhed on too broad a foundation to be called in queſtion for theſe anomalies, philoſophers think it more reaſonable to attribute the anomalies to local irregularity in terreſtrial gravity. Ir, in one place, the pendulum is above a great maſs of ſolid and denſe rock, perhaps abounding in metals, and, in another place, has below it a deep ocean, or a deep and extenſive ſtratum oſ light ſand or earth, we ſhould certainly look ſor a retardation of the pendulum in the latter ſituation. The French academicians compared the vibrations of the ſame pendulum on the ſea-ſhore in Peru, and near the top of a very lofty mountain, and they obſerved that the retardation of its motion in the latter ſituation was not ſo great as the removal ſrom rhe centre required, according to the Newtonian theory, viz. in the proportion of the diſtance ſthe gravity being in the inverſe duplicate proportion).* But it ſould not be ſo much retarded. The pendulum was not raiſed aloſtin the air, but was on the top of a great mountain, to which, as well as to the reſt of the globe, its gravitation was directed. Some obſervations were reported to have been made in Switzerland, which ſiewed a greater gravitation on the ſummit of a mountain than in the adjacent vallies; and much was built on this by the partians of vortices. aA A-omvom -* The length of a pendulum vibrating ſeconds was found to be 439,21 French lines on the ſea-ſore at Lima; when reduced to time at Quito, 1466 fathoms higher, it was 438,88; and on Pichinka, elevated 2434 fathoms, it was 438,69. Had gravity diminiſhed in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſancas, the pendulum at Quito ſould have been 438, 80, and at Pichinka tices. But, aſter due inquiry, the obſervations were found to be altogether ſictitious. It may juſt be noticed here, that ſome of the anomalies in the experiments with pendulums may have proceeded from magnetiſm. The clocks employed on thoſe occaſions probably had gridiron pendulums, having five or ſeven iron rods, of no inconſiderable weight. We know, for certuin, that the lower end of ſuch rods acquires a very diſtinct magnetiſm by mere upright poſition. This may be conſiderable enough, eſpecially in the circumpolar regions, to aſfect the vibration, and it ĩs thereſore adviſeable to employ a pendulum havjng no iron in its compoſition. Although the deduction of the form of this globe ſrom obſervations on the variations of gravity is expoſed to the ſame cauſe oſ error which aſſects the poſition of the plummet, occaſioning errors in the meaſure oſ a degree, yet the errors in the variations of gravity are incomparably leſs. What would cauſe an error of a whole mile in the meaſure of a degree will not produce the ,5 part of this error in the difference of gravity. 590. Thcſc obſervations naturally lead to other reſlections. Newton's determination of the form oſ the terraqueous globe, is really the ſorm oſ a homogeneous and ſluid or perſectly flexible ſpheroid. But will this be the form of a globe, conſtituted as ours in all probability is, of beds or layers of diſſerent ſubſtances, whoſe denſity probably increaſes as they are farther down? This is a very pertinent and momentous queſtion. But this outline of mechanical philoſophy will not admĩt of a diſcuſſion of the many caſes which may reaſonably be propoſed for ſolution All that ean, with propriety, be attempted here is to give a general notion of the changę of form that will be induced by a varying denſity. And even in this, our attention muſt be conſined Tome ſimple and probable caſe. We ſhall thereſore ſuppoſe the denſity to increaſe as we penetrate deeper, and this in ſuch ſort, that at any one depth the denſity is uniform. Jt ĩs highly improbable that the internal conſtitution of 1his globe is allogether megalar. 591. We ſnall therefore ſuppoſe a ſphere of ſolid matter, equally denſe at equl diſtances from the centre, and covered with a leſs denſe ſluid; and we ſhall ſuppoſe that the whole has a form ſuitable to the velocity oſ its rotation. It ĩs this form that we are to ſind out. With this view, let us ſu; poſe that all the matter, by mhich the ſolid globe or nucleus is denſer than the ſluid, is collected in the centree. We have ſeen that this vill make no change in the gravitation of any particle of the incumbent ſluid. Thus, we have a ſolid globe, covered vith a ſiuid of the ſame denſity, and, beſides the mutual gravitation oſ the particles of the fluid, we have a force of the ſame nature acting on every one of them, directæd to the central redundant matter- Now, let the globe liqueſy or diſſolve. This can induce no change of force on any particle of the ſluid. Let us then determine the ſorm of the now ſluid ſpheroid, which will maintain itſelſ in rotation. Tlis being determined, Iet the glube again become ſolid ſ e remainh, ſuid vill not change ĩits form, becauſe no chunge ĩs uuced on the ſoree aciing on aiy parucle of the ſiuidl. Gall this Hypotlſis A. 552. In ord.r to determine this ſtate of equilitvium, or the form which inſures it, which is the chief diſculty, let us form another hyputhieſs B, dirtering from A cnly in this circumſtance, that the matter collected in the eentre, inſtead of attructing the particles oſ the incumbent ſluid with a force decreaſing in the inverſe duplicate ratio of their diſtances, attracts them with a ſoree inereaſing in the direct ratio of their diſtances, keeping the ſame intenſity at the diſtance of the pole as in hypotheſis A Thia ſictitious hypotheſũs, ſimilar to Hermann's, is choſen, beeauſe a maſs ſo conſtitutcd will maintain the form of an accurate clliptical ſpherold, by a proper adjuſtment of the proportion of its axis to the velocity of its rotation. This will eaſily appear. For we have alrendy ſeen that the mutual gravitation of the particles oſ the elliptical ſluid ſpheroid produces, in each particle, a ſorce which may be reſolved into two forces, one of them perpendicular to the axis, and proportional to the diſtance from it, and the other perpendicular to the equator, and proportional to :he diſtance from its plane. There is now by hypotheſis B ſuperadded, on each particle, a force proportional to its diſtance ſrom the centre, and directed to the centre. This may alſo be reſolved into a force perpendicular to the axis, and another perpendicular to the equator, and proportional to the diſtances from them. Therefore the whole combined forces acting on each particle may be thus reſolved into two forces in thoſe directions and in thoſe proportions. Therefore a maſs ſo conitituted will maintain its elliptical form, provided that the velocity of its rotation be ſuch that the whole forces at the pole and the equator are inverſely as the axes of the generating ellipſe. We are to aſcertain this form, or this required magnitude of the centrifugal force. Having done this, we ſhall reſtore to the accumulated central matter its natural gravitation, or ĩts action on the ſluid in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances, and then ſee what change muſt be made on the form of the ſpheroid in order to reſtore the equilibrium. 593. Let B A ba (fig. 67.) be the fictitious elliptical ſpheroid of hypotheſis B. Let BE bæ be the inſcribed ſphere. Take EG, perpendicular to CE, to repreſent the force of gravitation of a particle in E to the cenmal matter, correſponding to the diſtance CE or CB. Draw CG. Draw alſo A I perpendicular to C A, meeting CG in I. Deſcribe the curve GL R, whoſe ordimates GE, LA, RM, &c. are proportional to cæ æ &c. Theſe ordinates will expreſs the gravitations of the particles E, A, M, &c. to the central matter by hypotheſis A. In hypotheſis A, the gravitation of A is repreſented by AL, but in hypotheſis B it is repreſented by Al. For in hypotheſis B the gravitations to this matter are us the diſtances. EG is the gravitation oſ E ĩn both hypotheſes. Now, EG: AL æ CA: CE, but EG: AI = CE: CA—In Iiypotheſis A the weight oſ the column AE is repreſented by the ſpace AL GEI, but by AIGE in hypotheſis B. Iſ therefore the ſpheroid of hypotheſis B was in equilibrio, while turning round its axis, the equilibrium is deſtroyed by merely changing the ſorce acting on the column E A. There is a loſu of preſſure or weight ſuſtaincd by the column E A. This may be expreſied by the ſpace LGI, the diſference between the two areas E GIA and EGLA. But the equilibrium may be reſtored by adding a column of fluid AM, whoſe weight ALRM ſhall be equal to LG I, which : . LIXAE is verj ncarly æ In order to find the height of this column, produce GE on the other ſide of E, and make EF to EG as the denſity of the ſluid to the denſity by which the nucleus exceeded it. EF will be to E G as the gravitation of a particle in E to the globe (now of the ſame denſity ith the fluid) is to its gravitation to the redundant matter collected in the centree Now, take DE to repreſcnt the gravitation of E to the ſluid contained in the concentric ſpheroid E æ ?æ 83 which is ſomewhat leſs than its gravitation to the ſphere E B æ b. Draw CDN. Then AN repreſents the gravitation of A to the whole fiuid ſpheroid, by § 558. In like manner, NI is the u3R nited gravitation of A to hoth the fluid and the central matter, in the ſame hypotheſis But in hypotheſis A, this gravitation is repreſented by NL. Let NO repreſent the centrifugal force aſfecting the particle A, taken in due proportion to NA or NIL, its whole gravitation in hypotheſis A Draw CKO. DK vill be the centriſugal force at E. The ſpace OKGI will expreſs the whole ſenſible weight of the fluid in AE, aceording to hypotheſis B, and OK G L will exexpreſs the ſame, according to hypotheſis A LGI is the diſference, to be compenſated by means of a due addition AM. This addition may be deſined by the quadrature of the ſpaces GE AL and GLI. But it will be abundantly exact to ſuppoſe that G L R ſenſibly coincides with a ſtraight line, and then to proceed in this manner. We have, by the nature of the curve GL R, AL:EG EC: AC Alſlo AH, or EG: AIEC: AC Therefore AL: AIzEC: AC:. Now, when a line changes by a very ſmall quantity, the variation of a line proportional to its cube is thrice as great as that of the line proportional to the root. HI is the quantity proportional to EA the increment of the root EC. IL is proportional to the variation of the cube, and is therefore very nearly equal to thrice HI. Thereſore ince EG: HN IZE C: AE, we may ſtate EG:LIZEC: 3AF, or 3EG: LIZEC: AE. Now, QOL R may be conſidered as equal to QR x AM, or as equal to KG xX AM, and L GI may be conſidered as equal to LI X FAE, and 2KG xX AM =LIx AE. Thereſore 2 KG: AEæLI: AM but EC:AEZ3EG: LI thereſore 2KG X EC: AE Zæ3EG: AM and KGè 35G: AM AE: and 2KG: 3EGæ5&5 AM That is, twice the ſenſible gravity at the equator is to thrice the gravitation to the central matter as a third proportional to radius and the elevation of the equator is to the addition neceſſary for producing the equilibrium required in hypotheſis A. This addition may be more readily conceived by means of a conſtructionn. Make AE: E ? æ2KG: 3 E G. Draw e a parallel to EA, and draw Cæ m, cutting AN in m. Then a m is the addition that muſt be made to the column A C. A fſimilar addition muſt be made to every diameter CT, making 2 KG: 3 E Gæ ⸗ : T1, and the whole will be in equilibria. 594. This determination of the ellipticity will equally ſuit thoſe caſes where the ſluid is ſuppoſed denſer than the ſolid nucleus, or where there is a central hollo. For EG may he taken negatively, as if a quantity of matter were phced in the centre acting with a repelling or centrifugal force on the fluid. This is repreſented on the other ſide o the axis B. The ſpace gil in this cſe is negative, and indicates a diminution of the coIumn a fæ, in order to reſtore the equilibrium. 595. It is evident that the ſigure reſulting from this conſtruction is not an accurate ellipſe. For, in the ellipſe, T? would be in a conſtant ratio to VT, whereas it is as VIV by our conſtruction. But ĩt is alſo evident hat in the caſc; of ſmall deviation from perfect ſphericity, the change of ſigure from the accurate ellipſe of hypotheſis B is very ſmall. The greateſt deviation happens when Eæ is a maximum. It can never be ſenſibly greater in proportion to AE than 4 of AE is in proportion to E C, unleſs the centrifugal force FD be very great in compariſon of the gravity DE. In the caſe of the Earth, where EA ĩs nearly æĩ⸗ of EC, if we ſuppoſe the mean denſity of the Earth to be ſive times that of ſea water, a m i not  excecd rr⸗ of EC, or 547 oſ EA.  596. w e are not to imagine that, ſince central matter requires an addition AM to the ſpheroid, a greater denſity in the interior parts of this globe requires a greater equatoreal protuberancy than if all were homogeneous; for iĩt is juit the contrary. ꝑhè ſpheroid to which the addition muſt be made is not the ſigure ſuited to a homogeneous maſs, but a fictitious ſigure employed as a ſtep to facilitate inveſtigationn. We muſt thereſore define its ellipticity, that we may know the ſape reſulting from the ſinal adjuſtment. Let f be the denſity oſ the ſluid, and n the denſity of the nucleus, and let nf be =q, ſo that  corræſponds with E G of our conſtruction, and expreſſes the redundant central matter (or the central deſiciency of matter, when the ſluid is denſer than the nucleus). Let BCor EC be r, AE be æ, and let g be the mean gravity (primitive), and  the centriſugal force at A Laſtly, let æ be the circumference when the radius of the circie is . The gravitation of B to the ſluid ſpheroid is 7 æſr 582.), and its gravitation to the central matter is ; æ. The ſum of theſe, or the whole gravitation of B, is * ænr. This may be taken for the mean gravitation on every point of the ſpheroidal ſurface. But the whole gravitation of B diſfers conſiderably from that of A. 1mo. CA, or CE, is to 7 AE as the primitive gravity of I to the ſpherold is to ĩts exceſs above the gravitation (primitive) of A to the ſame, (582.) That is, 7r: ; =35fr: 2 æfx, and æf æ expreſſes this exceſs. ad7. In hypotheſis B, ve have CE to CA as the gravitation of B or E to the central matter is to the gravitation of A to the ſame. Therefore CE is to EA as the gravitation of E to this matter is to the exceſs of As i Whereſore x er sncr , which /  , æ=2]20444& l  x in—4” 5 n is more conveniently expreſſed in this form æ æ m x n —— he ſpecies, or ellipticity of the ſpheroĩd is 573 I pticity P EP 5 & n Quagz 5n—35 Such then is the elliptical ſpherold of hypotheſis BS and we ſaw that, in reſpect of form, it is ſcarcely diſtinguiſhable ſrom the figure which the maſs will have when the ſictitious force of the central matter gives place to the natural force of the denſe ſpherical nucleus. This is true at leat in all the caſes where the centrifugal force is very ſmall in compariſon with the mean gravitation. We muſt thereſore take fome notice of the inſluence which the variations of denſity may have on the ſorm of this ſpheroid. We may learn this by attending to the formula r5c n rag5 561—35 The value of this formula depends chieſly on the ſraction n 553 597. IF the denſity of the interior parts be immenſely greater than that of the ſurrounding ſluid, the value of this fraction becomes nearly ;, and : becomes nearly æ and the ellipſe nearly the ſame with what Hermann aſſigned to a homogeneous ſluid ſpheroid. If n=3sf; then2595 ; and, in the caſe of 5m3 the Earth, i would be nearly æ , making am equa5o85 toreal elevation of nearly7 miles. 598. If n =f, the fraction becomes 3, JOSS— s13/6 and = = . , which we have already ſnewn to be ſuitable to a homogeneous ſpheroid, with which this is equivalent. The protuberance or ellipticity i in this caſe is to that when the nucleus is incomparably denſer than the ſluid in the proportion of 5 to 2. This is the greateſt ellipticity that can obtain when the ſluid is not denſer than the nucleus. Between theſe two extremes, all other values of the formula are competent to homogeneous ſpheroids of gravitating ſluids, covering a ſpherical nucleus of greater denſity, either uniformly denſe or conſiſting of concentric ſpherical ſtrata, each of which is uniformy denſe. From this view of the extreme caſes, we may infer in general, that as the incumbent fluid becomes rarer in proportion to the nucleus, the ellipticity diminiſhes. M. Bernoulli (Daniel), miſled by a gratuitous aſſumption, ſays in his theory of the tides that the ellipticity produced in the acreal ſluid which ſurrounds this globe will be 800 times greater than that of the ſolid nucleus; but this is a miſtake, which a juſter aſſumption of data would have prevented. The acreal ſpheroid will be ſenſibly leſs oblate than the mucleus. It was ſaid that the volue of the formula depended chieſiy on the fraction—But it depends alſo sn—35 on the fraction u , increaſing or diminiſhing as æ increaſes or diminiſhes, or as g diminiſhes or increaſes. It muſt alſo be remirked that the theorem 5 5 for a homogeneous ſpheroid was deduced ſrom the ſuppoſition that the eccentricity is very ſmall (See § 590. 585.) When the rotation is very rapid, there is another form of an elliptical ſpheroid, which is in that kind o equilibrium, which, if it be diſturbed, will not be recovered, but the eccentricity will increaſe with great rapidity, till the whole diſſipates in a round ſlat ſheet. But within this limit, there is a kind of ſtability in the equilibrium, by which it is recovered when it is diſturbed. If the rotation be too rapid, the ſpheroid becomes more oblate, and the ſluids which accumulate about the equator, having leſs velocity than that circle, retard the motion. This goes on however ſome time, till the true ſhape is overpaſſed, and then the accumulation relaxes. The motion is now too ſlow for this accumulation, and the waters ſlow back again toward the poles. Thus an oſcillation is produced by the diſturbance, and this is gradually diminiſhed by the mutual adheſion oſ the waters, and by ſriction, and things ſoon terminate in the reſumption of the proper formm. ] 599. When the denſity of the nucleus is leſs than that of the ſluid, the varieties which eſult in the form from a variation in the denſity of the fluid are much greater, and more remarkable. Some of them are even paradoxical. Caſes, for example, may be put, (When the ratio of n to f diſſers but very little from that oſ 3 to 5), where a very ſmall centrifugal force, or very ſlow rotation, ſhall produce a very great protuberance, and, on the contrary, a very rapid rotation may conſiſt with an oblong form like an egg. But theſe are very ſingular caſes, and of little uſe in the explanation of the phenomena actually exhibited in the ſolar ſyſtem. The equilibrium which obtains in ſuch caſes may be called a #1tering equilibrium, which, when once diſturbed, will not he again recovered, but the diſſipation of the fſũid will immediately follow with accelerated ſpeed. Some caſes will be conſidered, on another occaſion, where there is a deſiciency of matter in the centre, or even a hollow. 600. The chief diſtinction between the caſes of a nucleus covered with an equally denſe ſluid, and a denſe nucleus covered with a rarer fluid, conſiſts in the diſference between the polar and equatoreal gravities; for we ſee that the diſference in ſape is inconſiderable. It has yjbeen ſhewn already that, in the homogenous ſpheroid of ſmall eccentricity, the exceſs of the polar gravity above the ſenſible equatoreal gravity is nearly equal to (for x : ” . r:2x mg:5 )- When, in addition to this, ve take 5 into account the diminution , produced by rotation, we - x . Iar and the ſenſible equatoreal gravity. But, in a homogeneous ſpheroid, we have æ = Va Therefore the exceſs of polar gravity in a homogeneous revolving ſpheroid ĩs c or c We may diſtinguiſh this exceſs in the homogeneous ſpheroid by the ſymbol E. 6o1. But, in hypotheſis B, the equilibrium of rota- . x tion requires that  be to  as g& to and the exceſs of polar gravity in this hypotheſis is g. But we have alſo ſeen that in this hypotheſis, = 5 x 5 5sn3ſ5 Therefore the exceſs oſ polar gravity in this hypotheſis . 5 n is /x 7 Let this exceſs be diſtinguiſhed by the ſymbol . 602. The exceſs oſ polar gravity muſt be greater than this in hypotheſis A For, in that liypotheſis the equatoreal gravity to the fluid part of the ſpheroid is already ſmaller. And this ſmaller gravity is not ſo much increaſed by the natural gravitation to tie central mutter, in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtace, as it was increaſed by the ſictitious gravity to the ſame matter, in the direct ratio of the diſtances. The ſccond of the three diſtinctions noticed in § 596. between the gravi: x tations of B and A was I This muſt now be changed into + 2x, as may eaſily be deduced from C, ſuited to a homogeneous ſluid ſpheroĩd, or encloſing a ſpherical nucleus of equal denſity. Theſe exceſſes It is evident that the ſum ofr A and B is v x 503ſ which is double of C, or- x s0; and thereſore C is the arithmetical mean betwern them. the ratio of the exceſs of polar i to the mean graNow we have ſeen that vity in the hypotheſis AA We have alſo ſeen that u x may ſaſely be tuken as the value oſ the elIipticity in the ſame hypotheſis. It is not perſcctly exact, but the deviation is altogether inſenſible in a caſo Iike rhat of the Earth, where the rotation and the eccentricity are ſo moderate. And, Iaſtly, we have ſeen that the ſame fraction that expreſſcs the ratio of the exceſs of polar gravity to mean gravity, in a homogeneous ſpheroid, alſo expreſſes ĩts ellipticity, and ſthat tice this ſraction is equal to the ſum oſ the other two. 604. Hence may be derived a beautiſul theorem, ſir?t given by M. Clairaut, that the fraction expreſſing fuice t the ellipticity of a homogeneous revolving ſpheroid is thæ sum of tun fractions, one of which expreſſet the ratio of the exceſi of polar gravity to mean grovity, and the other expręſſes the ellipticity of any ſpheroid of ſmall eccentricity, ahich conſiſts of a sluid covering a denſer ſpherical nucleus, If thereſore any other phenomena give us, in the caſe of a revolving ſpheroid, the proportion of polar and equatoreal gravities, we can ſind its ellipticity, by ſubtracting the fraction expreſſing the ratio of the exceſs of polar gravity to the mean gravity ſrom twice the ellipticity of a homogeneous ſyherold. Thus, in the caſe of the Earth, twice the ellipticity of the homogeneous ſpherold is r75: A medium of ſeven compariſons of the rate of pendulums gives the proportion of the exceſs of polar gravity above the mean gravity = 45: If this fraction be ſubtracted from 44, it leaves 45 for the medium ellipticity of the Earth. Of theſe ſeven experiments, ſive are ſcarcely different in the reſult. Of the other two, one gives an ellipticity not exceeding 7The agreement in general is incomparably greater than in the forms deduced from the compariſons of degrees of the meridian. All the compariſons that have been publiſhed concur in gvnĩ a conſiderably ſmaller eccentricity to the terruæous ſpheroid than ſuits a homogeneous maſq, and which is uſually called Newton's determination. It is indeed his determination, on the ſuppoſition of homogeneity; but he expreſsly ſays that a different denſity in the interior parts will induce a different form, and he points out ſome ſuppoſititious caſes, not indeed very probable, where the form will be different. Newton has not conceived this ſubject with his uſual ſagacity, and has made ſome inferences that are certainly inconſiſtent with his law oſ gravitation. That the protuberancy oſ the terreſtrial equator is certainly leſs than, Jæ proves the interlor parts to be of a greater mean denſity than the exterior, and even gives us ſome means for determining how much they exceed in m ction 5  an3ſ denſity. For, by making the ſraction 7⸗ x Vi = ri5, as indicated by the experiments with penduIums, we can ſind the value of æ. 605. The length of the ſeconds pendulum is the meaſure of the accelerating force of gravity. Thereſore let ſ be this length at the equator, and  4 d the length at the pole. We have u x ar3ſ a vhence sni—3 : ; - - i. This equation, when properly treat15c 6gd 2010d ed, ghe - = &c. &.* The ſame principles may be applied to any other planet as well as to this Earth. Thus, we can tell what portion of the equatoreal gravity of Jupiter is expended in keeping bodies on his ſurface, by comparing the time of  We have information very lately of the meaſurement of a degree, by Major Lambton in the Myſore in India, with excellent inſtruments. It lies in lat. 12° 32', and its length is 60494 Britiſh fathoms. We are alſo informed by Mr Melanderhielm of the Swediſh academy that the meaſure of the degree in Lapland by Maupertuis ſs found to be 208 toiſes too of his rotation with. the period of one of his ſatellites. We ſind that the centrifugal ſorce at his equator is of the whole gravity, and from the equation =  x, we ſhould infer that iſ Jupiter be a homogeneous ſluid or ſlexible ſpheroid, his equatoreal diameter will exceed his polar axis nearſy 10 parts in 113, which is not very diſferent from what we obſerve; ſo much however as to authoriſe us to conclude that his denſity is greater near the centre than on his ſurſace. Theſe obſervations muſt ſuſice as an account of this ſubject. Many circuniſtances, of great effect, are omitted, that the conſideration might be reduced to ſuch ſimplicity as to be diſcuſſed without the aid of the higher geometry. The ſtudent who wiſhes for more complete information muſt conſult the elaborate perſormances of Euler, Clairaut, D Alembert, and La Place. The diſſertation of Th. Simpſon on the ſame ſubject is excellent. The diſſertation of F. Boſcovich will be of great ſervice  thoſe who are leſs verſant in the ſluxionary calculus, that author Laving every where endeavoured to reduce things to a geometrical conſtruction. To theſe I would add the Coſmographia of Friſius, as a very maſterly performance on this part of his ſubject. It were deſireable that another element were added to the problem, by ſuppoſing the planet to conſiſt of coherent ſlexible matter. It is apprehended that this would give it a form more applicable to the actual ſtate of things. If a planet conſiſt of ſuch matter, ductile like vitation and this kind oſ coheſion, would induce, will be conſiderably diſſerent from what we have been conſidering, and ſuſceptible of great variety, according to the thickneſs oſ the ſhell of which it is ſuppoſed to conũiſt. The ſorm oſ ſuch a ſhell will have the chief inſluence on the ſform which will be aſlumed by an ocean or atmoſphere which may ſurround it. If the globe of Mars be as eccentsic as the late obſervations indicate it to be, it is very probable that it is hollow, with no great thickneſs. For the centrifugal force muſt be exceedingly ſmall. 666. The moſt ſingular example of this phenomenon that is exhibited in the ſolar ſyſtem, is the vaſt arch or ring which ſurrounds the planet Saturn, and turns round its axis with moſt aſtoniſhing rapidity. It is above 200000 miles in diameter, and makes a complete rotation in ten hours and thirty-two minutes. A point on its ſurface moves at the rate of 1000; miles in a minute, or nearly 17 miles in one beat of the clock, which is 58 times as ſwiſt as the Earth's equator. M. La Place has made the mechaniſm of this motion a ſubject of his examination, and has proſecuted it with great zeal and much ingenuity. He thinks that the permanent ſtate of the ring, in its period of rotation, may be explained, on the ſuppoſition that its parts are without connexion, revolving round the planet like ſo many ſatellites, ſo that it may be conſidered as a vapour. It appears to me that this is not at all probable. He ſays that the obſerved inequalities in the circle of the ring are neceſſary for keeping it from coaleſcing with the planet. Such inequalities ſeem incompatible with its own conſtitution, being inconſiſtent with the equilibrium of ſorces among incoherent bodies. Beſides, as he ſuppoſes no coheſion in it, any inequalities in the conſtitution oſ its diſferent parts cannot influence the general motion of the whole in the manner he ſuppoſes, but merely by an inequality of gravitation. The effect of this, it is apprehended, would be to deſtroy the permanency of its conſtruction, without ſecuring, as he imagines, the ſteadineſs of its poſition. But this ſeems to be the point which he is eager to eſtabliſh; and he finds, in the numerous liſt of poſibilities, conditions which bring things within his general equation for the equilibrium of revolving ſpheroids; but the equation is ſo very general, and the conditions are ſo many, and ſo implicated, that there is reaſon to fear that, in fome circumſtances, the equilibrium is of that kind that has no ſtability, but, if diſturbed in the ſmalleſt degree, is deſtroyed altogether, being like the equilibrium of a needle poiſed upright on its pomt. There is a ſtronger objection to M. La Places explanation- He is certainly miſtaken in thinking that the period of the rotation of the ring is that which a ſatellite would have at the ſame diſtance. The ſecond Caſſinian fatellite revolves in 65 a4, and its diſtance is 56,2 (the elongation in ſeconds). Now &5 44ſ: 7 3230 æ 56,: 16,42. This is the diſtance a; which a ſatellite would revolve in 100 39. It muſt be ſomewhat leſę than this, on account of the oblate figure of the planet. Yet even this is leſs than the radius oſ the very inmoſt edge of the ring. The radius oſ the outer edge is not leſs than 221, and that of its middle is 20. , It is a much more probable ſuppoſition (for we can only ſuppoſe) that the ring conſiſts of coherent matter. It has been repreſented as ſupporting itſelſ like an arch; but this is leſs admiſſible than La Place's opinion. The rapidity of rotation is ſuch as would immediately ſcatter the arch, as water is ſlirted about from a mop. The ring muſt cohere, and even cohere with conſiderable force, in order to counteract the centriſugal force, which conſiderably exceeds its weight. Iſ this be admitted, and ſurely it is the moſt obyious and natural opinion, there will be no diſſiculty ariſing from the velocity of rotation or the irregularity of its parts. M. La Place might eaſily pleaſe his fancy by contriving a mechaniſm for its motion. We may ſuppoſe that it is a viſcid ſubſtance like melted glaſs. If matter of this conſtitution, covering the equator of a planet, turn round its axis too ſwiſtly, the viſcid matter will be thrown off, retaining its velocity oſ rotation. It Will thereſore expand into a ring, and will remove from the planet, till the velocity of its equatoreal motion correſpond with its diameter and its curvaturee However ſmall we ſuppoſe the coheſive or viſcid force, it will cauſe this ring to ſtop at a dimenſion ſmaller than the orbit of a planet moving with the fame velocityTheſc ſeem to be legitimate conſequences of what we know of coherent matter, and they greatly reſemble what we ſee in Satum's ring. Ihis conſtitution of the ring is alſo well fitted for admitting thoſe irregularities which are indicated by the ſpots on the ring, and which M. La Place employs with ſo much ingenuity ſor keeping the ring in ſuch a poſirion that the planet always occupies its centre. This is a very curious circumſtance, when confidered attentively, and its importance is far from boing obvious. The planet and the ring are quite ſeparate. Thè planet is moving in an orbit round the Sun. The ring accompanies the planet in all the irregularities of its motion, and has it always in the middle. This ingenious mathematician gives ſtrong reaſons for thinking that, if the ring were perſectly circular and uniſorm, although it is poſſible to place Saturn exactly in its centre, yet the ſmalleſt diſturbance by a ſatellite or paſſing comet would be the beginning of a derangement, which would rapidly increaſe, and, after a very ſhort time, Saturn would be in contact with the inner edge of the ring, never more to ſeparate from it. But if the ring is not uniform, but more maſſive on one ſide of the centre than on the other, then the planet and the ring may revolve round a common centre, very near, but not coinciding with the centre of the ring He alſo maintains that the oblate form of the planet is another circumſtance abſolutely neceſſary ſor the ſtability of the ring. The redundancy of the equator, and flatneſs of the ring, fit theſe two bodies for acting on each other like two magnets, ſo as The whole of this analyſis of the mechaniſm of Saturn's ring is of the moſt intricate kind, and is carried on by the author by calculus alone, ſo as not to he inſtructive to any but very learned and expert amlyſts. Several points of it however might have heen treated more familiarly. But, aſter all, it muſt reſt entirely on the truth of the conjectures or aſumptions made ſor procuring the poſſible application of the fundamental equations. lE 657. The Moon preſents to the reſlecting mind a phenomenon that ĩs curious and intereſting. She always preſents the ſame face to the Earth, and her appearance juſt now perfectly correſponds with the oldeſt accounts we have of the ſpots on her diſs. Theſe indeed are not of very ancient date, as they cannot be anterior to the teleſcope. But this is enough to ſiew that the Moon turns round her axis in preciſely the ſame time that ſhe revolves round the Earth. Such a preciſe coincidence is very remarkable, and naturally induces the mind to ſpeculate about the cauſe of it. Newton aſcribed it to an oblong oval figure, more denſe, or at leaſt heavier, at one end than at the other. This he thought might operate on the Moon ſomewhat in the way that gravity operates on a pendulum. He defines this figure in Propoſition 38. B. III.; and as the eccentricity, or any deviation of its centre of gravity from that of its figure, is extremely ſmall; the vis diſponens, by which one diameter is directed towards the Earth, ĩs alſo very minute, and its operation muſt be too ſlow to keep one face ſteadily turned to the Earth, in oppoſition to the momentum of rotation round the axis, ſeven or eight days being all the time that is allowed for producing this eſfect. Therefore we obſerve what is called the Libration of the Moon, ariſing from the uniform rotation of the Moon, combined with her unequable orbital motion. One diameter of the Moon is always turned to the upper focus of her orbit, becauſe her angular motion round that focus is almoſt perfectly uniform, and therefore correſponds with her uniform rotation. But that diameter which is towards us when the Moon is in her apogee or perigee, deviates from the Earth almoſt ſix degrees when ſhe is in quadrature. But although, in the ſhort ſpace of eight days, the pendulous force of the Moon cannot prevent this deviatiom altogether, it undoubtedly leſſens it. It is ſaid to produce another effect. If the origiml projection of the Moon in the tangent oſ her orbit did not preciſely, but very nearly, correſpond with the rotation impreſſed at the ſame time, this pendulous tendency would, in the courſe of many ages, gradually leſen the difference, and at laſt make the rotation perfectly commenſurate with the orbital revolution, But we apprehend that this concluſion cannot be admitted. For, in whatever way we ſuppoſe this arranging force to operate, if it has been able, in the courſe of ages, to do away ſome ſmall primitive difference between the velocity of rotation and the velocity of revolution, it muſt certainly have heen able to annihilate a much finaller difference in the poſition of the Moon's ſigure;” namely, the obliquity of the axis to the plane of the orbit. It deviates about I or 2 degrees from the perpendicular, and it firmly retains this obliquity of poſition; and no obſervation can diſcover any deviation from perfect paralleliſm of the axis in all ſituations. It ſurely requires much leſs action of the directing force to produce this change in the poſition of the axis, than to overcome even a very ſmall difference in angular motion, becauſe this laſt difference accumulates, and mahes a great diſference of longitude. Theſe conſiderations ſeem to prove that the conſtans appearance of one and the ſame part of the Moon's ſurface has not been produced by the cauſe ſuſpected by Newton. The coincidence has more probably been origina. We have no reaſon to doubt that the ſame conſummate ſuill that is manifeſt in every part oſ the ſyſtem, in which every thing has an accurate adjuſtment, pondere et menſurã, alſo made the primitive revolution rotation of the Moon that which we now behold and admire. æ The axis round which the rotation of the Moon is performed is inclined to the plane oſ the ecliptic in an angle of 884°, and it is inclined to the plane of the lunar orbit 825. It is always ſituated in the plane paſſing through the poles of the ecliptie and of the lunar orbit.. It therefore deviates about 13 from the axis of the ecliptic, and 7 from that of the Moon's orbit. The deſcending node of the Moon's mire. The maniſeſt ſubſerviency to great and good purpoſes, in every thing that we in ſome meaſure underſtand, leaves us no room to imagine that this adjuſtment of the lunar motions is not equally proper. 608. Philoſophers have ſpeculated about the nature of that body of faintly ſhining matter in which the Sun ſeems immerged, and is called the æcdiacal light, becauſe it lies in the odiac. It is rarely perceptible in this climate, yet may ſometimes be ſeen in a clear night in February and March, appearing in the weſt, a little to the north of where the Sun ſet, like a bẽam of faint yelJowiſh grey light, ſlanting toward the north, and extending, in a pointed or leaſ ſhape, about eight or ten degrees. The appearance is nearly what would be exhibited by a ſining or reflecting atmoſphere ſurrounding the Sun, and extending, in the plane of the eeliptic, at leaſt as far as the orbit of Mercury, but of ſmall thickneſs, the whole being ſlat like a cake or diſk, whoſe breadih i at leaſt ten times its thickneſs in the middle. This has been the ſubject of ſpeculation to the mechanioal philoſophers. It is ſomething connected with the Sun. We have no knowledge of any connecting principle but gravitation. But ſimple gravitation would gather this atmoſphere into a globular ſhape, whereas it is a very oblate diſ or lens. Gravitation, combined with 2 proper revolution of the particles round the Sun, might throw the vapour into this form; and the object of the ſpeculation is to aſſign the rotation that is ſuitable to it t the zodincal light be produced by the reſlection of an atmoſphere that is retained by gravity alone, without any mutunl adheſion of iĩts particles, it cannot have the form that we obſerve. The greateſt proportion that the equatoreal diameter can have to the polar is that of 3 to 23 ſor, beyond that, the centriſugal ſorce would more than balance its gravitation, and it would diſipate. A very ſtrong àdheſion is neceſſury ſor giving ſo oblute æa form as we obſerve in the 7odiacal light. Combined with this, it may indeed expand to any degree, by rapidly whirling about, as we ſee in the manufacture of crown-glaſs. But how is this whirling given to the ſolar atmoſphere ? It may get it by the mere action of the ſurſace of the Sun, in the manner deſcribed by Newton in his nccount of the produotion of the Carteſian vortices. The ſurface drags round what is in contact with it. This ſtratum acts on the next, and communicates to ĩt part of its own motion. This goes on ſrom ſtratum to ſtratum, till the outermoſ ſtratum begins to move alſo. All this while, each imterior ſtratum is cireulating more ſwiſtly than the one immediately without it. Thereſore they are ſtill acting on one another. It is very evident that a permanent ſtate is not acquired, till all turn round in the ſame time with the Sun's body. This circumſtance limits the poſſible expanfion of an atmoſphere that does not cohere. It cannot exceed the orbit of a planet which would revolve round the Sun in that time. But the æodiacal tuli extends much farther. The diſcoveries of Dr Hetſchel on the ſurſace of the Sun, if conſirmed by future obſervation, render this production of the Zodiacal light inconceivablee For motions and changes are obſerved there, which ſhiew a perſect freedom, not conſtrained by the adheſion of any ſuperior ſtrata. This would give a conſtant weſterly motion on the ſurface of the Sun. The diſſiculty in accounting for this phenomenon is greatly increaſed by the fact that when a comet paſſes through this atmoſphere, the tail of the comet is not perceptibly aſſected by it. The comet oſ 1743 gave a very good opportunity of obſerving this. It was not attended to; but the deſcriptions that are given of the appearances of that comet ſhew clearly that the tail was (as uſual) directed almoſt ſtraight upward from the Sun, and therefore it mixed with this vapour, or whatever it may be, without any mutual diſturbance. It appears therefore, on the whole, that we are yet ignorant of the nature and mechaniſm of the Zodiacal light. 6o9. Before concluding this ſubject, it is not improper to take ſome notice of an obſervation to which great importance has been attached by a certain claſs of philoſophers. We ſhall find it demonſtrated in its proper place, that when the force which impels a firm body forward acts in a direction which paſſes through iĩts centre of gravity, it merely impels it forward. The body moves in that direction, and every particle moves alike, ſo that, during its progreſs, the body preſerves the ſame attitude o to ſpeak). Taking any tranſverſe line of the body for a diameter, we expreſs the circumſtance by ſaying that this diameter keeps parallel to itſelf, that is, all its ſucceſſive poſitions are parallel to ĩts firſt poſition. But, when the moving force acts in a line which paſſes on one ſide of the centre of the hody, the body not only advances in the direction of the force, but alſo changes its attitude, by turning round an axis. This is eaſily ſeen and underſtood in ſome ſimple caſes. Thus, if a beam of timber, floating on water, be puſhed or pulled in the middle, at right angles to its length, it will move in that direction, keeping parallel to its firſt poſition. But, if it be puſhed or pulled in the ſame direction, applying the force to a point ſituated at the third of its length, that end is moſt aſected ſ(as we ſhall ſee fully demonſtrated) and advances faſteſt, while the remote end is left a little behind. In this particular caſe, the initial motion of all the parts of the beam iĩs the ſame as if the remote end were held faſt for an inſtant. If the impulſe has been nearer to one end than ; of the length, the remote end will, in the firſt inſtant, even move a little backward. We ſhall be able to ſtate preciſely the relation that will be obſerved between the progreſſive motion and the rotation, and to ſay how far the centre of the body will proceed while it makes one turn round the axis. We ſhall demonſtrate that this axis, round which the body turns, always paſſes through its centre of gravity in a certain determined direction. It very rarely happens that the direction of the im30 pelling ſorce piſſes exactly through the centre oſ a body; and accordingly we very rarely obſerve a body moving forward in ſree ſpace without rotation. A ſtone thrown ſrom the hand never does. A bomb-ſhell, or a canmon bullet, has commonly a very rapid motion oſ rotation, which greatly deranges its intended direction. The ſpeculative philoſophers who wiih to explain all the celeſtial motions mechanically, think that they explain the rotation of the planets, and all the phenomena depending on it, by ſaying that one and the ſame force produced the revolution round the Sun, and the rotation round the axis; and produced thoſe motions, becauſe the direction of the primitive impulſe did not paſs preciſely through the centre of the planet. They even ſhew by calculation the diſtance between the centre and the line of direction oſ the impelling force. Thus, they ſew that the point of impulſion on this Earth is diſtunt from its centre 4- of its diameter. Having thus accounted, as they imagine, for the Eartls rotation, they ſay that this rotation cauſes the Earth to ſwell out all around the equator, and they aſſign the preciſe eccentricity that the ſpheroid muſt acquire. They then ſhiew that the action of the Sun and Moon on this equatoreal protuberance deranges the rotation, ſo that the axis does not reimain parallel to itſelf, and produces the phenomenon called the preceſſion of the equinusæs And thus all is explained mechanically. Anq on this explanation a conjecture is founded, which leads io very magniſicent conceptions oſ the viſible univerſe. The Sun turns round an axis. Analogy ſhould lead us to aſcribe this to the ſame cauſeto the action of a force whoſe direction does not paſs through his centre. If ſo, the Sun has alſo a progreſſive motion through the boundleſs ſpace, carrying all the planets and comets along with him, juſt as we obſerve Jupiter and Saturn carrying their ſatellites round their annual orbits. This is, ſor the moſt part, perſectly juſt. A planet turns round its axis and advances, and therefore the ſorce which reſults ſrom the actual compoſition of all the forces which cooperated in producing both motions, does not paſs through the centre oſ the planet, but preciſely at the diſtance aſſigned by theſe gentlemen. But there is nothing of explanation in all this. From the manner in which the remark and its application are made, we are miſſled in our conception of the fact, and the imagination immediately ſuggeſts a ſingle force, ſuch as we are accuſtomed to apply in our operations, acting in one preciſe line, and thereſore on one point of the body. It is this ſimpliſication oſ conception alone which gives the remark the appearance of explanation. A mathematician may thus give an explanation of a ſirſt rate ſhip of war turning to windward, by ſiewing how a rope may be attached to the ſhip, and how this rope may be pulled, ſo as to muke her deſcribe the very line ſne moves in. But the ſeaman knows that this is no explanation, and that he produced this motion of the ſhip by various manœuvres of the ſails and rudder. The only explanation that could be given, correſponding to the natural ſuggeſtion by this remark, would be the ſhewing ſome general fact in the ſyſtem, in which this ſingle force may be ſound that muſt thus impel the planets eccentrically, and thus urge them into revolution and rotation at once, as they would be urged by a ſtroke ſrom ſome other planet or comet. With reſpect to this Eorth, there is not the leaſt appearance of the eſfect which muſt have been produced on it, had it been urged into motion by a ſingle force applied to one point. The force has been applied alike to every particle; there is no appearance of any ſuch general force competent to the production of ſuch motions. Nay, did we clearly perceive the exiſtence of ſuch a force, we ſhould be as far from an explanation as ever. It is not enough that Jupiter receives an impulſe which impreſſes both the progreſſive and rotative motion. His four ſatellites muſt receive, each ſeparately, an impulſe of a certain preciſe intenſity, and in a certain preciſe direction, very different n each, and which cannot be deduced from any thing that we know of matter and motion. No principle of general influence has been contrived by the zealous potrons of this ſyſtem (for it is a ſyſtem) that gives the ſmalleſt ſatisfaction even to themſelves, and they are obliged to reſt ſatisſied with expreſſing their hopes that it may yet be accompliſhed. But ſuppoſe that an expert mechanician ſhould ſhiew how the planets, ſatellites, and comets may be ſo placed that an impulſe may at once be given to them all, preciſely eompetent to the production of the very motions that we obſerve, which motions will now be mulntained for ever by the univerſal operation of gravity. We ſnould certainly admire his ſagacity and his knowledge oſ nature. But we ſtill wonder as much as ever at the nice adjuſtment of all this to ends which have evidently all the excellence that order and ſymmetry can give, while many of them are indiſpenſably ſubſervient to purpoſes which we cannot help thinking good. The fuggeſtion oſ purpoſe and final cauſes is as ſtrong as ever. It is no more eluded than it would be, ſould any man perfectly explain the making of a watch wheel, by ſiewing that it was the neceſſary reſult of the ſhape and hardneſs of the fites and drills and chizels employed, and the intenſity and direction of the forces by which thoſe tools were moved; and having done all this, ſhould ſay that he had accounted for the nice and ſuitable form of the wheel as a part of a watch. And, with reſpect to the ſubſequent oblate form of the planet ſet in rotation, the mechanical explanation of this is incompatible with the ſuppoſition that the revolution and rotation are the effects of one ſimple force. The oblate form, if acquired by rotation, requires primitive fluidity, which is incompatible with the operation of one ſimple ſorce as the primitive mover. There is no proof whatever that this Earth was originally fluid; it is not nearly ſo oblate as primitive ſluidity requires; yet its form is ſo nicely adjuſted to its rotation, that the thin film of water on it ĩs diſtributed with perfect uniformity. We are obliged to grant that a form has been originally given iĩt ſuitablæ to its deſtination, and we enjoy the advantages of this exquiſite adjuſt ment. I acknowledge that the inſluence of ſinal cauſes has been frequently and egregiouſly miſapplied, and that theſe ignorant and precipitate attempts to explain phenomena, or to account for them, and even ſometimes to authenticate them, have certainly obſtructed the progreſs of true ſcience. But what gift of God has not been thus abuſed? A true philoſopher will never be ſo regardleſs of logic as to adduce final cauſes as arguments for the reality of any fact; but neither will he have ſuch a horror at the appearances of wiſdom, as to ſiun looking at them. And we apprehend that unleſs ſome  Frigidus obſtiterit circum praæcordia ſanguis, it is not in any man's power to hinder himſelf from perceiving and wondering at them. Surely  To look thrò nature up to Naturè's God, cannot be an unpleaſant taſk to a heart endowed with an ordinary ſhare of ſenſibility; and the face of nature, expreſſing the Supreme Mind which gives animation to its features, is an object more pleaſing than the mere workings of blind matter and motion. But enough of thisWe ſhall cloſe this ſubject of planetary figures by ſlightly noticing, for the preſent, a conſequence of the oblate form perceptible in all the planets which turn round their axes; in the explanation of which the penetration of Newtons intellect is eminently conſpicuous. 610. In § 584, and ſeveral following paragraphs, we cxplained the eſſects ariſing ſfrom the inclination of the Moon's orbit round the Earth to the plane of the Earth's orbit round the Sun. We ſuw, for example, that when the interſoction of the two planes is in the line AB (ſig. 61.) of quadrature, the Moon is perpetually drawn out of that plane, and her path is continually bent down toward the ecliptic, during her moving along the ſemicircle A CB, and ſhe deſcribes another path A c, croſſing the ecliptic in b, nearer to A than B is. In the other half of her orbit, the ſame deviation is continued, and the Moon again croſſcs the ecliptic beſore ſie come to A, croſſes her laſt path near to f, and the ecliptic a third time at d, and ſo on continually. Hence ariſes the retrograde motion of the nodes of the lunar orbit. We ſmewed that this obtains, in a greater or leſs degree, in every poſition of the nodes, except when they are in the line of ſyzigy. What is true oſ one moon, would be true of any number: It would be true, were there a complete ring of moons ſurrounding the Earth, not adhering to one another. We ſaw that the inclination of the orbit is continually changing, being greateſt when the nodes are in the line of the ſyæigies, and ſmalleſt when they are in quadrature. Now, i? we apply this to a ring ſ moons, we ſhall find that it will never be a ring that is all in one plane, except when the nodes are in the ſyzigies, and at all other times will be warped, or out of ſhape. Nov, let the moons all cohere, and the ring become ſtiff; and let this happen when its nodes are in ſyigyIt will turn round without diſturbance of this ſort. But this poſition of the nodes of the ring ſoon changes, by the Sun's change of relative ſituation, and now all the derangements begin againm The ring can no longer gO out of ſhape or warp, becauſe we may ſuppoſe it inſlexible. But, as in the courſe of any one revolution of the Moon round the Earth, the inclination of the orbit would either be increaſed, on the whole, or diminiſhed, on the whole, and the nodes would, on the whole, recede, this effect muſt be obſerved in the ring. When the nodes are ſo ſituated that, in the courſe of one revolution of a ſingle Moon, the inclination will be more increaſed in ne part than it is diminiſhed in another, the oppoſite actions on the different parts of a coherent and inflexible ring will deſtroy each other, as far as they are equal, and the exceſs only will be perceived on the whole ring. Hence we can infer, with great conſidence, that from the time that the nodes of the ring are in ſyZigy to the time they are in quadrature, the inclination of the ring of moons will be continually diminiſhing; vill be leaſt of all when the Sun is in quadrature with the line of the nodes; and will increaſe again to a maximum, when the Sun again gets into the line of the nodes, that is, when the nodes are in the line of the ſyzigies. But the inertia of the ring will cauſe it to continue any motion that is accumulated in it till it be deſtroyed by contrary forces. Hence, the times of the maximum and minimum of inclination will be conſiderably different from what is now ſtated. This will be attended to by and by. For the ſame reaſon, the nodes of the ring will continually recede; and this retrograde motion will be moſt remarkable when the nodes are in quadrature, or the Sun in quadrature with the line oſ the nodes; and will gradually become leſs remarkable, as the nodes approach the line of the ſyzigies, where the retrograde motion avill be the leaſt poſſible, or rather ceaſes altogether. All theſe things may be diſtinctly perceſved, by ſteadily conſidering the manner of acting of the diſturbing force. This ſteady contemplation however is neceſſory, as ſome of the effects are very unexpected. lll Suppoſe now that this ring contracts in its dimenſions. The diſturbing force, and all its eſfects, muſt diminiſh in the ſame proportion as the diameter of the ring diminiſies. But they will continue the ſame in kind as before. The inclination will increaſe till the Sun comes into the' line of the nodes, and diminiſh till he gets into quadrature with them. Suppoſe the ring to contract till almoſt in contact with the Eartis ſurſace. The receſs of the nodes, inſtead of being almoſt three degrees in a month, will now be only three minutes, and the change of inclination in three months will now he only about five ſeconds. Suppoſe the ring to contract ſtill more, and to cohere with the Earth. This will mate a great change. The tendency of the ring to change its inclination, and to change its interſection with the ecliptic, ſtill continues. But it can352 not now produce the eſſect, without dragging with it the whole maſs of the Earth. But the Earth is at perſect liberty in empty ſpace, and being retained by nothing, yvields to every impulſe, and therefore yvields to this action of the ring. Now, there is ſuch a ring ſurrounding the Earth, having preciſely this tendency. The Earth may be conſfidered as a ſphere, on which there is ſpread a quantity of redundant matter which makes it ſpheroidal. The gravitation of this redundant matter to the Sun ſuſtains all thoſe diſturbing forces which act on the inflexible ring of moons; and it will he proved, in its proper place, that the eſſect in changing the poſition of the globe is  of what it would be, if all this redundant matter were accumulated on the equator. It will alſo appear that the force by which every particle of it is urged to or from the plane of the ecliptic, is as its diſtance ſrom that plane. Indeed, this appears already, becauſe all the diſturbing forces acting on the particles of this ring are ſimilar, both iæ direction and proportion, to thoſe which we ſhewed to inſluence the Moon in the ſimilar ſituations of her monthly courſe round the Earth. Similar effects will therefore be produced. Let us now ſee what thoſe eſſcts will beThe lunar nodes continually recede; ſo will the nodes of this equatoreal ring, that is, ſo will the nodes of the equator, or its interſection with the ecliptic. But the interſections of the equator with the ecliptic are what we call the Equinoctial Points. ILe plane oſ the Eartl's equator, being produced to the ſtarry heavens, interſects that ſeemingly eoncave ſphere in a great circle, which may be traced out among the ſtars, and marked on a celeſtial globe. Did the Eartis equator always keep the ſame poſition, this circle of the heavens would always paſs through the ſame ſtars, and cut the ecliptic in the ſame two oppoſite points. When the Sun comes to one of thoſe points, the Earth turning round under him, every point of its equator has him in the zenith in ſucceſſion; and all the inhabitants of the Earth ſee him riſe and ſet due eaſt and weſt, and have the day and night of the ſame length. But, in the courſe of a year, the action of the Sun on the protuberance of our equator deranges it from its former poſition, in ſuch a manner that each of its interſections with the ecliptic is a little to the weſtward of its former place in the ecliptic, ſo that the Sun comes to the interſection about 20' before he reaches the interſection of the preceding year. This anticipation of the equal diviſion of day and night is therefore called the PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES. The axis o diurnal revolution is perpendicular to the plane of the equator, and muſt thereſore change its poſition alſo. If the inclination oſ the equator to the ecliptic were always the ſame (234 degrees), the pole of the diurnal revolution of the heavens (that is, the point of the heavens in which the Earth's axis would meet the concave) would keep at the ſame diſtance of 233 degrees from the pole of the ecliptic, and would therefore always be found in the circumſerence of a circle, of which the pole of the ecliptic is the centre. The meridian which paſſes through the poles of the ecliptic and equator muſt always be perpendicular to the meridian which paſſes through the equinoctial points, and thereſore, as theſe ſhift to the weſtward, the pole of the equator muſt alſo thift to the weſtward, on the circumference of the circle above mentioned. But we have ſeen that the ring of redundant matter does not preſerve the ſame inclination to the ecliptic. It is moſt inclined to it when the Sun is in the nodes, and ſmalleſt when he is in quadrature with reſpect to them. Thereſore the obliquity of the equator and ecliptic ſhould be greateſt on the days of the equinoxes, and ſmalleſt when the Sun is in the ſolſtitial points. The Earths axis ſould twice in the year incline downward toward thè ecliptic, and twice, in the intervals, ſhould raiſe itſelf lii again to its greateſt elevation. Something greatly reſembling this ſeries of motions may be obſerved in a child's humming top, when ſet a ſpinning on its pivor. An equatoreal circle may be drawn on this top, and a circular hole, a little bigger than the top,; may be cut in a bit of ſtif paper. When the top is ſpinning very ſteadily, let the paper be held ſo that half of the top is above it, the equator almoſt touching the ſides of the holee. When the whirling motion abates, the top begins to ſtagger a little. Its equator no longer coincides with the rim oſ the hole in the paper, but interſects it in two oppoſite points. Theſe interſections will be obſerved to ſnift round the whole circumferenee of the hole, as the axis of the top veers round. The axis becomes continually more oblique, without any periods of recovering its former poſition, and, in this reſpect only the phenomena diſſer from thoſe of the preceſſion. It was aſfirmed that the obliquity of the equator is greateſt at the equinoxes, and ſmalleſt at the ſolſtices. This would be the caſe, did the redundant ring inſtantly attain the poſition which makes an equilibrium of action. But this cannot be; chicſly for this reaſon, that it muſt drag along with it the whole inſcribed ſphere. During the motion from the equinox to the next ſolſtice, the Earth's equator has been urged toward the ecliptic, and it muſt approach it with an accelerated motion. Suppoſe, at the inſtant of the ſolſtice, all action of the Sun to ceaſe; this motion of the terreſtrial globe would not ceaſe, but would go on for ever, equably. But the Sun's action continuing, and now tending to raiſe the equator again from the ecliptic, it checks the contrary motion of the globe, and, at length, annihilates it altogether; and then the eſſect oſ the elevating force begins to appear, and the equator riſes again from the ecliptic. When the Sun is in the equinox, the elevation of the equator ſhould be greateſt; but, as it arrived at this poſition with an accelerated motion, it continues to riſe (ith a retarded motion) till the continuance of the Sun's depreſſing force puts an end to this riſing; and now the eſfect of the depreſſing force begins to appear. For rheſe reaſons, it happens that the greateſt obliquity of ſhe equator to the ecliptic is not on the days of the e quinoxes, but about ſix weeks aſter, viæ. about the firſt of May and November; and the ſmalleſt obliquity is not at midſummmer and midwinter, but about the beginning of February and of Auguſt. And thus, ve ſind that the ſame principle of univerſal gravitation, which produces the elliptical motion oſf the planets, the inequalities of their ſatellites, and determines the ſiape oſ ſuch as turn round their axes, alſo explains this moſt remarkable motion, which had baſfled all the attempts of philoſophers to account fora motion, which ſeemed to the ancients to aſfec the whole hoſt of heaven; and when Copernicus ſiewed that it was only an appearance in the heavens, and proceeded from a real ſmall motion of the Earth's axis, it gave him more trouble to conceive this motion with diſtinctneſs, than all the others. All theſe thingsobvia conſpicimus, nubem pellente matheſi. 611I. Such ĩs the method which Sir Iſaac Newton, the ſagacious diſcoverer of this mechaniſm, has taken to give us a notion of it. Nothing can be more clear and familiar in genera. He has even ſubjected his explanation to the ſevere teſt of calculation. The forces are known, both in quantity and direction. Thereſore the eſſfects muſt be ſuch as legitimately flor from thoſe forces. When we conſider what a minute portion of the globe is acted upon, and how much inert matter is to be moved by the force which affects ſo ſmall a portion, ve muſt expect very feeble effects. All the change that the action of the Sun produces on the inclination of the equator amounts only to the ſraction of a ſecond, and is therefore quite inſenſiblee The change in the poſition of the equinoxes is more conſpicuous, becauſe it accumulates, amounting to about ꝗ annually, by Newtons calculation. We ſull take notice of this calculation at another time, and at preſent ſhall only obſerve that this motion of the equinox is but a ſmall part of the preceſſion actually obſerved. This is about 50 annually. It would thereſore ſeem that the theory and obſervation do not agree, and that the preceſſion of the equinoxes is by no means explained by it. 612. It muſt be remarked that we have only given an account of the eſfect reſulting from the unequal gravitation of the terreſtrial matter to the Sun. But it gravitates alſo to the Moon. Moreover, the inequality of this gravitation (on which inequality the diſturbance depends) is vaſtly greater. The Moon being almoſt 400 times nearer than the Sun, the gravitation  a pound of lunar matter is almoſt 646,000,000 times greater than to as much ſolar matte. When the calculation ĩs made from proper data, (in which Newton was conſiderably miſtaken) the effect of the lunar action muſũt very conſiderably exceed that of the Sun. He was miſtaken, in reſpect to the quantity oſf matter in the Sun and in the Moon. The tranſit of Venus, and the obſervations which have heen made on the tides, have 3il 3 li brought brought us much nearer the truth in both theſe reſpects. When the caleulation is mude on ſuch aſſumptions of the matter in the Sun and Moon as are beſt ſupported by obſervation, we find that the anmual prece ſion occaſioned by the Sun's action on the equatoreal protuberance li is about 147 or 15, and that produced by the Moon is abour 35. The preceſion really obſerved is about 50, and the agreement is abundantly exact. It muſt be farther remarkeq that this agreement is no longer inforred ſrom a due proportioning of the whole obſerved preceſſion between the Sun and the Moon, as we vere Formerly obliged o do; but ench ſhare is an independent thing, calcuhted vithout any reſerenee to the whole preceſſion. It is thus only that the phenomenon may be aſfirmed to be truly explained. 613,. Tor this demonſtration we are indebted to Dr Bradley.. His diſcovery of what is now calledthe 3vTaTioN of the Earths axis, gave us a preciſe meafure of the lunar action which removed every doubt. It therefore muſt be conſidered here. The action of the luminaries on the Emtlvs equator, by which the poſition of ĩt ĩs deranged, depends on the magnitude of the angle which the equator makes with the line joining the Earth with the diſturbing body. The Sun is never more than 235 degrees from the equator. But when the Moon's aſcending node ĩs in the vernal equinox, ſhe may deviate nearly 29 degrees from it. And when the node is io the autumnal equinoꝶ, ſie cannot go more than 17 NUTATION OF THE EARTHS AXIS. 59 degrees ſfrom it. Thus, the action of the Sun is, from year to year, the ſame. But as, in 19 years, the Moons nodes take all ſituations, the action of the Moon is very variable. It was one oſ the eſfects of this variation that Bradley diſcovered. While the Eurti's equator continued to open ſarther and ſarther ſrom the line joining the Earth with the Moon, the axis of the Earth was gradually depreſſed towards the ecliptic, and the diminution of its inclination at Iaſt amounted to 18 ſeconds. Dr Bradley ſaw this by its increaſng the declination of a ſtar properly ſituatedl. Aſter nine years, when the Moon was in ſuch a ſituation that ſhe never went more than 17° from the Earti's equator, the ſame ſtar had 18' leſs declimaion. G14. This change in the inclination of the Earths equator is accompanied with a change in the preceſſion of the equinoxes. This muſt increaſe as the equator is more open when viewed from the Moon. In the year in which the lunar aſcending node is in the vicinity of the vernal equinox, the preceſion is more than 587; and it is but 43 when the node is near the autumnal equinox. Theſe are very conſpicusus changes, and of eaſy obſervation, although long unnoticed, while blended with other anomalies equally unknown. Few diſcoveries in aſtronomy have been of more ſervice to the ſcience than this of the nutation, and that of aberration, both by Dr Bradley. For till they were known, there was an anomaly, which might ſometimes amount to 58/ (the ſum of nutation and aberration), and aſfected every motion and every obſervation. No theory of any planct could be freed from this uncertainty. But now, we can give to every phenomenon its own proper motions, with all the accuracy that moderm inſtruments can attainn. Without theſe two diſcoveries, we could not have brought the ſolution of the great nautical problem oſ the longitude to any degree oſ perfection, becauſe we could not render either the ſolar or lunar tables perfect. The changes in the poſition of the Earth's axis by nutation, and the concomitant equation of the preceſſion, by recurring in the moſ regular manner, have given us the moſt exact meaſure of the changes in the Moons action; and therefore gave an incontrovertible meaſure of her whole action, becauſe the proportion between the variation and the whole action was aitinly known. This not only completes the practical ſolution oſ the problem, but gives the moſt unqueſtionable proof of the ſoundneſs of the theory, ſhewing that the oblate form of the Earth is the cauſe of this nutation of its axis, and eſtabliſhing the univerſal and mutual attraction of all matter. It ſews vith vhat confidence we may proceed, in ſolloing this law of gravitation into all its conſequences, and that we may predict, without any chance of miſtake, what will be the effect of any combination of circumſtances that can be mentioned. And it ſurely ſhews, in the moſt conſpicuous manner, the penetration and ſagacity of Newton, who gave encouragement to a ſurmiſe ſo ſingular and ſo unlike al the uſual queſtions of progreſſive motion, even in all their varieties Yet this moſt recondite and delicate ſpeculation was one of his garly thoughts, and is one oſ the twelve propoſitions which he read to the Royal Society. 615. It muſt be acknowledged however that this manner of exhibiting the theory of the preceſſion of the equinoxes is not complete, or even accurate in the ſelection of the phyſical circumſtances on which the proof proceeds. It is merely a popular way of leading the mind to the view of actions, which are indeed of the ſame kind with thoſe actually concurring in the production of the eſſect. But it is not a narration of the real actions. Nor are the effccts of thoſe that are employed eſtimated according to their real manner of acting. The whole is rather a ſirewd gueſs, in which Newton's great penetration enabled him to catch at a very remote analogy between the libration of the Moon and the wavering motion of the Earth's axis. We are not in a condition in this part of the courſe to treat this queſtion in the proper manner. We muſt firſt underſtand the properties of the leyer as a mechanical power, and the operation of the connecting ſorces of firm or rigid bodies. What we have ſaid will ſuſice however for giving a diſtinct enough conception oſ the general eſfects of the action of remote bodies on a ſpheroidal planet turning round its axis. It IS  To thoſe who wiſh to ſtudy this ery curious and diſſiJult is ſcarcely neceſſary to add that the other planets cannot ſenſibly influence the motion of the Earths axis. Their accumulated action may add about ; of a ſecond to the annual preceſſion of the equinoxes. The planets Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, being vaſtly more oblate than the Earth, muſt be more expoſed to this derangement of the rotative motion. Jupiter anà Saturn, having ſo many ſatellites, which take various poſitions round the planet, the problem becomes immenſely complicated. But the ſmall inclination of the equator, and the great maſs of the plonet, and its very rapid rotation, muſt greatly diminiſh the eſfect we are now conſidering. Murs, being ſmall, turning ſlowly, and yet being very oblate, muſt ſuſtain a greater degree of this derangement; and if Mars had a ſatellite, we might expect ſuch a change in the poſition of his axis as ſould become very ſenſible, even at this diſtance. The ring of Saturn muſt be ſubject to ſimilar diſturbances, and muſt have a retrogradation of its interſection with ſius in the ſccond part of his Coſmographia, as the moſt perſpicuous of any that I am acquainted with. The elaborate performance of Mr Walmeſely, Euler, D Alembert, and La Grange, are acceſſible only to expert analyſts. The eſſay by T. Simpſon in the Philoſophical Tranſactions, Vol. L. is remarkable for ?ts ſimplicity, but, by employing the ſymbolical or algebraic analyſis, the ſtudent is not ſo much aided by the conſtant acconipariment of phyſical ideas, as in the geon⸗trical with the plane of the orbit. Had we nothing to conſider but the ring itſelf, it would be a very eaſy problem to determine the motion of its nodes. But the proximity, and the oblate form, of the planet, and, above all, the complicated action of the ſatellites, make it next to unminageable. Tt has not been attempted, that I know of. It may (I think) be deduced, from the Greenwich obſervations ſince 1750, that the nodes retreat on the orhit of Saturn ahout 34' or 36 in a century, and that their longitude in 1801 was 50 177 13' and 11f 177 13. This may be received as more exact than the determination given in art. 380. I ſaid, in art. 350, that we have ſeen too little of the motions of Ceres and Pallas to announce the elements of their theories with any thing like preciſion. But, ihat they may not be altogether omitted, the ſollowing may be received as of moſt authority. Ceres. Palluas. Mean diſtance - -- -- 2967231 2767123 Eccentricity to m. d. . -- 9,79 0,2463 Long. aphelion - ---  4.26.44 4.1.7. 1682,25 1681,22 Mean long. Jan. 180. - - IO.IL59 929.53 Period (ſydereal) in days Inelin. orbit - - ----1I0.3 34:39 Long. nodee - ----- 221.] 52227 Theſe bodies preſent ſome very ſingular circumſtances t0 our ſtudy; their diſtances and ꝑeriods being almoſt the ſame, and their longitudes at preſent differing very little. They differ conſiderably in eccentricity, the place of the node, and the inclimation of their orbits. They muſt be greatly diſturbed by each other, and by Jupiter, and it will be long before we ſhall obtain exact elements. With theſe obſervations I might conclude the diſcuſſion of the mechaniſm of the ſoler ſyſtem. The facts obſerved in the appearances of the comets are too few to authoriſ me to add any thing to what has been already ſaid concerning them. I refer to Newton's Principia for an account of that great philoſophers conjectures concerning the luminous train which generally attends them, acknowledging that I do not think theſe conjectures well ſupported by the eſtabliſhed laws of motion. Dr Winthorp has given, in the 57th volume of the Phil. Tranſ. a geometrical explanation of the mechaniſm of this phenomenon that is ingenious and elegant, but founded on a hypotheſis which I think inadmiſſible. x 616. No notice has yet been taken of the relations oſ the ſolar ſyſtem to the reſt of the viſible hoſt of heaven, and we have, hitherto, only conſidered the ſtarry heavens as aſſfording us a number of fixed points, by which we may eſtimate the motions of the bodies which compoſe our ſyſtem. It will not therefore be unacceptable ſhould I now Iay before the reader ſome reſlections, which naturally ariſe in the mind of any perſon who has heen much occupied in the preceding reſearches and ſpeculations, and which lead the thoughts into a ſcene of contemplation fa; exceeding in magnificence any thing yet laid before the reader. As they are of a miſcellaneous nature; and not ſuſceptible of much arrangement, I ſhall not pretend to mark them by any diſtinctions, but mall take them as they naturally offer themſelves. The fitneſs for almoſt eternal duration, ſo conſpicuous in the conſtitution of the ſolar ſyſtem, cannot but ſuggeſt the higheſt ideas of the intelligence of the Great Artiſt. No doubt theſe conceptions will be very obſcure, and very inadequate. But we ſhall find that the farther we advance in our knowledge of the phenomena, we ſhall ſee the more to admire, and the more numerous diſplays of great wiſdom, power, and kind intentions. It is not thereſore fearful ſuperſtition, but the cheerful anticipation of a good heart, which will make a ſtudent of nature even endeavour to form to himſelf ſtill higher notions of the attributes of the Divine Mind. He cannot do this in a direct manner. All he can do is to abſtract all notions of imperſection, whether in power, ſxill, or benevolent intentions, and he will ſuppoſe the Author of the univerſe to be infinitely powerful, wiſe and good. It is impoſſible to ſtop the flights of a ſpeculative mind, warmed by ſuch pleaſing notions. Such a mind will form to itſelf notions of what is moſt excellent in the deſigns which a perfect being may form, and it finds ĩtſelf under a ſort of neceſſity of believing that the Divine Mind will really form ſuch deſigns. This romantic wandering has given riſe to many ſtrange theological opinions. Not doubting (at leaſt in the moment of en;Z thuſiaſm) that we can judge of what is moſt excellent; e take it for granted that this creature of our heated imagination muſt alſo appear moſt excellent to the Supreme Mind. From this principle, theologians have ventured to lay down the laws by which God himſelf muſt regulate his actions. No wonder that, on ſo fanciful a foundation as our capacity to judge of what is moſt excellent, have been erected the moſt extravagant ſabrics, and that, in the exuberance of religious Zeal, the Author of all has been deſcribed as the moſt limited Agent in the univerſe, forced, in every action, to regulate himſelf by our poor and imperfect notions of what is excellent. We, who vaniſh from the ſight, at the diſtance oſf a neighbouring hillwhoſe greateſt works are inviſible from the Moonwhoſe whole habitation is not viſible to a ſpectator in Saturnſhall ſuch creatures pretend to judge of what is ſupremely excellent? Let us not pretend even to gueſs at the ſpeciſic laws by. which the conduct of the Divinity muſt be directed, except in ſo ſar as it has pleaſed him to declare them to us. We ſhall purſue the only ſafe road in this ſpeculation, if we endeavour to diſcover the laws by which Lis viſible and comprehenſible works are actually conducted. The more ve diſcover of theſe, the more do we find to ſill us with admiration and aſtoniſhment. The only ſpeculations in which we can indulge, without the continual danger of going aſtray, are thoſe which enlarge our notions of the ſcene on which it has pleaſed the Almighty to diſplay his perfections. This will be the undoubted eſſect of enlarging the ſield oſ our own obſervation. Aſter examining this lower world, and obſerving the nice and infinitely various adjuſtments of means to ends here below, we may extend our obſervation beyond this globe. Then ſhall we fimd that, as far as our knowledge can carry us, there is the ſame art, and the ſame production of good effects by beautiſully contrived means. We have lately diſcovered a new planet, far removed beyond the formerly imagined bounds of the planetary world. This diſoovery ſiews us that if there are thouſands more, they may be for ever hid from our eyes by their immenſe diſtance Yet rhere we find the ſame care taken that their condition ſhall be permanent. They are inſluenced by a foree directed to the Sun, and inverſely as the ſquare of the diſtance from him; and they deſeribe ellipſes. This planet is alſo aecompanied by ſatellites, doubtleſs rendte.ing to the primary and its inhabitants ſervices ſimilar to what this Earth receives from the Moon. All the comets of whoſe motions we have any preciſe knowledge, are eequally ſecured; none ſeems to deſeribe a parabola or hyperbola, ſo as to quit the Sun for ever. This mark of an intention that this noble fabric ſhall continue for ever to declare itſelf the work of an Almighty and Kind Hand, naturally carries forward the mind into that unbounded ſpace, of which our ſolar ſyſtem occupies ſo inconſiderable a portion. The mind revolts at the thought that this is ſtudded with ſtars for 10 other purpoſe than to aſſiſt the aſtronomer in his com3Z putations, and to furniſh a gay ſpectacle to the unthinking multitudlee We ſee nothing here below, or in our ſyſtem, which anſwers but one ſolitary purpoſe, and we require that a poſitive reaſon ſhall be given for limiting the Hoſt of Heaven to ſo ignoble an oſfice. As ſuch has not been given, we indulge ourſelves. in the pleaſing thought that the ſtars make a part of the univerſe, no leſs important in purpoſe than great in extent. We are juſtifiable, by what we in ſome meaſure underſtand, in ſuppoſing each ſtar a ſun, the centre of a planetary ſyſtem, full of enjoyment like our own, and ſo conſtructed as to laſt for ever. When the philoſopher inulgs nimſelf i in thoſe amazing, but pleaſing thoughts, he muſt regulate his ſpeculations by analogies and reſemblances to things more familiarly known to him. We muſt ſuppoſe thoſe ſyſtems to reſemble our. own, and that they are kept together by a gravitation in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances. For we know that this alone will inſure permanancy and good order. But in ſo doing, we extend the inſluence of gravity to diſtances inconceivably greater than any that we have yet conſidered, and we come at laſt to believe that gravitation is the bond of connexion which unites the moſt diſtant bodies of the viſible univerſe, rendering the whole one great machine, for ever operating the moſt magnificent purpoſes, worthy of its All- Perfect Creator. And, vhen we ſee that ſuch a connexion is neceſſary for this end, ve are apt to imagine that gravity is eſſential to or indiſpenſable in that matter that ĩs to be moulded into a world. But let not our ignorance miſlead us, nor let us meaſure every thing by that ſmall ſcale which God has enabled us to uſe, unleſs we can ſee ſome circumſtances of reſemblance in the appearances, which may huuiry e the application.  A frame of material mature of an xina cannõt be conceived by the mind, without ſuppoſing that the matter of which it conſiſts is influenced by ſome active powers, conſtituting the relations between its diſferent parts. Were there only the mere inort materials of æ world, it would hardly be better than a chaos, although moulded into ſymmetrical forms, unleſs the ſpirit of its author were to animate thoſe dead maſſes, ſo as to bring forth change, and order, and beauty7. Our illuſtrious Newl l ĩlli ton  For many of the thoughts in what follos, the reader is indebted to a very ingenious pamphlet, publiſied by Caddel & Davies in 1777, entitled, Thoughts on General Gravitation. It is much to be regreted that the author has not availed himſel? of the ſucceſsful reſearches of aſtronomers ſince that time, and proſecuted his excellent hints. If it be the performance of the perſon whom I ſuppoſe to be the author, I have ſuch an opinion of his acuteneſs, and of his juſtneſs of thought, that I take this opportunity of requeſting him to turn his attention afreſh to the ſubject. His advantages, from his preſent ſituation and connexions, are precious, and ſhould not be ton therefore ſays, with great propriety, that the buſineſs of a true philoſophy is to inveſtigate thoſe active powers, by which the courſe of natural events, to a very great extent at leaſt, is perpetually governed. Philoſophiſing with this view, he diſcovered the law of univerſal gravitation, and has thus given the brighteſt ſpecimen of the powers of human underſtanding.. The notion of ſomething like gravity ſeems inſeparable from our conception of any eſtabliſhed order of things. For unleſs ſome principle of general union obtain among the parts of matter, we can have no conception of the very firſt formation of the individuals of which a world may be compoſed. But general gravitation, or that power by which the diſtant bodies belonging to any ſyſtem are connected, and act on one another, does not ſeem ſo indiſpenſably neceſſary to the very being of the ſyſtem, as porticular gravity is to the being of any individual in it. We cannot diſcern any abſurdity in the ſuppoſition of bodies, ſuch as the planets, ſo ſituated with reſpect to another great body, ſuch as the Sun, as to receive from it ſuitable degrees of light and heat, without their having any tendency to approach the Sun, or each other. But then, how far ſuch limitation of gravity may be a poſſible thing, or how far its indeſinite extenſion in every direction may be involved in its very nature, we cannot tell, until we are able to conſider gravity as an effect, and to deduce the laws of its operation ſrom our knowledge oſ its cauſe. That the influence of gravity extends into the boundleſs void, to the greateſt aſſignable diſtance, ſeems to be almoſt the hinge of the Newtonian philoſophy. At leaſt, there is nothing that warrants any limit to its action. Father Boſcovich indeed ſhews that all the phenomena may be what they are, without this as a neceſſary confequence:. But hè is plainly induced to bring forward the limitation in order to avoid what has been thought a neceſſary conſequence of the indefinite extenſion of gravity; and what he oſfers is a mere poſſibility. Now, if ſuch extenſion of gravitation be inſeparable, in fact, from ĩts nature, then, if all the bodies of our ſyſtem are at reſt in abſolute ſpace, no ſooner does the inſluence of general gravitation go abroad into the ſyſtem, than all the planets and comets muſt begin to approach the Sun, and, in a very ſmall number of days, the whole of the ſolar ſyſtem muſt fan i into the Sun, and be deſtroyed. But, that this fair order may be preſerved, and accommodated to this extended influence of gravity, which appears ſo eſſential to the conſtitution of the ſeveral parts of the ſyſtem, we ſee a moſt fimple and eſfectual prevention, by the introduction of pręjectile forces, and progræſſine motion. For upon theſe being now combined, and properly adjuſted with the variation of gravity, the planets are made to revolve round the Sun in ſtated courſes, by which their continual approach to the Sun and to one another is prevented, and the adjuſtment is made with ſuch exquiſite propriety, that the perfect ori der of things is almoſt unchangeablee. This adjuſtment is no leſs maniſeſt in the ſubordinate ſyſtems of a primary planet and its ſatellites, which are not only regular in their own orbital motions, but are the conſtant attendants of their primaries in their revolution round the Sun. In this view of the ſubject, foraſmuch as gravity ſeems eſſential to the conſtitution of all the great bodies of the ſyſtem, and in ſo far as its indefinite extenſion may be inſeparable from its nature, it appears that periodical motion muſt be neceſſary for the permanency and order of every ſyſtem of worlds whatever. But here a thought is ſuggeſted which obviouſly leads to a new and a very grand conception of the univerſe: If periodical motion be thus neceſſary for the preſervation of a ſmall aſemblage of bodies, and if Newton's law preſent to us the whole hoſt of heaven as one great aſſemblage affected by gravitation, ve muſt ſtill have recourſe to periodical motion, in order to ſecure the eſtabliſhment of this grand univerſal ſyſtem. For if there be no bounds to the inſluence of gravitation, and if all the ſtars be ſo many ſuns, the centres of as many ſyſtems (as is moſt reaſonable to believe) the immenſity of their diſtance cannot ſatisſfy us for their being long ale to remain in any ſettled order. Thoſe that are ſituated toards the confines of this magnificent creation muſt forſuke their ſtations, and, with an approach, continually ral gravitation, and, aſter a ſeries of ages, the whole glory of nature muſt end in a univerſal wreck. As the ſyſtem of Jupiter and his ſatellites is but an epſtome of the great ſolar ſyſtem to which he belongs, may not this, in its turn, be a faint repreſentation of that grand ſyſtem of the univerſe, round whoſe centre this Sun, with his attending planets, and an inconceiveable multitude of like ſyſtems, do in reality revolve according to the law of gravitation? Now, will our anticipation of diſorder and ruin be changed into the contemplation of a countleſs number oſ nicely adjuſted motions, all proclaiming the ſuſtaining hand of God. This is indeed a grand, and almoſt overpowering thought; yet juſtified both by reaſon and analogy. The grandeur however of this univerſal ſyſtem only opens upon us by degrees. If it reſemble our ſolar ſyſtem in conſtruction, vhat an inconceivable diſplay of creation is ſuggeſted, when we turn our thoughts towards that place which the motions of ſo many revolving ſyſtems are made to reſpect Here may be an unthought of univerſe oſ itſelf, an example of material creation, which muſt individually exceed all the other parts, though addcd into one amount. As our Sun is almoſt four thouſand times bigger than all his attendants put together, it is not unreaſonable to ſuppoſe the ſame thing here. It is not neceſſary that this central body ſhould be viſiblee. The great uſe of it is not to illuminate, but to govern the motions of all the reſt. We know, however, that the exiſtence of ſuch a central body is not neceſſary. Two bodies, although not very unequal, mæy be projected with ſuch velocities, and in ſuch directions, that they will revolve for ever round their common centre of poſition and gravitation. But ſuch a ſyſtem could hardly maintain any regulatity of motion when a third body is added.. It may indeed be ſaid that the ſame tranſcendent wiſdom, which has ſo exquiſitely adapted all the circumſtances of our ſyſtem, may ſo adjut the motions of an immenſe number of bodies, that their diſturbing actions ſhall accurately compenſate each other. But ſtill, the Beautiſul ſimplicity that is manifeſt in what we ſee and underſtand, ſeems to warrant a like ſimplicity in this great ſyſtem, and therefore renders the exiſtence of ſuch a great central Regulator of the movements of all, the moſt probable ſuppoſition. Sober reaſon will not be diſpoſed to revolt at ſo glerious an extenſion of the works of God, however much it may overpower our feeble conceptions. Nay this analogy acquires additional welght and authority even from the tranſcendent nature of the univerſe to which it directs our thoughts. Nothing leſs magnificent ſeems ſuitable to a Being of infinite perfections. But we are not left to mere conjecture in ſupport of this conception of a great univerſe, connected by mutual powers. There are circumſtances of analogy which tend greatly to perſuade us of the reality of our conjecturecircumſtances which ſeem to indicate a connexion among the moſt diſtant objects of the creation viſible from our habitation. The light by which the ſixed ſtars are ſeen is the ſame with that by which we behold our Sun and his attending planets. It moves with the ſame velocity, as we diſcover by comparing the aberration of the ſixed ſtars with the eclipſes of Jupiters ſatellites. ſt is reſracted and reſlected according to the ſame laws. It conſiſts of the ſame colours. No opinion can be formed therefore oſ the ſolar light, which muſt not alſo be adopted with reſpect to the light of the fixed ſtars. The medium of viſion muſt be acted on in the ſame manner by both, whether we ſuppoſe it the undulation of an æther, or the emiſſion of matter from the luminous body. In either caſe, a mechanical connexion obtains between thoſe bodies, however diſtant, and our ſyſtem. Such a connexion in mechahical properties induces us to ſuppoſe that gravitation, which we know reaches to a diſtance which exeeeds all our diſtinct conceptions, extends alſo to the fſixed ſtars. : lll If this be really the caſe, motion muſt enſue, even in producing the final ruin oſ the viſible univerſe; and peTiodic motion is indiſpenſably neceſſary for its permanency. If all the ſixed ſtars, and our Sun, were equal, and placed at equal diſtances, in the angles of regular ſolids, their mutual ruinous approach could hardly be perceived. For in every moment, they would ſlill have the ſame relative poſitions, and an increaſle oſ brightneſs is all that could enſue after many ages. But if they were irregularly placed, and unequal, their relative poſitions would change, with an accelerated motion, and this change might become ſenſible aſter a long courſe of ages. If they have periodical motions, ſuited to the permanency of the grand ſyſtem of the univerſe, the changes of place may be much more ſenſible; and if we ſuppoſe that their diſference in brilliancy is owing to the diſſerences in their diſtance from us, we may expect that theſe changes will be moſt ſenſible in the brighteſt ſlars. Facts are not wanting to prove that ſuch changes really obtain in the relative poſitions oſ the fixed ſtars. This was ſirſt obſerved by that great aſtronomer, mathematician and philoſopher, Dr Halley He found, aſter comparing the obſervations of Ariſtillus, Timochares and Ptolemy with thoſe of our days, that ſeveral of the brighter ſtars had changed their ſituation remarkably (See Phil. Tranſ.. N° 255.) Aldebaran has moved to the ſouth about 35. Syrius has moved ſouth about 42', and Arcturus, alſo to the ſouth, about 335 The eaſtern ſhoulder of Orion has moved northward about 6. Obſervations in modern times ſhiew that Arcturus has moved in 78 years about 3'3. This is a very ſenſible quantity, and is eaſily obſerved, by means of the ſmall ſtar b in its immediate neighbourhood. (ee Phil. Tranſ. LXIII. alſo 1748.; and Mem. Par. 1755.) Syrius in like manner increaſes its latitude about 2' in a century (Mem. Par. 1758.) Aldebaran moves very irregularly. The bright ſtar in Aquila has changed its latitude 36' ſince the time of Ptolemy, and 3' ſince the time of Tycho. This is eaſily ſeen by its continual ſeparation from the ſmall ſtarã. Theſe motions ſeem to indicate a motion in our ſyſtem. Moſt of the ſtars have moved toward the ſouth. The ſtars in the northern quarters ſeem to widen their relative poſitions, while thoſe in the ſouth ſeem to contract their diſtances. Dr Herſchel thinks that a compariſon of all theſe changes indicates a motion of our Sun with his attending planets toward the conſtellation Hercules (Phil. Tranſ. 1788.0 A learned and ingenious ſriend thinks it not impoſſible to diſcover this motion by means of the aberration of the ſtars. Suppoſe the Sun and planets to be moving toward the Pole-ſtar, and that his motion is 100 times greater than that of the Earth in her orbit (a very moderate ſuppoſition, when we compare the orbital motion of the Earth with that of the Moon), every equatoreal ſtar will appear about 34 north of its true place, vhen viewed through a common teleſcope, but only 23 when viewed through a teleſcope ſilled with water. The declination of every ſuch ſtar will be 1v/ leſs through a water teleſcope than through a common teleſcope. Stars out of the equator will have their declination diminiſhed by a water teleſcope 1I' X coſ. declin. In 1761, the ingenious Mr Lambert publiſhed his Letters on Coſmology (in the German language), in which he has conſidered this ſubject with much attention and ingenuity. He treats of the motion of the Sun round a central bod yof ſyſtems of ſyſtems, or milky ways, carried round an immenſe bodyofſ ſyſtems of ſuch galaxies —and of the great central body oſ the univerſe. In theſe ſpeculations he inſers much from final cauſes, and is often ingeniouſly romanticc. But Lambert was alſo a true inductive philoſopher, and makes no aſſertion with conſidence that is not ſupported hy good analogies. The rotation of the Sun is a ſtrong ground of belief to Mr Lambort that he has alſo a progreſſive motion. Tobias Mayer oſ Gottingen ſpeaks in the ſame manner, in ſome of his diſſertations publiſhed after his death by Lichtenberg. See alſo Baill?s Account of Modern Aſtronomy, Vol. II. 664, 689. Mayer of Manheim has alſo publiſied thoughts to this eſſect. See Comment. Acad. Palatin. IV. Prevoſt, Mem. Berlin 1781. Mitchel Phil. Tranſ. LVII. 252. . j The gravitation to the ſixed ſtars can produce no ſenſible diturbances of the motions of our ſyſtem. This gravitation muſt be inconceivably minute, by reaſon of the immenſe diſtance; and, as they are in all quarters of the heavens, they will nearly compenſate each others action; and the extent of our ſyſtem being but as a point, in compariſon with the diſtance of the neareſt ftar, the gravitation to that ſtar in all the parts of our ſyſtem muſt be ſo nearly equal and parallel, that (98.) no ſenſible derangement can be effected, even aſter ages of ages. As a further circumſtance of analogy with a periodical motion in the whole viſible univerſe, we may adduce the remarkable periodical changes of brilliancy that are ubſerved in many of the fixed ſtars. This was ſirſt obſerved (I think) in a ſtar of the conſtellation Hydra. Montanari had obſerved it in 1670, and leſt ſome account of it in his papers, which Maraldi took notice of. Maraldi, aſter long ſearching in vain, found it in 1704, and ſaw ſeveral alternations of its brightneſs and dimneſs, but without being able to aſcertain their period. It was long loſt again, till Mr Edward Pigot found it in 1786. Ie determined iĩts period to be 404 days. Since that time, this gentleman, and his ſather, with a Mr Goodricke, have given more attention to this department oſ aſtronomy, and their example has been followed by other aſtronomerss. Mr Pigot has given us, in Phil. Tranſ. 1786, a liſt of a great number of ſtars (above ſiftv) in which ſuch periodical changes have been obſerved, and has given particular determinations of twelve or thirteen, aſcertaining their periods with preciſion. The whole is followed by ſome very curious reſlections. Of theſe ſtars, one of the moſt remarkable is x Cygni, having a period of 4155 doys, See Phil. Trans. NC 343.; alſo Mem. Acad. Paris, 1719, 1759. Another remarkable ſtar is o Ceti, having a period of 334 days. (See Ihil. Tranſ. N 134. 346. Mem. Par. 1719.) There is another ſucli, cloſe to  Cygni. The double ſtar I Lyræ exhibits very ſingular appearances, the ſouthernmoſt ſometimes appearing double, ſchoſf of Berlin is poſitive that it has planets moving round it. Some of thoſe ſtars have very ſhort periods. The moſt remarkable is Algol, in the head of Meduſa. Its period is 20 200 49, in which its changes are very irregular, although perfectly alike in every period. Its ordinary appearance is that of a ſtar of the ſecond magnitude. It ſuffers, for about 35 hours, a reduction to the appearance of a ſtar of the fourth or fifth magnitude. Mr Goodricke obſerved ſimilar variations in the ſtar  Cephei. During 59 8' 379 it ĩs a ſtar of the fifth magnitude. For 14 134 it is of the ſecond or third. It diminiſhes during 14 180; remains 36 hours in its fainteſt ſtate, and regains its brilliancy in 133 more (Phil. Tranſ. 1786.) Mr Pigot obſerved the ſtar » Antinoi to maintain ĩts utmoſt brilliancy during 44 hours, and then gradually to fade during 62 hours, and, after remaining 30 hours of the fifth magnitude, it regains its greateſt brilliancy in 36 hours (Phil. Tranſ. 1786.) Whatever may be the cauſe of theſe alternations, they are ſurely very analagous to what we obſerve in our ſyſtem, the individuals of which, by varying their poſitions, and turning their different ſides toward us, exhibit alternations of a ſimilar kind; as, for example, the apparition and diſparition of Saturns ring.. Theſe circumſtances, therefore, encourage us to ſuppoſe a ſimilarisy of conſtitution in our ſyſtem to the reſt of the heavenly Hoſt, and render it more probable that all are connected by one general bond, and are regulated by ſimilar lIaws. Nothing is ſo likely for conſtituting this connexion as gravitation, and its combination with projectile force and periodic motion tends to ſecure the permanency oſ the whole. But I muſt at the ſame time obſerve that ſuch appearances in the heavens make it evident that, notwithſtanding the wiſe proviſion made for maintaining that order and utility which we behold in our ſyſtem, the day may come  when the heavens ſhall paſs away like a  ſcroll that is folded up, when the ſtars in heaven ſhall t fail, and the Sun ſhall cæaſe to give his light.. The ſuſtaining hand of God is ſtill neceſſũry, and the preſent order and harmony which he has enabled us to underſtand and to admire, is wholly dependent on his will, and its duration is one of the unſearchable meaſures of his providence. What is become of that dazæling ſtar, ſurpaſing Venus in brightneſs, which ſhone out all at once in November 1572, and determined Tycho Brahẽ tò become an aſtronomer? He did not Tee it at half an hour paſt five, as he was croſſing ſome ſields in going to his laboratory. But, returning about ten, he came to a crowd of country folks who were ſtaring at ſomething behind him. Looking round, he ſaw this wonderful object. It was ſo bright that his ſtaf had a ſhadow. It was of a dazzling white, with a little oſf a bluiſh tinge. In this ſtate it continued about three weeks, and then be4B came yellowiſh and leſs brilliant. Its brilliancy diminiſhed faſt after this, and it became more ruddy, like glowing embers. Gradually ſading, it was wholly inviſible aſter ſiſteen months. A ſimilar phenomenon is ſaid to have cauſed Hipparchus to devote himſelf to aſtronomy, and to his vaſt project of a catalogue of the ſtars, that poſterity might know whether any changes happened in the heavens. And, in 1604, another ſuch phenomenon, though much leſs remarkable, engaged for ſome time the attention of aſtronomers. Nor are theſe all the examples of the periſhable nature of the heavenly bodies. Several ſtars in the catalogues of Hipparchus, of Ulugh Beigh, of Tycho Brahẽ, and even of Flamſtead, are no more to be ſeen. They are gone, and have left no trace. Should we now turn our eyes to objects that are nearer us, we ſhall ſee the ſame marks of change. When the Moon is viewed through a good teleſcope, magnifying about 150 times, we ſee her whole ſurface occupied by volcanir craters; ſome of them of prodigious magnirude. Some of them give the moſt unqueſtionable marks of ſeveral ſucceſſive eruptions, each deſtroying in part the crater oſ a former eruption. The precipitous and craggy appearance of the brims of thoſe craters is preciſely ſuch as would be produced by the ejection of rocky matter. In ſhort, it is impoſſible, after ſuch a view of the Moon, to doubt of her being greatly ehanged s from her primitive ſt⸗ ate. Even the Sun himſelf, the ſource of light, and heat, and life, to the whole ſyſtem, is not free from ſuch changes. If we now look round us, and examine with judicious attention our own habitation, we ſee the moſt incontrovertible marks oſ great and general changes over the whole face of the Earth. Beſides the ſlow degradation by the action of the winds and rains, by which the ſoil is gradually waſhed away ſrom the high lands, and carried by the rivers into the bed of the ocean, leaving the Alpine ſummits ſtripped to the very bone, we cannot ſce the face of any rock or erag, or any deep gully, which does not poiut out much more remarkable changes. Theſe are not conſined to ſuch as are plainly owing to the horrid operations of volcanoes, but are univerſal. Except a few: mountains, where we cannot confidently ſay that they are factitious, and which for no better reaſon we call primitive, there is nothing to be ſeen but ruins and convulſions. What is now an elevated mountain has moſt evidently been at the bottom of the ſea, and, previous to its being there, has been habitable ſurface. It is very true that all our knowledge on this ſubject is merely ſuperſicia. The higheſt mountains, and deepeſt excavations, do not bear ſo great a proportion to the globe as the thickneſs of paper that covers a terreſtrial globe bears to the hulk of that philoſophical toy We have no authority from any thing that we have ſeen, for forming any judgement concerning the internal conſtitution of the Earth. But we ſee enough to convince us that it bears no marks of eternal duration, or of exiſting as it is, by its own energy. No lall is periſiableall requires the ſuſtaining hand of God, and is ſubject to the unſearchable deſigns of its Author and Preſerver. There is yet another claſs of objects in the heavens, 6ſ which I have taken no notice:. They are called NEBULE, Or NERULOUS STARS. They have not the ſparkling brilliancy that diſtinguiſhes the ſtars, and they are of a ſenſible dimeter, and a determinate ſiape. Many of them, when viewed through teleſcopes, are cluſters of ſtars, which the naked eye cannot diſtinguiſa. The moſt remarkable of theſe is in the conſtellation Cancer, and is Eknown by the name Præſepe. Ptolemy mentions it, and another in the right eye of Sagittarius. Another may be ſeen in the head of Orion. Many ſmall cluſters have been diſcovered by the help of glaſſles. The whole galaxy is nothing elſe. But there is another kind, in which the ſineſt teleſcopes have diſcovered no cluſtering ſtars. Moſt õſ them have a ſtar in or near the middle, ſurrounded with a pale light, which is brighteſt in the middle, and grows more faint toward the circumſerence. This circumſerence is diſtinct, or well defſined, and is not always round. One or two nebulæ have the form of a luminous diſ©, with a hole in the middle like a milſtone. They are of various colours, white, yellow, roſe-coloured, &c. Dr Herſchel, cal Tranſactions, has given us the places of a vaſt number of nebulæ, with curious deſcriptions of their peculiar appearances, and a ſeries of moſt ingenious and intereſling reſlections on their nature and conſtitution. His Thoughts on the Structure of the Hecavens are ſull of moſt curious ſpeculation, and ſould be read by every philoſopher. When we reſiect that theſe ſingular objels are not, like the ſixed ſtars, briliiant points, which become ſmaller when ſeen through finer teleſcopes, but have a ſenſible, and meaſureable diameter, ſometimes exceeding 2'; and when we alſo recollect that a ball of 200,090,00 miles inſęiameter, which would fill the whole orbit of the Erth round the Sun, would not ſubtend an angle of two ſeconds when taken to the neareſt ſixed ſtar, what muſt we think of theſe nebulæ? One oſ them is certainly ſome thouſands of times bigger than the Earths orbit. Although our fineſt teleſcopes cannot ſeparate it into ſtars, it is ſtill probable that it is a cluſter. It is not unreaſonable to think, with Dr Herſchel, that this ebject, which requires a teleſcope to find it out, ill appear to a ſpectator in its centre much the ſame as the viſible heavens do to us, and that this ſtarry heaven, which, to us, appears ſo magniſicent, is but a nebulous ſtar to a ſpectator placed in that nebula. The human mind is almoſt overpowered by ſuch a thought. When the ſoul is ſilled with ſuch conceptions of the extent of created nature, we can ſcarcely avoid exclaiming,  Lord, what then is man that thou arnt  mindful of him Under ſuch impreſſions, David ſirunk into nothing, and feared that he ſhould be forgotten amongſt ſo many great objects of the Divine attention. His comfort, and ground of relief from this dejecting thought, are remarkablee  But,, ſays he,  thou haſt made man but a little lower than the angels,  and haſt crowned him with glory and honour. David corrected himſelf, by calling to mind how high he ſtood in the ſcale of God's works. He recogniſed his own divine original, and his alliance to the Author of all. Now, cheered, and delighted, he cries out,  Lord, how glorious is thy name THERE remains yet another phenomenon, which is very evidently connected with the mechaniſm of the ſoIar ſyſtem, and is in itſel? both curious and important. I mean the tides of our ocean. Although it appears improper to call this an aſtronomical phenomenon, yet, as it is moſt evidently connected with the poſition of the Sun and Moon, we muſt attribute this connexion in fact to a natural connexion in the way of cauſe and effect. Of the Tides. 617. It is a very remarkable operation of nature that we obſerve on the ſhores of the ocean, when, in the calmeſt weather, and moſt ſerene ſcy, the vaſt body of undating all the ſlat ſands, riſing to a conſiderable height, and then as gradually retiring again to the bed of the ocean; and all this without the appearance of any cauſe to impel the waters to our ſhores, and again to draw them off. Twice every day is this repeatedl. In many places, this motion of the waters is even tremendous, the ſea advancing, even in the calmeſt weather, with a high ſurge, rolling along the ſlats with reſiſtleſs violence, and riſing to the height oſ many fathoms. In the bay of Fundy, it comes on with a prodigious noiſe, in one vaſt wave, that is ſeen thirty miles oſf; and the waters riſe 100 and 120 feet in the harbour oſ Annapolis-Royal. At the mouth of the Severn, the ſlood alſo comes up in one head, about ten feet high, bringing certain deſtruction to any ſmall craſt that has been unfortunately left by the ebbing waters on the ſlats; and as it paſſes the mouth of the Avon, it ſends up that ſmall river a vaſt body of water, riſing ſorty or ſiſty feet at Briſtol. Such an appearance forcibly calls the attention of thinking men, and excites the greateſt curioſity to diſcover the cauſe. Accordingly, it has been the object of reſearch to all who would be thought philoſophers. We Aind very little however on the ſubject in the writings of the Greeks. The Greeks indeed had no opportunity of knowing much about the ebbing and ſlowing of the ſea, as this phenomenon is ſcarcely perceptible on the ſhores of the Mediterranean and its adjoining ſeas. The Perſian expedition of Alexander gave them the only opportunity they ever had, and his army was aſtoniſhed at finding the ſiips leſt on the dry flats when the ſea re tired. Yet Alexander's preceptor Ariſtotle, the prince of Greek philoſophers, ſhews little curioſity about the tides, and is contented with barely mentioning them, and ſaying that the tides are moſt remarkable in great ſeass. 618. When we ſearch aſter the cauſe of any recurring event, we naturally look about for recurring conconitant circumſtances; and when we find any that generally accompany it, we cannot help inferring ſome connexion. All nations ſeem to have remarked that the flood-tide always comes on our coaſls as the Moon moves acroſes the heavens, and comes to its greateſt height when the Moon is in one particular poſition, generally in the Touth-weſt. They have alſo remarked that the tides are moſt remarkable about the time of new Moon, and become more moderate by degrees every day, as the Moon draws near the quadrature, aſter which they gradually increaſe till about the time of full Moon, when they are nearly of their greateſt height. They now leſſen every day as they did beſore, and are loweſt about the laſt quadrature, aſter which they increaſe daily, and, at the next new Moon are a third time at the higheſt. Theſe circumſtances of concomitancy have been noticed by all nations, even the moſt uncultivated; and all ſeem to have concurred in aſcribing the ebbing and ſlowing of the ſea to the Moon, as the eſſicient cauſe, or, at leaſt, as the occaſion, of this phenomenon, although without any comprehenſion, and oſten without any thought, in what manner, or by what powers of nature, this or that poſition of the Moon ſhould be accompanied by the tide of ſlood or of ebb. Although this accompaniment has been every where remarked, it is liable to ſo many and ſo great irregularities, by winds, by freſhes, by the change of ſeaſons, and other cauſes, that hardly any two ſucceeding tides are obſerved to correſpond with a preciſe poſition of the Moon. The only way therefore to acquire a knowledge of the connexion that may be uſeſul, either to the philoſopher or to the citizen, is to multiply obſervations to ſuch a number, that every ſource of irregularity may have its period of operation, and be diſcovered by the return of the periodl. The inhabitants oſ the ſea-coaſts, and particularly the ſiſhermen, were moſt anxiouſly intereſted in this reſearch. 619. Accordingly, it was not long aſter the conqueſts of the Romans had given them poſſeſſion of the coaſts oſ the ocean, beſore they learned the chicf circumſtances or laws according to which the phenomena of the tides proceed. Pliny ſays that they had their ſource in the Sun and the Moon. It had been inferred from the gradual change oſ the tides between new Moon and the quadrature, that the Sun was not unconcerned in the operation. Pytheas, a Greek merchant, and no mean philoſopher, reſident at Marſeilles, the oldeſt Grecian colony, had often been in Britain, at the tin mines in Cornwall and iĩts ad4C jacent iſlands. He had obſerved the phenomena with great ſagacity, and had collected the obſervations of the natives. Plutarch and Pliny mention theſe obſervations of Pytheas, ſome of them very delicate, and, the whole taken together, containing almoſt all that was known of the ſubject, till the diſcoveries of Sir Iſaac Newton taught the philoſophers what to look for in their inquiries into the nature oſ the tides, and how to claſs the phenomena. Pytheas had not only obſerved that the tides gradually abated from the times of new and full Moon to the time oſ the quadratures, and then increaſed again, but had alſo remarked that this vulgar obſervation was not exact, but that the greateſt tide was always two days after new or full Moon, and the ſmalleſt was as long after the quadratures. He alſo corrected the common obſervation of the tides falling later every day, by obſerving that this retardation of the tides was much greater when the Moon was in quadrature than when new or full. The tide-day, about the time of new and full Moon, is really ſhorter by 50 than at the time oſ her quadrature. 620. This variation in the interval of the tides ĩs called the PRIMING or the LAGGING of the tides, according as we reſer them to lunar or ſolar time. Pytheas probably leamed much of this nicety of obſervation from the Corniſh fiſnermen. By ſſlians accounts, they had nets extended along ſhore for ſeveral miles, and were therefore much intereſted in this matter. 621. Many obſervations on the ſeries of phenomena which completes a period of the tides are to be found in the books of hydrography, and the inſtructions for mariners, to whom the exact knowledge of the courſe of the tides is of the utmoſt importance. But we never had any good collection of obſervations, from which the laws of their progreſs could be learned, till the Academy of Paris procured an order from government to the oſſicers at the ports of Breſt and Rochefort, to keep a regiſter of all the phenomena, and report it to the Academy. A regiſter of obſervations was accordingly continued for ſix years, without interruption, at both ports, and the obſervations were publiſhed, forming the moſt complete ſeries that is to be met with in any department of ſcience, aſtronomy alone excepted. The younger Caſſini undertook the examination oſ theſe regiſters, in order to deduce from them the general laws of the tides. This taſk he executed with conſiderable ſucceſs; and the general rules which he has given contain a much better arrangement of all the phenomena, their periods and changes, than any thing that had yet appeared. Indeed there had ſcarcely any thing been added to the vague experience of illiterate pilots and ſiſhermen, except two diſſertations by Wallis and Ilamitead, publiſhed in the Philoſophical Tranſactions. 622. It is not likely, notwithſtanding this excellent collection of obſervations, that our knowledge would have proceeded much farther, had not Newton demonſtrated a ſeries of phenomena perſectly reſembling the tides reſulted from the mutual attraction of all matter. Theſe conſequences pointed out to thoſe intereſted in the knowledge of the tides what viciſſitudes or changes to look forwhat to look for as the natural or regular ſeries what they are to confider as mere anomaliewhat periods to expect in the diſerent variationsand whether there are not periods which comprehend the more obvious periods oſ the tides, diſtinguiſhing one period from another. As ſoon as this clue was obtained, every thing was laid open, and without it, the labyrinth was almoſt inextricable; for in the variations of the tides there are periods in which the changes are very conſiderable; and theſe periods continually eroſs each other, ſo that a tide which ſhould be great, conſidered as a certain tide of one period, ſhould be ſmall, conſidered as a certain tide of another periodc. When it arrives, ĩt is neither a great nor a ſmall tide, but it prevents both periods from oſfering themſelves to the mere obſerver, The tides afford a very ſtrong example of the great importance oſ a theory for directing even our obſervations. Aided by the Newtonũan theory, we have diſcovered many periods, in which the tides ſuſſer gradual changes, both in their hour and in their height, which commonly are ſo implicated with one another, that they never would have been diſcovered without this monitor, whereas now, we can predict them all. 623. The phenomena oſ the tides are, in general, the following. li 1. The waters oſ the ocean riſe, from a medium height to that of high water, and again ebb away from the ſhores, ſalling nearly as much below that medium ſtate, and then riſe again in a ſucceeding tide of flood, and again make high water. The interval between two ſucceeding high waters is about 12 25, the half of the time of the Moons daily circuit round the Earth, ſo that we have two tides of ſlood and two ebb tides in every 240 55. This is the ſhorteſt period of phenomena obſerved in the tides. The gradual ſubſidence of the waters is ſuch that the diminutions of the height are nearly as the ſquares of the times ſfrom high water. The ſame may be ſaid of the ſubſequent riſe of the waters in the next ſlood. The time of low water is nearly half way between the two hours oſ high vater; not indeed exactly, it being obſerved at DBreſt and Rochefort that the ſlood tide commonly takes ten minutes leſs than the ebb tide. 62. As the diſferent phenomena of the tides are chieſly diſtinguiſhable by the periods, or intervals of time in which they recur, it will be convenient to mark thoſe periods by different names. Thereſore, let the time of the apparent diurnal revolution of the Moon, viz. 24' 5, be called A LuUNAR DAY, and the 24th part of iĩt be called A LUNAR HOUR. To this interval almoſt all the viciſſitudes of the tides are moſt conveniently referredl. Let the name TIDE DAY be given to the interval between two high waters, or two low waters, ſucceeding each other val comprehends two complete tides, one of the full ſeas happening when the Moon is above the horizon, and the next, when ſhe is under the horizon. We ſhall alſo ſind it convenient to diſtinguiſh theſe tides, by calling the ſfirſt the SUPERIOR TIDE, and the other the INFERIOR TIDE. At new Moon they may be called the Morning and Evening tides. 625. 2. It is not only obſerved that we always have high water when the Moon is on ſome particular point of the compaſs (. W. nearly) but alſo that the height of full ſea from day to day has an evident reference to the phaſes of the Moon. At Breſt, the higheſt tide is always about a day and a half after ſull or change. If it ſould happen that high water falls at the very time of new or full Moon, the third full ſea after that one is the higheſt of all. This is called the SPRING-TIDE. Each ſucceeding full ſea is leſs than the preceding, till we come to the third full ſea after the Moon's quadraturee. This is the Ioweſt tide of all, and it is called NEAP-TIDE. After this, the tides again increaſe, till the next full or new Moon, the third aſter which is again the greateſt tide. 626. The higher the tide of flood riſes, the lower does the ebb tide generally ſink on that day. The total magnitude of the tide is eſtimated by taking the diſference between high and low water. As this is continually varying, the beſt way of computing its magnitude ſeems to be, to take the half ſum of two ſucceeding tides. This muſt always give us a mean value ſor the tide whoſe full ſea was in the middle. The medium ſpring-tide at Breſt is about nineteen ſeet, and the neap-tide is about nine. ] Here then we have a period oſ phenomena, the time of which is half of a lunar month. This period comprehends the moſt important changes, both in reſpect of magnitude, and of the hours of high and low water, and ſeveral modiſications of both of thoſe circumſtances, ſuch as the daily diſference in height, or in time. 627. 3. There is another period, of nearly twice the ſame duration, which greatly modifies all thoſe leading circumſtances. This period has a reference to the diſtance of the Moon, and therefore depends on the Moon's revolution in her orbit. All the phenomena are increaſed when the Moon is nearer to the Earth. Therefore the higheſt ſpring-tide is obſerved when the Moon is in perigeo, and the next ſpring-tide is the ſmalleſt, becauſe the Moon is then nearly in apegeo. This will make a diſference of 23 feet from the medium height of ſpring tide at Breſt, and thereſore occaſion a diſference of 55 between the greateſt and the leaſt. It is evident that as the perigean and apogean ſituation of the Moon may happen in every part of a lunation, the equation for the height oſ tide depending upon this circumſtance may oſten run counter to the equation correſponding to the regular monthly ſeries of tides, and will ſeemingly deſtroy their regularity. 628. 4. The variation in the Sun's diſtance alſo affects the tides, but not nearly ſo much as thoſe in the diſtance of the Moon. In our winter, the ſpring-tides are greater than in ſummer, and the neap-tides are ſmaller. 629. 5. The declination, both of the Sun and Moon, affects the tides remarkably; but the effects are too intricate to be diſtinctly ſeen, till we perceive the cauſes on which they depend. 630. 6. All the phenomena are alſo modified by the latitude of the place of obſervation; and ſome phenomena occur in the high latitudes, which are not ſeen at all when the place of obſervation is on the equator. In particular, when the obſerver is in north latitude, and the Moon has north declination, that tide in which the Moon is above the horizon is greater than the other tide of the ſame day, when the Moon is below the horizon. It will be the contrary, if either the obſerver or the Moon (but not both) have ſouth declinationn. If the polar diſtance of the obſerver be equal to the Moons declination, he will ſee but one tide in the day, containing twelve hours ſlood and twelve hours ebb. 631. 7. To all this it muſt be added, that local maikably, ſo as frequently to leave ſcarcely any circumſtances of reſemblance, except the order and periods in which the various phenomena follow one another. We muſt now endeavour to account for theſe remarkable movements and viciſſitudes in the waters oſ the ocean. 632. Since the phenomena of the planetary motions demonſtrate that every particle of matter in this globe gravitates to the Sun, and ſince they are at various diſtances from his centre, it is evident that they gravitate unequally, and that, from this inequality, there muſt ariſe a diſturbance of that equilibrium which terreſtrial gravitation alone might produce. If this globe be ſuppoſed either perſectly ſluid and homogeneous, or to conſiſt of a ſpherical nucleus covered with a ſluid, it is clear that the ſluid muſt aſſume a perfectly ſpherical form, and that in this form alone, every particle will be in equilibrio. But when we add to the forces now acting on the waters of the ocean their unequal gravitation to the Sun, this equilibrium is diſturbed, and the ocean cannot remain in this form. We may apply to the particles of the ocean every thing that we formerly ſaid of the gravitation of the Moon to the Sun in the diſferent points of her orbit; and the ſame conſtruction in fig. 59, that gave us a repreſentation and meaſure of the forces which deranged the lunar motions, may be employed for giving us a notion of the manner in which the particles of water in the ocean are affected. The circle OB C A may re4D preſent the watery ſphere, and M any particle of the water. The central particle E gravitates to the Sun with a force which may be repreſented by ES. The gravitation of the particle M muſt be meaſured by MG. This force M G may be concæived as compounded of MF, equal and parallel to ES, and of M H. The force M F occaſions no alteration in the gravitation of M to the Earth, and M H is the only diſturbing force. We found that this conſtruction may be greatly ſimpliſied, and that M I may be ſubſtituted for M H without any ſenſible error, becauſe it never differs from it more than 3,. We thereſore made E I, in fig. 60, =3MN, and conſidered M I as the diſturbing force. This conſtruction is applicable to the preſent queſtion, with much greater accuracy, becauſe the radius of the Earth is but the ſixtieth part of that of the Moon's orbit. This reduces the error t0 75, à quantity altogether inſenſible. 633. Therefore let O A CB (ſig. 68.) be the terraqueous globe, and CS a line directed to the Sun, and B E A the ſection by that circle which ſeparates the illuminated from the dark hemiſphere. Let P be any particle, whether on the ſurface or within the maſs. Let QPN be perpendicular to the plane B A. Make EI=ZPN, and join PI. PI is the diſturbing force, vhen the line ES is taken to repreſent the gravitation of the particle E to the Sun. This force PI may be conceived to be compounded of two forces P E and P Q. PE tends to the centre of the Earth. ? Q tends from the plane B A, or toward the Sun. If this conſtruction be made ſor every particle in the fluid ſphere, it is evident that all the ſorces PE balance one another. Thereſore they necd not be conſidered in the preſent queſtion. But the forces P Q evidently diminiſh the terreſtrial gravitation of every particle. At C the force P Q acts in direct oppoſition to the terreſtrial gravity of the particle. And, in the ſituation P, it diminiſhes the gravity oſ the particle as eſtimated in the direction PN. There is therefore a ſorce acting in the direction N P on every particle in the canal PN. And this force is proportional to the diſtance of the particle from the plane BA (for P Q is always = 3N). Therefore the water in this canal cannot remain in its former poſition, its equilibrium being now deſtroyed. This may be reſtored, by adding to the column NP a ſmall portion P4, whoſe weight may compenſate the diminution in the weight of the column NP. A ſimilar addition may be made to every ſuch eolumn perpendicular to the plane B E A. This being ſuppoſed, the ſpherical ſigure of the globe will be changed into that of an elliptical ſpheroid, having its axis in the line OC, and its poles in O and C 569.) Without making this addition to every column NP, we may underſtand how the equilibrium may be reſtored by the waters ſubſiding all around the circle whoſe ſeetion is BA, and riſing on both ſides oſ it. For it was ſhewn (564.) that in a ſluid elliptical ſpheroĩd oſ gravi4 tating matter, the gravitation of any particle P to all the other particles may be reſolved into two forces PN and PM perpendicular to the plane BA and to the axis forces be really in this proportion, the whole will be in equilibrio, provided that the whole forces at the poles and equator are inverſely as the diameters O C and B A. Now this may be the caſe heree. For the forces ſuperadded to the terreſtrial gravitation of any particle are, iſ, A force T E, proportional to P E. When this is reſolved into the directions PN and Pl, the forces ariſing in this reſolution are as P N and P), and therefore in the due proportion: 2, The force P Q, which is alſo as PN. It is evident therefore that this maſs may acquire ſuch a protuberancy at O and C, that the force at O ſhall be to the ſorce at B as B A to OC, or as E A to EC. We are alſo taught in § 585. what this protuberance muſt be. It muſt be ſuch that four times the mean gravity of a particle on the ſurface is to five times the diſturbing force at O or C as the diameter BA is to the exceſs of the diameter O C. This ellipticity is expreſſed by the ſame formula as in the former 40 EC—VA . x caſe, vizZ. m r s 7 EC 6343. Thus we have diſcovered that, in conſequence oſ the unequal gravitation of the matter in the Earth to the Sun, the waters will alume the form of an oblong elliptical ſpheroid, having its axis directed to the Sun, and its poles in thoſe points of the ſurface which have the Sun in the zenith and nadir. There the waters are higheſt above the ſurface of a ſphere of equal capacity. All around the crcumſerence B E A, the waters are below the natural level. A ſpectator placed on this circumference ſees the Sun in the horizon. We can tell exactly what this protuberance EO—E A muſt be, becauſe we know the proportions of all the forces. Let W repreſent the terreſtrial gravitation, or the weight of the particle C, and G the gravitation of the ſame particle to the Sun, and let F be the diſturbing force acling on a particle at C or at O, and therefore 3 CE. Let S and E be the quantity of matter in the Sun and n the Earth. Then (ſig. 59.0 F: G =CE: CG 5 L G: Wæ c CE 465.) 3CE xXS CG XIE . r thereſore F: Wæ 5:7C 35 E CS x Cõ CE- But, becauſe CS: ES?æES: CG, we have CS X CGæES X ES, æ ES. Therefore F: v=25, : i Now E: S æ I: 338343: ES C: ES æ1I: This will eive 35. E and EC: ES æI: - This will give L5 EC =1: 127733541, 2m F: V. Fimally, 4W: 5 F/CE: CEAE. We ſall find this to be nearly 24% inches. 635. Such iĩs the ſigure that this globe would aſſume, had it been originally ſluid, or a ſpherical nucleus covered with a ſluid of equal denſity. The two ſummits of the watery ſpheroid would be raiſed about two feet above the equator or place of greateſt depreſſion. But the Earth is an oblate ſpheroid. If we ſuppoſe it covered, to a moderate depth, with a fluid, the waters would acquire a certain ſigure, which has been conſidered already. Let the diſturbing force of the Sun act on this ſigure. A change of figure muſt be produced, and the waters under the Sun, and thoſe in the oppoſite parts, will be elevated above their natural ſurface, and the ocean vwill be depreſſed on the circumference B E A. It is plain that this change of figure will be almoſt the ſame in every place as if the Earth were a ſphere. For the diſference between the change produced by the Sun's diſturbing force on the ſigure of the ſluid ſphere or ſluid ſpheroid, ariſes ſolely from the difference in the gravitation of a particle of water to the ſphere and to the ſpheroid. This diſference, in any part of the ſurface, is exceedingly ſmall, not being of the whole gravitation. The difference therefore in the change produced by the Sun cannot be 5 of the whole change. Therefore, ſince it is from the proportion of the diſturbing force to the force of gravity that the ellipticity is determined, it follows that the change of figure is, to all ſenſe, the ſame, whether the Earth be a ſphere or a ſpheroid whoſe eccentricity is leſs than 3-. Let us ſuppoſe, for the preſent, that the watery ſpheroid always has that form which produces an equilibrium in all ĩts particles. This cannot ever be the caſe, becauſe ſome time muſt elapſe before an accelerating force can produce any finite change in the diſpoſition of the waters. But the contemplation of this figure gives us the moſt diſtinct notion of the forces that are in action, and of their eſfects; and we can aſterwards ſtate the difference that muſt obtain becauſe the figure is not completely attained. Suppoſing it really attained, it follows that the ocean will be moſt elevated in thoſe places which have the Sun in the zenith or nadir, and moſt depreſſed in thoſe places where the Sun is ſeen in the horizon. While the Earth turns round its axis, the pole of the ſpheroid keeps ſtill toward the Sun, as if the waters ſtood ſtill, and the ſolid nucleus turned round under it. The phenomena may perhaps be eaſier conceived by ſuppoſing the Earth to remain at reſt, and the Sun to revolve round it in 24 hours from eaſt to weſt. The pole of the ſpheroid follows him, as the card of a mariner's compaſs follows the magnet; and a ſpectator attached to one part of the nucleus will ſee all the viciſſitudes of the tide. Suppoſe the Sun in the equinox, and the obſerver alſo on the Earti's equator, and the Sun juſt riſing to him. The obſerver is then in the loweſt part of the watery ſpheroid. As the Sun riſes above the horizon, the water alſo riſes; and when the Sun is in the Zenith, the pole of the ſpheroid has now reached the obſerver, and the water is two feet deeper than it was at ſun-riſe. The Sun now approaching the weſtern horizon, and the pole of the ocean going along with him, the obſerver ſees the water ſubſide agai, and at ſun-ſet, it is at the ſame level as at ſunriſe. As the Sun continues his courſe, though unſeen, the oppoſite pole of the ocean now advances from the eaſt, and the obſerver ſees the water riſe again by the ſame degrees as in the morning, and attain the height of two feet at midnight, and again ſubſide to its loweſt level at ſix dclock in the following morning. Thus, in 24 hours, he has two tides of ſlood and two ebb tides; high water at noon and midnight, and low water at ſix òclock morning and evening. An obſerver not in the equator will ſee the ſame gradation of phenomena, at the ſame hours; but the riſe and fall of the water will not be ſo conſiderable, hecauſe the pole of the ſpheroid paſſes his meridian at ſome diſtance from him. If the ſpectator is in the pole of the Earth, he will ſee no change, becauſe he is always in the loweſt part of the watery ſpheroid. From this account of the ſimpleſt aſ, we may infer that the depth of the water, or its change of depth, depends entirelj on the ſhape of the ſpheroid, and the place of it occupied by the obſerver. 636. To judge oſ this with accuracy, we muſt take notice of ſome properties of the ellipſe which forms the meridian of the watery ſpheroid. Let A E a Q (fig. 69.) repreſent this elliptical ſpheroid, and let BE b Q he the inſcribed ſphere, and A G a g& the circumſcribed ſphere. Alſo let DF àd7 be the ſphere of equal capacity with the ſpheroid. This will be the natural ſigure of the ocean, uudiſturbed by the gravitution to the Sun. In a ſpheroid like this, ſo little diſerent ſrom a ſphere, the elevation AD oſ its ſummit above the equally capicious ſphere is very nearly double of the depreſſion FE of its equator below the ſurface oſ that ſphere. For ſpheres and ſpheroids, being equal to ; of the circumſcribing eylinders, are in the ratio compounded of the ratio of their equators and the ratio of their axes. Therefore, ſince the ſfphere D F à1 is equal to the ſpheroid AE a Q, ve hive CF' x CDæCE x CA, and CE: CF CD: CA. Make CE: CFæCP: Cæ, then CE: Cæ m CD: CA, and CE: Ex = CD: DA, and CE: CD æEæ: DA. Now CE does not diſfer ſenſibly from CD (only eight inches in near 4000 miles), therefore Eæ may be accounted equal to DA. But E æ is not ſenſibly diſſerent ſrom twice E F. Therefore the propoſition is maniſeſt. 637. In ſuch an elliptical ſpherold, the elevation IL of any point I above the inſcribed ſphere is proportional to the ſquare of the coſine oſ its diſtance from the pole A, and the depreſſion KI of this point below the ſurface of the circumſcribed ſphere is as the ſquare of the ſine of its diſtance from the pole AA Draw through the point I, HH IM perpendicular to CA, and IN perpendicular to CE. The triangles CIN and 4 IL are ſimilar. ll 4 E Therefore There ſore ?IIL=CI:IN, ærad. : coſ.ICA but, by the ellipſe AB:  IZ7 AC: IN, =rad.: coſ. ICA therefore AB: IL=rad.: coſ ITCA and IL is always in the proportion of coſ.?;, IC A, and is / AB X coſ}, ICA, radius being æ1I. In like mammer Fl I: IKæ CI: IM æ rad.: ſin. ICA. and GL: HIZPEC: IM=ærad.: ſin. CA therefore GE: KIærad.?: ſin..ICA and KI is æ AB X ſin.: ICA. 638. We muſt alſo know the elevations and depreſſions in reſpect of the natural level of the undiſturbed ocean. This elevation for any point i is evidently ilml m AB X col.;, CAF AB, m ABX cſ. 7TCX—F, and the depreſſion n r of a point r is ErrEn=AB X ſin. CAAB, m ABX It will be convenient to employ a ſymbol for expreſſing the whole difference AB or G E between high and low water produced by the action of the Sun. Let it be expreſſed by the ſymbol S. Alſo let the angular diſtance from the ſummit, or from the Sun's place, be æ. The elevation mi is 5S X coſ.? F5S. The depreſſion nr is æ X ſin..  S. 639. The ſpheroĩd interſects the equicapacious ſphere in a point ſo ſituated that S x coſ.? 4 S æ o, that is, where coſ.? x æF. This is 54° 44 from the pole oſ the ſpheroid, and 350 16' ſfrom ĩts equator, a ſituation that has ſeveral remarkable phyſical properties. We have already ſeen ſ572.) that on this part of the ſurſace the gravitation is the ſame as if it were really a perfect ſphere. 640. The ocean is made to aſſume an eccentric form, not only by the unequal gravitation of its waters to the Sun, but alſo by their much more unequal gravitation to the Moon; and, although her quantity of matter is very ſmall indeed, when compared with the Sun, yet being almoſt 400 times nearer, the inequality of gravitation is increaſed almoſt 450X 400 X 400 times, and may therefore produce a ſenſible eſſtẽt. We cannot help preſuming that it does, becauſe the viciſſitudes of the tides have a moſt diſtinct reſerence to the poſition of the Moon. Without going over the ſame ground again, it is plain that the waters will be accumulated under the Moon, and ĩn the oppoſite part oſ the ſpheroid, in the ſame manner as they are afſected by the Sun's action. Therefore * The diſtance oſf the Sun being about 392 times that of the Moon, and the quantity of matter in the Sun about 338000 times that in the Earth, if the quantity of matter in the Moon were equal to that in the Earth, her accumulating force would be 178 times greater than that of the Sun. We ſall ſee that it is nearly 25 times greater. From which we Thould infer that the quantity of matter in the Moon is nearly ſ7 of that in the Earth. This ſeems the beſt information 1hat we have on this ſubject. Thereſore let M repreſent the elevation of the pole of the ſpheroid above the equicapacious ſphere that is produced by the unequal gravitation to the Moon, and let 3 be the angular diſtance of any part of this ſpheroid from ĩts pole. We ſhall then have The elevation of any point 2/M x coſ.y4£ M. The depreſſion M x ſin.y42 M. 641. In conſequence of the ſimultaneous gravitation to both Iuminaries, the ocean muſt aſlume a form differing from both of theſe regular ſpheroids, It is a figure of diſſicult inveſtigation, but all that we are concerned in may be determined with ſuſſicient accuracy by means of the following conſiderations. We have ſeen that the change of ſigure induced on the ſpheroidal ocean of the revolving globe is nearly the ſame as if it were induced on a perſect ſpheree. Much more ſecurely may we ſay that the change of figure, induced on the ocean already diſturbed by the Sun, is the ſame that the Moon would have occaſioned on the undiſturbed revolving ſpheroid. We may therefore ſuppoſe, without any ſenſible error, that the change produced in any part of the ocean by the joint action of the two luminaries is the ſum or the diſference of the changes which they would have produced ſeparately. 642. Therefore, ſince the poles oſ both ſpheroids are in thoſc parts of the ocean which have the Sun and nith diſtance of the Sun from any place, and 5 the zenith diſtance of the Moon, the elevation of the waters above the natural ſurface of the undiſturbed ocean will be S x coſ.a5 +M x coſ.?y —4 M. And the depreſſion in any place will be S x ſin.: æ 8 + M x ſin 7/ F M. This may be better expreſſed as follows. Elevation 8 x coſ. x +M x coſ.. y35 F M, Depreſſion æS x ſin.?  +M x ſiny35F M 643. Suppoſe the Sun and Moon to be in the ſame part of the heavens. The ſolar and Iunar tides will have the ſame axes, poles, and equator, the gravitations to each conſpiring to produce a great elevation at the combined pole, and a great depreſſion all round the common equator. The elevation will be à SF M, and the depreſion will be  S M. Therefore the elevation above the inſcribed ſphere (or rather the ſpheroid ſimilar and ſimilarly placed with the natural revolving ſpheroid) vill be § F N, 644. Suppoſe the Moon in quadrature in the line EDM (fig. 70.) It is plain that one luminory tends to produce an elevation above the equicapacious ſphere AODB C, in the point of the ocean A immediately under it, where the other tends to produce a depreſſion, and thereſore their forces counteract each other. Let ilic Sun be in the line ES. The elevation at Sæ8q35FM, æ 3573M. The depreſſion at MæS238 F M, æ53M. The elevation at S above the inſcribed ſpheroid 2 M. The elevation at M above the ſame M—253S. Hence it is evident that there will be high water at M or at S, when the Moon is in quadrature, according as the accumulating force of the Moon exceeds or ſalls ſhort of that of the Sun. Now, it is a matter of obTervation, that when the Moon is in quadrature, it is high water in the open ſeas under the Moon, and low water under the Sun, or nearly ſoo. This obſervation conſirms the concluſion drawn from the nutation of the Earth's axis, that the diſturbing force of the Moon exceeds that of the Sun. This criterion has ſome uncertainty, owing to the operation of local circumſtances, by which it happens that the ſummit oſ the water is never ſituated either under the Sun or under the Moon. But even in this caſe, we ſind that the high water is referable to the Moon, and not to the Sun. It is always ſix hours of the day later than the high water at full or change. This correſponds with the elongation of the Moon ſix hours to the eaſtward. The phenomena of the tides ſhew further that, at this time, the waters under the Sun are depreſſed below the natural ſurface of the ocean. This ſhews that M is more than twice as great as S. 645. When the Moon has any other poſition beſides mediate poſition. It muſt certainly be in the great circle paſſing through the ſimultaneous places of the two luminaries. As the place and time oſf high and low water, and the magnitude of the elevation and depreſſion, are the moſt intereſting phenomena of the tides, they ſhall be the principal objects of our attention. The place of high water is that where the ſum of the clevations produced by both uminaries above the natutural ſurſace of the ocean is a maximum. And the place of low water, in the great circle paſſing through the Sun and Moon, is that where the depreſſion below the natural level of the ocean is a maximum. Therefore, in order to have the place of high water we muſt ſind where S x coſl.. x +M x coſ.;& 5F M is a maximum. Or, ſince  §F M is a conſtant quantity, ve muſt find where S x coſi? x +M X coſ.'5 is a maximum. Now, accounting the tabular ſines and coſines as ſractions of radius, æ 1, we have Coſ. x =% +E coſ. 2x and Coſ. y = + 4 coſ. 235. For let ABS D (ſig. 71.) be a circle, and AS, BD two diameters croſſing each other at right angles. Deſcribe on the ſemidiameter CS the ſmall circle CmS à, having its centre in 2. Let H C make any angle æ with CS, and Iet it interſect the ſmall circle in h. Drav d h, S h, producing S h till it meet the exterior circle in S, and join A;, C5. Laſly, drawv bo and s r perpendicular to CS. S b is perpendicular to Ch and CS: Chæ æ rad.: ecoſ. HCS, and CS: Co æ R: coſ H CS. The angie SCs is evidently =m 2CH æ©S àh and Ar =2Co. Now if CS be æ13 Crmcoſ? 23 Ar=I4 col. 2 x. Thereſore Co æ + à coſ. 2 . In like manner toſ 5y æ4 +4 coſ. 2. There ſore we muſt have s + Exa + : + M x coſ. 2 . . c2 2 maximum, or, neglecting the conſtant . S M .. quantities, - and the conſtant diviſor 23, ve muſt have S x coſ. 2x +M X coſ. 25 a maximum. Let ABSD (ſig. 71) be now a great circle of the Earth, paſing through thoſc points S and M of its ſurface which have the Sun and the Moor in the zenith. Draw the diameter S CA, and croſs it at right angles by BCD. ILet S d be to d a as the accumulating force of the Moon to the accumulating force of the Sun, that is, as M to S, which proportion we ſuppoſe known. Draw CM in the direction of the Moons place. It will cut the ſmall circle in ſome point m. Join m a. Let H be any point of the ſurface of the ocean. Drawv CH, cutting the ſmall circle in h Draw the diameter h d V. Draw mt and a x perpendicular to h4, and ay parallel to h&, and join m d. Alſo draw the chords m h and mb'. In this conſtruction, m d and d a repreſent M and 5, the angle MCH æ34, and S CH =xæ. It is farther maniſeſt that the angle m d h=2 m Ch, æ2, and that di =M x coſ. 2537 In like manner hd S æ2 H CS, = 2x, and d x æd a x coſ. 2x, /8 Xx coſ. 2x. Thereſore 1x=E5 x coſ. 2x +M x coſ. 253. Moreover ?æ = ay, and is a maximum when a5 is a maximum. This muiſt happen vhen a 5 coincides with a m, that is, when hd is parallel to a m. Hence may be derived the following conſtruction. Lot AMS (ſig. 72.) be, as beſore, a great circle whoſe plane paſſes through the Sun and the Moon. Let S and M be thoſe points which have the Sun and the Moon in the zenith. Deſcribe, as beſore, the circle CmS, cutting CM in m. Make S à: da =M: S, and join m a. Then, for the place of high water, draw the diumeter hd  parallel to m a, cutting the circle Cm S in /. Draw Ch H cutting the ſurface of the ocean in H and H. Then H and H are the places of high water. Alſo draw C4, cutting the ſurface of the oceam in L and . L. and I are the places oſf low water in this circle. For, drawing mt and a  perpendicular to hV, it is plain that 7æ=DM Xx eoſ. 25 +5 x coſ. 2. And what was juſt now demonſtrated ſhes that ?æ is in its maximum ſtate. Alſo, if the angle L C s æ u, and LCMæcs, it is evident that d x æS x coſ. a d æ, E x coſ. ?d 8, =S x coſ. 2/ CS, =S x coſ. 2L CS, =5 x coſ. 2 u3 and in like manner, 1d =M X coſ. 22; and therefore 1x S x eoſ. 2u+M X coſ. 2 æ, and it is a maximum. il - ; V It is plain, independent oſ this conſtraction, tat ihe places of high and Iow water are -90° aſunder; for the, two hemiſpheres of the ocean muſt be ſimilar and equal, and the equator muſt be equidiſtant from its poles. 6&48. Draw à f perpendicular to m a. Then, if d & be taken to repreſent the whole tide produced by the Moon, that is, the whole diſference in the height of high and low water, m a will repreſent the compound tide at H, or the difſerence between high and low water correſponding to that ſituation of the place H with reſpect to the Sun and Moon. m f will be the part oſ it produced by the Moon and a F the part produced by the Sun. For, the elevation at H above the natural level is S x ſæbJ +M x coſ.7/F, and the depreſion beIow it at L is S X m a3 +M x ſn z3. But ſin. u = coſ.: æx, and ſin.? æ = coſ.3. Thereſore the depreſſion at L is S X õſ-x4 4 Mx coſ 7/. The ſum of theſe makes the whole diſference berween high and low water, or the whole tide. Therefore the tide is =S8 x 2 col. —I +Mæã co.;1. But 2 coſ. æ 11 æ coſ. 2 x, and 2 coſ.yi1 æ coſ. 25. Thereſore the tide =S x coſ. 2 +M x coſ. 25. Now it is plain that m f=m d coſ. d mf, and that the angle d mf =mdh, æ2 mCh, =2y. Therefore m d x coſ. d mf =M X coſ. 25. In like manner a f=S Xx coſ. 2æ. The point a muſt be within or without the circk CmS, according as M is greater or leſs than S, that is, or leſs than that of the Sun. It appears alſo that, in the firſt caſe, H will be nearer to M, and in the ſecond caſe, it will be nearer to S. Thus have we given a conſtruction that ſeems to expreſs all the phenomena of the tides, as they will occur to a ſpectator placed in the circle paſſing through thoſe points which have the Sun and Moon in the Zenith. It marks the diſtance of high water from thoſe two places, and therefore, if the luminaries are in the equator, it marks the time that will elapſe between the paſſage of the Sun or Moon over the meridian and the moment of high water. It alſo expreſſes the whole height of the tide of that day And, as the point H may be taken without any reference to high water, we ſhall then obtain the ſtate of the tide for that hour, when it is high water in its proper place H. By conſidering this conſtruction for the diſferent relative poſitions of the Sun and Moon, we ſhall obtain a pretty diſtinct notion of the ſeries of phenomena which proceed in regular order during a lunar month. 649. To obtain the greater ſimplicity in our firſt and moſt general concluſions, we ſhall firſt ſuppoſe both luminaries in the equator. Alſo, abſtracting our attention from the annual motion of the Sun, we ſhall conſider only the relative motion of the Moon in her ſynodical revolution, ſtating the phenomena as they occur when the Moon has got a certain number of degrees away from the Sun; and we ſhall always ſuppoſe that the watery ſpheroid has attained the form ſuited to its equilibriun in that ſituation of the two luminaries. The concluſions will ſrequently diſfer much from common obſervation. But we ſill aſterwards find their agreement very ſatisfactory. The reader is thereſore expected to go along with the reaſoning employed in this diſcuſſion, although the concluſons may frequently ſurpriſe him, being very different ſrom his moſt familiar obſervations. 650. ſ: At new and ſull Moon, we ſhall have high water at noon, and at midnight, vhen the Sun and Moon are on the meridian. For in this caſle CM, am, CS, a h, CH, 3ll coincide. li 651. 2. When the Moon is in quadrature in B, the place of high water is alſo in B, under the Moon, and this happens when the Moon is on the meridian. For when M C is perpendicular to CS, the point m coincides with C, a m with a C, and à h with àdC. G52. 3. While the Moon paſtes ſfrom a ſyzigy to the next quadrature, the place of high water follows the Moon's place, keeping to the weſtward of it. It overtakes the Moon in the quadrature, gets to the eaſtward of the Moon ſas it ĩs repreſented at M I?, by the ſame conſtruction), preceding her while ſie peſes forward to the next ſyzigy, in A, where it is overtaken by the Moon's place. For while M is in the quadrant S B, or AD, the point h is in the arch S m. But when M yond the arch 8 m* (counted eqſtavcard ſfrom S). Therefore, durin⸗ the ſirſt and third quarters oſ the lunation, we have high water aſter noon or midnight, but before the Moon's ſouthing. But in the ſecond and fourth quarters, it huppens aſter the Moon's ſouthing. 633. 4. Since the place of high water coincides with the Moon's place both in ſyZigy and the following quadrature, and in the interval is between her and the Sun, it follows that it muſt, during the ſirſt and third quarters, be gradually left behind, for a while, and then muſt giin on the Moon's place, and overtake her in quadrature. There muſt thereſore be a certain greateſt diſtance between the place of the Moon and that of high water, a certain maximum of the angle M C H. Thia happens when H' CS is exactly 450. For then & d 5 is 9f, m a is perpendicular to a S, and the angle a mà is a maximum. Now a  d æ m d ll, æ 2y. 654. When things are in this ſtate, the motion of high water, or its ſeparation from the Sun to the eaſtward, is equal to the Moon's eaſterly motion. Thereſore, at new and full Moon, it muſt be ſlower, and at the quadratures it muſt be ſwiſter. Conſequently, vhen the Moon is in the octant, 45° from the Sun, the interval between two ſucceſſive ſouthings oſ the Moon, which is always 24 50 nearly, muſt be equal to the interval oſ the two concomitant or ſuperior high waters, and each tide muſt occupy 12' 25, the half of a lunar day. But at new or ſull Moon, the interval between the two ſucceſſive high waters muſt be leſs than 12' 25, and in the quadratures it muſt be more. 655. The tide day muſt be equal to the lunar day only when the high water is in the octants. It muſt be ſnorter at new and full Moon, and while the Moon is paſſing from the ſecond octant to the third, and from the fourth to the firſt. And it muſt exceed a lunar day while the Moon paſſes from the firſt octant to the ſecond, and from the third to the fourth. The tide day is always greater than a ſolar day, or twenty-four hours. For, while the Sun makes one round of the Earth, and is again on the meridian, the Moon has got about 13 caſt of him, or SM is nearly 13, and S H is nearly 5°0, ſo that the Sun muſt paſs the meridian about 35 or 36 minutes beſore it is high water. Such is the law of the daily retardation called the priming or lagging oſ the tides. At new and full Moon it is nearly 35, and ar the quadratures it is 85', ſo that the tide day at new and full Moon is 24' 35, and in the quadratures it is 25 25 nearly. Our conſtruction gives us the means of aſcertaining this circumſtance of the tides, or interval between two ſucceeding ſull ſeas, and it may be thus expreſſed. 656. The ſynodical motion of the Moon is to the ſynodical motion of the high water as ma to mf. For, take a point u very near to m. Braw ua and u d; and draw d i parallel to a u, and with the centre a, and diſtance a u, deſcribe the areh u v, which may be conſidered as a ſtraight line perpendicular to m a. Then um and i b are reſpectively equal to the motions oF M and H (though they fubtend twice the angles)] The angles a u v, d u m are equal, being right angles. Therefore m u v æo u d, æ a m d, and the triangles m u v, d m f, are ſimilar, and the angles u a m, i d h are equal, and therefore uv:ih=ma:hd, mma: md um: uv= md: mf therefore um: i hæ ma: mf. When m coincides with S, that is, at new or full Moon, m a coincides with S a, and m f with S d. But when m coincides with C, that is, in the quadratures, m a coincides with C a, and mf with Cò. 657. Hence it is eaſy to ſee that the retardation of the tides at new and full Moon is to the retardation in the quadratures as Ca to S a, that is, as M 4S to M—B3B. When the high water is in the octant, m a is perpendicular to 5 a, and therefore a and f coincide, and the ſynodical motion of the Moon and of high water are thę ſame, as has been already obſerved. Let us now conſider the elevations of the water, and the magnitude oſ the tide, and its gradual variation in the courſe of a lunation. This is repreſented by the line m a. 658. This ſeries of changes is very perceptible in onr conſtruction. At new and full Moon, m a coincides vith 5a, and in the quadratures, it coincides with Ca. Therefore, the ſpring-tide is to the neap-tide as 5 a to Ca, that is, asM 4 5 to M—S8. From new or full Moon the tide gradually leſſens to the time oſ the quadraturee. We alſo ſce that the Sun contributes to the elevation by the part a f, till the high water is in the octants, for the point f lies between m and a. Aſter this, the action of the Sun diminiſhes the elevation, the point ſ then lying beyond a. 629. The momentary change in the height of the vhole tide, that is, in the diſference between the high and low water, is proportional to the ſine of twice the arch M II. It is meaſured by df in our conſtruction. For, let mu be a given arch of the Moons ſynodical motion, ſuch as a degree Then m v is the diſference between the tides æ7a and u a, correſponding to the conſtant arch of the Moons momentary elongation from the Sun. The ſimilarity of the triangles mu v and md f gives us mu: mv=md: df. Now m u and m d are conſtant. Thereſore m v is proportional to d f, and md: d f ærad.: ſin. d mf, æ ſin. md h, æ ſin. 2M CH. Hence it ſollows that the diminution of the tides is moſt rapid when the high water is in the octants. This will be found to be the difference between the twelſth andthirteenth tides, counted from new or full Moon, and between the ſeventh and eighth tides aſter the qua4 dratures. If m u be taken æ the Moon's daily elongation from the Sun, which is  30 nearly, the rule will give, with ſuſficient accuracy, b the difference between the two ſuperior or the two inferior tides immediately ſucceeding. It does not give the diſference between the two immediately ſucceeding tides, becauſe they are alternately greater and leſſer, as will appear afterwards. 660. Having thus given a repreſentation to the eye of the various circumſtances of theſe phenomena in this ſimple caſe, it would be proper to ſiew how all the diſferent quantities ſpoken of may be computed arithmetically. The ſimpleſt method for this, though perhaps not the moſt elegant, ſeems to be the following. In the triangle m d a, the two ſides md and d a are given, and the contained angle m d a, when the proportion of the forcos M and S, and the Moon's elongation MCS are givenn Let this angle m d a be called a. Then make M +5: M S æ tan., a: tan. 5. Then 661. It is of peculiar importance to know the greateſt feparation of the high water from the Moon. This happens when the high water is in the octant. In this ſituation it is plain that  d: d a, that is, M: S, æ rad.: ſin. d m a, = rad.: ſin. 25, and thereſore ſin. 25 9 S Hence 25 and y are found. 662. It is maniſeſt that the applicability of this conſtruction to the explanation of the phenomena of the tides depends chieſly on the proportion of S  to d a, that is, the proportion of the accumulating force of the Moon to that of the Sun. This conſtitutes the ſpecies of the triangle m d a, on which every quantity depends. The queſtion now is, What is this proportion? Did we know the quantity of matter in the Moon, it would be decided in a minute. The only obſervation that can give us any information on this ſubject is the nutation of the Eart's axis. This gives at once the proportion of the diſturbing forces. But the quantities obſerved, the deviation of the Earth's axis from its uniform conical motion round the pole of the ecliptic, and the equation of the preceſſion of the equinoctial points, are much too ſmall for giving us any preciſe knowledge of this ratio. Fortunately, the tides themſelves, by the modification which their phenomena receive from the comparative magnitude of the forces in queſtion, give us means of diſcovering the ratio of S to M. The moſt obvious circumſtance of this nature is the magnitude of the ſpring and neap-tides. Accordingly, this wa; employed by Newton æ j 1I Newton in his theory of the tides. He collected a number oſ obſervations made at Briſtol, and at Plymouth, and, ſtating the ſpring-tide to the neap-tide as M +1 to M—S8, he ſaid that the ſorce of the Moon in raiſing the tide is to that of the Sun nearly as 47 to 1. But ĩt was ſoon perceived that this was a very uncertain method. For there are ſcarcely any two places where the proportion between the ſpring-tide and the neap-tide ĩs the ſame, even though the places be very near each other. This extreme diſcrepancy, while the proportion was obſerved to be invariable for any individual place, ſhewed that it was not the theory that was in fault, but that the local circumſtances of ſituation were ſuch as affected very diſferently tides of diſferent magnitudes, and thus changed their proportion. It was not till the noble collection of obſervations was made at Breſt and Rochefort that the philoſopher could aſſort and combine the immenſe variety of heights and times of the tides, ſo as to throw them into claſſes to be compared with the aſpects of the Sun and Moon according to the Newtonian theory. M, Caſſini, and, aſter him, M. Daniel Bernoulli, made this compariſon with great care and diſcernment; and on the authority of this compariſon, M. Bernoulli has founded the theory and explanation contained in his excellent Diſſertation on the tides, which ſhared with MLaurin and Euler the prize given by the Academy of Paris in 1740. M. Bernoulli employs ſeveral circumſtances of the tides for aſcertaining the ratio of M to S. IIe employs the law of the retardation oſ the tides. This has great advantages over the merhod employed by Newton. Whatever are the obſtructions or modifications of the tides, they will operate equally, or nearly ſo, on two tides that are equal, or nearly equal. This is the cae with two ſueceeding tides oſ the ſame kind. The Moors mean motion from the Sun, in time, is about 503 minutes in a day. The ſmalleſt retardation, in the vicinity of new and full Moon, is nearly 35, wanting 155 of the Moons retardation. Thereſore, by art. 656, i M: S æ35: 153, 51 23 nearly. The longeſt tide-day about the quadratures is 25' 25', exceeding a ſolar day 85, and a lunar day 343. Therefore M: S æ835: 343,  5: 270 hearly. The proportion of M to S8 may alſo be inferred by a direct compariſon of the tide-day at new Moon and in the quadratures. 35:8325M 5: M +S. Thereſore M:s æ &4ò⸗ 5. b33, =5: 27;5. It may alſo be diſcovered by obſerving the greateſt ſeparation of the place of high water from that oſ the Moon, or the elongation of the Moon when the tide-day and the lunar day are equal. In this caſe 5 is obſerved to he nearly 120 30. Thereſore  = ſin. 25°, and M M: S æ5: 23 neorly. Thus it appears that all theſe merhods give nearly the ſame reſult, and that we may adopt 5 to 2 as the ratio of the two diſturbing forces. This agrees extremely well with the phenomena of nutation aud preceſſion. Inſtead of inferring the proportion of M to S from the quantity of matter in the Moon, deduced from the phenomena of nutation, as is affected by D' Alembert and La Place,  am more diſpoſed to infer the maſs of the Moon from this determination of M: S8, conſirmed by ſo many coincidences of different phenomena, Taking 5:2,13 as the mean of thoſe determinations, and employing the analogy in § 465, we obtain for the quantity of matter in the Moon nearly ſæ, the Earth being I. If the forces of the two luminaries were equal, there would be no high and low water in the day of quadrature. There would be an elevation above the inſcribed ſpheroid of  F5 all round the circumference of the circle paſſing through the Sun and Moon, forming the ocean into an oblate ſpheroid. 663. Since the gravitation to the Sun alone produces tn elevation of 243 inches, the gravitation to the Moon will raiſe the waters 58 inches; the ſpring-tide will be 245 + 58, or 823 inches, and the neap-tide 334 inches. 664. The proportion now adopted muſt be conſidered as that correſponding to the mean intenſity of the accumulating forces. But this proportion is by no means conſtant, by reaſon oſ the variation in the diſtances of the luminaries. Calling the Suv's mean diſtance 1000, ãt is 983 in January and 1or7 in July. The Moons mean diſtance being 1000, ſhe is at the diſtance 1055 when in apogeo, and 945 when in perigeo. The action of the luminaries in producing a change of figure varies in the inverſe triplicate ratio of their diſtances (519.) Thereſore, if 2 and 5 are taken for the mean diſturbling forees of the Sun and Moon, we have the ſollowing meaſures of thoſe forces. Sun. Moon. Apogean I,90 4,258 Mean 27 5 Perigean 2,105 5,925 Hence we ſee that M: S8 may vary from 5,925: I,901 to 4,258: 2,105, that is, nearly from 6: 2 to 4: 2. The general expreſſion i the diſturbing force of the 3 Moon will be Mæ 558 x. where D and d expreſs the mean diſtances of Sun and Moon, and a and  any other ſimultaneòus diſtances. The ſolar force does not greatly vary, and need not be much attended to in our computations for the tides, But the change in the lunar action muſt not be neglected, as this greatly aſfects both the time and the height of the tide. 665. Firſt, as to the times. 1. The tide- day following ſpring-tide is 240 275 when the Moon is in perigeo, and 24 33 when ſhe is in apogeo. 2. The tide-day following neap-tide is 255 15 in the ſirſt caſe, and 25 40' in the ſecond. ' 3. The greateſt interval between the Moon's ſouthing and high water (which happens in the octants) is 39 when the Moon is in perigeo, and 61' when ſhe is in apogeo, y being 9 45 and 15° 15. 666. The height of the tide is ſtill more aſfected by the Moon's change of diſtance. If the Moon is in perigeo, when new or full, the ſpring-tide will be eight feet, inſtead oſ the mean ſpringtide of ſeven feet. The very next ſpring-tide will be no more than ſix feet, becauſe the Moon is then in apogeo. The neap-tides, which happen between theſe very unequal tides, will be regular, the Moon being then in quadrature, at her mean diſtance. . But if the Moon change at her mean diſtance, the ſpring-tide will be regular, but one neap-tide will be four feet, and another only two feet. We ſee therefore that the regular monthly ſeries of heights and times correſponding to our conſtruction can never be obſerved, becauſe in the very ſame, or nearly the ſame period, the Moon makes all the changes of diſtance which produce the eſfects above mentioned. As the eſfect produced by the ſame change of the Moons diſtance is different according to the ſtate of the tide which it affects, it is by no means eaſy to apply the equation ariſing ſrom this cauſe. 667. As a ſort of ſynopſis of the whole oſ this deſcription of the monthly ſeries of tides, the following Table by D. Bernoulli will be of ſome uſe. The firſt column contains the Moon's elongation S M (eaſtward) from the Sun, or from the point oppoſite to the Sun, in degrees. The ſecond column contains the minutes of ſolar time that the moment of high water precedes or follows the Moon's ſouthing. This correſponds to the acch HM. The third column gives the arch S H, or nearly the hour and minute of the day at the time of high water; and the fourth column contains the height of the tide, as expreſſed by the line m a, the ſpace S a being divided into 1000 purts, as the height of a ſpring-tide.. Note that the elongation is ſuppoſed 10 be that of the Moon at the time of her ſouthing. TABLE I. Minutes. 58. It is proper here to notice a circumſtance, of general obſervation, and which appears inconſiſtent our conſtruction, which ſtates the high water of tides to happen when the Moon is on the meriThis muſt make the high water oſ neap-tides ſix hours later than the high water of ſpring-tides, ſuppoſing that to happen when the Sun and Moon are on the meridian. But iĩt ĩs univerſally obſerved that the high water of tides in quadrature is only about ſive hours and ten er twelve minutes later than that of the tides in ſyzigyThis is owing to our not attending to another circumſtance, mamely, that the high water which happens in ſyzigy, and in quadrature, is not the high water of ſpring and of neap-tides, but the third before them. They correſpond to a poſition of the Moon 19° weſtward of the ſyzigy or quadrature, as will be more particularly noticed aſterwards. At theſe times, the points of high water are 135 weſt oſ the ſyæigy, and 290 weſt of the quadrature, as appears by our conſtruction. The lunar hours correſponding to the interval are exactly 5n , which is nearly 53 12' ſolar hours. 669. Hitherto we have conſidered the phenomena oſ the tides in their moſt ſimple ſtate, by ſtating the Moon and the Sun in the equator. Yet this can never happen. That is, we can never ſee a monthly ſeries of tides nearly correſponding with this ſituation of the luminarics. In the courſe of one month, the Sun may continue within ſix degrees oſ the equator, but the Moon will deviate from it, from 18 to 28 or 30 degrees. This will greatly affect the height of the tides, cauſing them to deviate from the ſeries expreſſed by our conſtruction. It ſtill more affects the time, particularly of low water. The phenomena depend primarily on the Zenith diſtances of the luminaries, and, when theſe are known, are accurately expreſſed by the conſtruction. But theſe zenith diſtances depend both on the place of the luminaries in the heavens, and on the latitude of the obſerver. It is diſficult to point out the train of phenomena as they occur in any one place, becauſe the ſigure aſumed by the waters, although its depth be eaſily aſcertained in any ſingle point, and for any one moment, is too complicated to be explained by any general deſcription. It is not an oblong elliptical ſpheroid, formed by revolution, except in the very moment oſ new or full Moon. In other relative ſituations of the Sun and Moon, the ocean will not have any ſection that is circulu;; Its poles, and the poſition of its equator, are eaſily determined. Iut this equatoreal ſection is not a circle, but approaches to an elliptical form, and, in ſome caſes, is an exact ellipſe. The longer axis of this oval is in the plane paſſing through the Sun and Moon, and its extremities are in the points of low water for this circle, as determined by our conſtruction. Its ſhorter axis paſes through the centre of the Earth, at right angles to the other, and its extremities are the points of the loeſl loi water. In theſe two points, the depreſſion below the natural level of the ocean is always the ſame, namely, the ſum of the greateſt depreſion produced by cach luminary. It is ſubjected therefore only to the changes ariſing ſrom the changes of diſtance of the Sun and Moon. Thus it appears that the ſurface of the ocean has generally four poles, two of which are prolate or prutube4H rant, and t0 of them are compreſſed. This is moſt rmarkably the caſe when the Moon is in quadrature, and there is then a ridge all round that ſection which has the Sun and Moon in its plane. The ſection through the ſour polcs, upper and lower, is the place of high water all over the Earth, and the ſection perpendicular to the axis oſ this is the place of low water in all parts of the Earth. Hence it follows that when the luminaries are in the plane of the Eartl's equator, the two depreſied poles of the watery ſphercid coincide with the poles of the Earth; and what we have ſaid of the times of high and low water, and the other ſtates of the tide, are xact in their application. But the heights oſ the tides are diminiſhed as we recede from the Earth's equator, in the proportion of radius to the coſine of the latitude. In all oiher ſituations of the Sun and Moon, the phenomena vary exceedingly, and cannot eaſily be ſhewn in a regular train. The poſition of the high water ſection is often much inclincd to the terreſtrial meridians, ſo that the interval between the tranſit oſ the Moon and the tranſit of this ſection acroſs the meridian of places in the ſame meridian is often very diſſerent. Thus, on midſummer day, ſuppoſe the Moon in her laſt quadrature, and in the node, therefore in the equator. The ridge which forms high water lies ſo oblique to the meridians, that when the Moon arrives at the meridian of London, the ridge of high water has paſſed London 2bout two hours, and is now on the north conſt of Ameriea. Ilence it happens that we have no ſatisfactory account of the times of high water in diſferent places, even though we ſould learn it for a particular day. The only way oſ forming a good gueſs of the ſtate oſ the tides is to have a terreſtrial globe before us, and having marked the places of the luminaries, to Iap a tape round the globe, paſing through thoſe points, and then to mark the place of high water on that line, and eroſs it with an arch at right angles. This is the line of high water. Or, a circular hcop may be made, croſſed by one ſemicirele. Place the cſrele ſo as to paſs through the places of the Sun and Moon, ſetting the interſection with the ſemicircle on the calculated place of high water. The ſemicircle is now the line oſ high water, and if this armilla be held in its preſent poſition, while the globe turns once round within ĩt, the ſucceſſion of tide, or ihe regular hour of high water for every part of the Earth will then be ſeen, not very diſtant ſrom the truth. At preſent, in our endeavour to point out the chief modifications oſ the tides which proceed from the declination of the luminaries, or the latitude of the place of obſervation, we muſt content ourſelves with an approximation, which ſhall not Pe very far from the truth. It vill be ſuſiciently exact, if we attend only to the Moon. The eſfects of declination are not much aſfected by the Sun, becauſe the diſſcrence between the declination of the Moon and that of the pole of the ocean can never exceed ſix or ſeven degrees. When the great circle paſing tor (it may even be perpendicular to it), the luminaries are very near each other, and the Moons place hardly deviates from the line of high water. At preſent we ſhall conſider the lunar tide only. 67. Let NQS E (ſig. 73.) repreſent the terraau- globe, NS being the axis, E Q the equator, and O the centree Let the Moon be in the direction OM, having the declination B Q. Let D be any point on the ſurface of the Earth, and CD L its parallel of latitude, and N DS its meridian. Let B F be the elliptical ſurface oſ the ocean, having its poles B and V in the line OM. Let OF be its equator. As the point D is carried along the parallel CD I, it will paſs in ſucceſſion through all the ſtates of the tide, having high water when it is in C, and in L, and Iow water when it gets into the interſection à of its parallel CL with the equator ſ F of the watery ſpherold. Draw the meridian Nà G through this interſection, cutting the terreſtrial equator in G. Then the arch Q G, converted into lunar hours, will give the duration of ebb of the ſuperior tide, and GE is the time of the ſubſequent ſlood of the inferior tide. It is evident that theſe are unequal, and that the whole tide GQG, conſiſting of a flood-tide G Q and ebb-tide Q G, vhile the Moon is above the horizon (which we called the ſuperior tide), exceeds the duration of the whole inferior ride GE G by ſour times G O (reckoned in lunar hours.) If thę ſpheroid be ſuppoſed to touch the ſphere in  and F, then C is the height of the tide. At L, the height oſ the tide is LL, and if the concentric circle L'q be deſeribed, C4 is the diſference between the ſuperior and inferior tides. From this conſtru/tion we leam, in general, that when the Moon has no declination, the duration of the ſuperior and inferior tides of one day are equal, over all the Earth. 671. 2. Iſ the Moon has declination, the ſuperior tide will be of longer or oſ ſhorter duration than the inferior tide, according as the Moon's declination B Q, and the latitude C Q of the place oſ obſervation are of the ſame or of diſferent denominations. 672. 3. When the Moon's declination is equal to the colatitude of the place of obſervation, or exceeds it, that is, if B Q is equal to N, or exceeds it, there will be only a ſuperior or inſerior tide in the courſe of a lunar day. For in this caſe, the parallel of the place of obſervation will paſs through ſ, or between N and f, as  n. 673. 4. The ſine of the arch G O is æ tan. lat. x tan. declin. For rad.: cot. 4 O G æ tan. à G: ſin. G O, and ſin. G Oæ tan. d G X cot. OG. Now 4 G is the Iatitude, and dO G is the codecl. 674. The heights of the tides are affected in the titude of the place of obſervation. The height of the ſuperior tide exceeds thut of the inferior, if the Moon's declination ĩs oſ the ſame denomination with the latitude of the place, and vſæ veriã. It often happens that the reverſe of this is uniſormly obſerved. Thus, at the Nore, in the entry to the river Thames, the inferior tide ĩs greater than the ſuperior, when the Moon has north declination, and vice vers?. But this happens becauſe the tide at the Nore is only the derivation of the great tide which comes round the north of Scotland, ranges along the eaſtern coaſts of Britain, and the high water of a ſuperior fide arrives at the Nore, while that of an inferior tide is ſformed at the Orkney iſlands, the Moon heing under the hę; izon. 675. The height of the tide in any place, occaſioned by the action of a ſingle luminary, ĩs as the ſquare of the coſine oſ the zenith or nadir diſtance of that luminary. Hence we derive the following conſtruction, which will æxpreſs all the modifications of the lunar tide produced by declination or latitude. It will not he far from the truth, even for the compound tide, and it is pesfectly exact in the caſe oF ſpring or neap-tides. With a radius C Q (ſig. 74.) taken as the meaſure of the whole elevation of a lunar tide, deſeribe the circle EP G ꝓ, to repreſent a terreſtrial meridian, vhere P and ꝓ are the poles, and E Q the equator. Biſect CP in O, and round O deſcribe the circle P BCD. Let M be that point of the meridian which has the Moon in the zenith, and let Z be the place of obſervation. Draw the diameter Z CN, cutting the ſmall circle in B, and MCm cutting it in A Draw AI porallel t0 E Q. Draw the diameter B OD of the inner circle; and draw IX, GH, and AF perpendiculor to BD. Laſtly, draw ID, IB, AD, AB, and CIM, cutting the meridian in M. i Aſter half a diurnal revolution, the Moon comes into the meridian at M, and the angle M CN is her diſtance from the nadir of the obſerver. The angle ICB is the ſupplement of ICN, and is alſo the ſupplement of IDB, the oppoſite angle of a quadrilateral in a circle. Therefore ID B is equal to the Moons nadir diſtance. Alſo ADB, being equal to ACB, is equal to the Moors zenith diſtance. Therefore, accounting D B as the radius of the tables, DF and DK are as the ſquares of the coſines oſf the Moons Zenith and nadir diſtances; and ſince PC, or DB, was taken as the meaſure of the whole lunar tide, DF will be the elevation of high water at the ſituation Z of the obſerver, when the Moon is above his horizon, and DK is the height of the ſubſequent tide, vhen the Moon is under his horizon, or, more accurately, it is the height of the tide ſeen at the ſame moment with DF, by a ſpectator at 2 in the ſame meridian and parallel. (For the ſubſequent tide, though only twelve hours aſter, ill be a little greater or leſs, according as they are on the increaſe or decreaſe). DF, then, and DE, are proportional to the heights of the ſuperior and inferior tides of that day Moreover, as AI biſected in G, F K is biſected in H, and D H is the arithmetical mean between the heights of the ſuperior and inſerior tides. Accounting O C as the radius of the tables, A G is the ſine of the arch A C, which meaſures twice the angle M C Q, the Moors declination. O G is the coſine of twice the Moons declination. Alſo the angle B O G is equal to twice the angle B CQ, the latitude of the obſerver. Thereſore O H æ coſ. 2 decl x coſ. 2 lat, and D H æD O 4 OH, æM X 14+ coſ. 2 decl.  x coſ. 2 lat. 2 l dium tide will be ſfound of continual uſe. This value of the meThis conſtruction gives us very diſtinct eonceptions of all the modiſications of the height oſ a Iunar tide, proceeding ſrom the various declinations of the Moon, and the poſition of the obſerver; and the height oſf the compound tide may be had by repeating the conſtruction for the Sun, ſubſtĩtuting the declination of the Sun for that of the Moon, and S for M in the laſt formula. The two elevations belng added together, and 2 M FS taken from the ſum, we have the heĩght required. If i©t is a ſpring-tide that we calculate for, there is ſcarcely any occaſion for two operations, hecauſe the Sun cannot then be more than ſix degrees from the Moon, and the pole of the ſpliorold will almoſt coincide with the Moons place. We may now draw ſome inferences from this repreſentation. 676. 1. The greateſt tides happen when the Moon is in the Zenith or nadir of the place of obſervation. For as M approaches to Z, A and I approach to B and D, and when they coincide, F coincides with B, and the height of the ſuperior tide is then /M. The medium tide however diminiſhies by this change, becauſe G comes nearer to O, and conſequently H comes alſo nearer to O, and D H is diminiſhed. If, on the other hand, the place of obſervation be changed, Z approaching to M, the ſuperior, inferior and medium tĩdes are all increaſed. For in ſuch caſe, D ſepurates from I, and DE, D H, and D F are all enlarged. 77. 2. E ihe Moon be in the equator, the ſuperior ar inſerior tide; are equul, and æ M X coſ.: lat. Yor then A and ĩ colncide with C; and F and K coaIeſce in7; ard Iiĩ =mDDL x coſ. BDC, æD B x coſ.} ZC Q. ;8. 3. IT the place of obſcrvation be in the equator, the ſuperior and inferior tides are equal every where, and are æM æ coſè, declin. &. Tor B then coincides with C; the poits F and K concide with G; and P G =PC x coſ CP A, æM x coſ.? M C Q. 679. 4. The ſuperior tides are greater or leſs than the inferior tides, according as Z and M are on the ſame or on oppoſite ſides of the equator. For, by taking QZ on the other ſide of the equator, equal to QZ, and drawing ZCæ, cutting the ſmall circle in B3, we ſes that the figure is ſimply reverſedl. The magnitudes and proportions of the tides are the ſame in either caſe, but the combination is inverted, and what belongs to a ſuperior tide in the one caſe belongs to an inſerior tide in the other. l 680. 5. If the colatitude be equal to the Moons declination, or Ieſs than it, there will be no inferior tide, or no ſuperior tide, according as the latitude and Moons declination are of the ſame or of different denominationss. For when PZ M Q, D coincides with I, and X alſ coincides with . Alſo when PZis leſę than MQ, D ſalls below I, and the point Z never paſſes through the equator oſ the watery ſpheroid. The Jow water m m (ſig. 73.) obſerved in the parallel ?m is only a lower part of the ſame tide 4, of which the high water is alſo obſerved in the ſame place. In ſuch ſituations, the tides are very ſmall, and are ſubjected to ſingular varieties which ariſe from the Moon's change of declination and diſtance. Such tides can be ſeen only in the circumpolur regions. The inhabitants of Iceland notice a period of nineteen years, in which their tides gradually increaſe and diminiſh, and exhibit very ſingular phcnomena. This is undoubtedly owing to the revolution of the Moons nudes, by which her declination is conſiderably aſcctedl. That iſland is preciſely in the part oſ the ocean where the eſfect of this is moſt remarkable. A regiſter kept there would be very nſtructive; mnd it is to be hoped that this will be done, as in that ſequeſtrated Thulè, there is a zealous aſtronomer, M. Lievog, furniſhed with good inſtruments, to whom this ſeries of obſervations has been recommended. 681. 6. At the very pole there is no daily tide. Eut there is a gradual riſe and ſubſidence of the water twice in a month, hy the Moon's declining on both ſides oſ the equator. The water is loweſt at the pole when the Moon is in the equator, and it riſes about twenty-ſix inches when the Moon is in the tropies. Alſo, when her aſcending node is in the vernal equinox, and ſhe has her greateſt declination, the water will be thirty inches above its loweſt ſlate, by the action oſ the Moon alone. 682. 7. The medium tide is, as has already been 1 + coſ. 2 decl. ¢ x coſ. 2 lat. 2--// As the Moons declination never exceeds 300, the coobſerved, / M x ſime of tuice her deelination ĩs alwavs a poſirive quantity, and never leſs than 2. When the latitude is leſs than 45, the coſine of twice the latitude iĩs ulſo poſitive, but negative when the latitude exceeds 455. Attending to theſe circumſtances, we may inſer, 683. 1. That the mean tides are equally aſfected by the northerly and ſoutherly declinations of the Moon. 684. 2. Iſ the latitude be exactly 45°, the mean tide is always the ſame, and 4 M. For in this caſe BD is perpendicular to PC, and the point H always coincides with O. This is the reaſon why, on the coaſts of France and Spain, the tides are ſo little afected by the declination of the luminaries. 685. 3. When the latitude is leſs than 45°, the mean-tides increaſe as the declination of the Moon diminiſhes. For ⸗ſin. 2 lat. being then a poſitive quantity, the formula increaſes when the coſine of the declination of the Moon increaſes, that is, it diminiſhes when the declination of the Moon increaſes. As B Q diminiſhes, G comes nearer to C, and H ſeparates from O towards B, and D H increaſes. But if the latitude exceed 450, the point H muſt fall Letween O and D, and the mean-tide will increaſe as the dæclination increaſes. &86. 5. IfF the latitude be  o, the point H coincides with G, and the eſſect of the Moos derlination is then the moſt ſenſiblee. The mean-tide in this caſe is 1 coſ. 2 declin. M x Lt col2 seclin-ſ . G85. Every thing that has been determined here for the lunar tide may eaſily be accommodated to the high uend Iow water of the compound tide, by repeating the computations with S in the place of M, as the conſtant coeſſicient. But, in general, it is almoſt as exact as the nature of the queſtion will admit, to attend only to the Iunar tide. The declination of the real Tummit of the ſpheroid, in this caſe, never diſfers from the declination of the ſummit of the lunar tide more than two degrees, and the correction may be mado at any time by a little reſleetion on the ſimultaneous poſition oſ the Sun. What has been ſaid is ſtrictly applicable to the ſpring-tides. M F 51tũde x ſin. d O (fig 73.) ĩs the quantity to be added to the tide found by the conſtruction. It is exact in ſpring-tides and very near the truth in all other caſes. The ſin.? d O is æ SInt . VFor ſin. dOG: coſ. decl. fin. d G O æ ſin. d G: ſin. à O. Such, then, are the more ſimple and general conſequences of gravitation on the waters of our ocean, on the ſuppoſition that the whole globe is covered with water, and that the ocean always has the ſorm which produces a perſect equilibrium of ſorce in every particle. 686. But the globe is not ſo covered, and it is clear that there muſt be a very great extent of open ſea, in order to produc⸗ that elevation at the ſummit of the ſpheroid which correſponds with the accumulating force of the Iuminaries. A quadrant at leaſt of the ellipſe is neceſſary for giving the whole tidee With Ieſs than this, there will not be enough of water to make up the ſpheroid. And, to produce the ſull daily viciſſirude of high and low water, this extent of ſea muſt be in longitudee An equal extent in latitude may produce the greateſt elevation; but it will not produce the ſeries of heights that ſhould occur in the courſe of a lunar day. In conſined ſeas of ſmall extent, ſuch as the Caſpian, the Euxine, the Baltic, and the great Iakes in North America, the tides muſt be almoſt inſenſiblee. For it is evident that the greateſt diſference of height on the ſhore of ſuch confined ſeas can be no more than the deflection from the tangent oſ the arch of the ſpheroĩd contained in that ſea. This, in the Caſpian Sea, cannot exceed ſeven inches; a quantity ſo ſmall, that a ſlight breeze of wind, ſetting oſf ſiore, will be ſuſſicient for preventing the accumulation, and even for producing a depreſſion. A moderate breeze, blowing along the canal in St James's Park at London, raiſes the water two inches at one end, while it depreſſes it as much at the other. The only conſined ſeas of conſiderable extent are the Mediterranean and the Red Sea. The ſirſt has an extent of 400 in longitude, and the tides there might be very ſenſible, were it on the equator, but being in lat. 35 nearly, the eſſects are leſſened in the proportion of ſive to four. In ſuch a ſituation, the phenomena are very diſferent, both in regard to time and to Eind, ſrom what they would be, if the Mediterranean were part oſ the open ocean. Its ſurface will be parallel to what it would be in that caſe, but not the ſame. This will appear by inſpection of ſig. 75, where m 7ꝓ repreſents the natural level of the ocean, and Mo Q repreſents the watery ſpheroid, having its pole in M, and its equator at Q. Ss may repreſent a tide poſt, ſet up on the ſhore of Syria, at the eaſt end oſ the Mediterranean, and Go a poſt ſet up at the Gut of Gibraltar, which we ſnall ſuppoſe at preſent to be dammed up. When the Moon is over M, the waters of the Mediterranean aſſume the ſurface gr s, parallel to the correſponding portion of the elliptical ſurſace Q M, croſſing the natural ſurface at r, nearly in the middle of its length. Thus, on the Syrian coaſt, there is a conſiderable elevation of the waters, and at Gibraltar, there is a conſiderable depreſſion. In the middle of the length, the water is at its mean height. The water of the Atlantic Ocean, an open and extenſive ſea, aſſumes the ſurface of the equilibrated ſpheroid, and it ſtands conſiderably higher on the outſide of the dam, as is ſeen by Go, than on the inſide, as expreſſed by G g. It is nearly low water within the Straits, while it is about 4 or à ſlood without. The water has been ebbing for ſome hours within the Straits, but ſlowing for great part of the time without. As the Moon moves weſtward, toward Gibraltar, the water will begin to riſe, but ſlowly, within the Straits, but it is flowing very faſt without. When the Moon gets to P, things are reverſed. The ſummit of the ſpheroid (it being ſuppoſed a ſpring-tide) is at P, and ĩt is nearly high water within the Straits, but has been ebbing for ſome hours without. It is low water on the coaſt of Syria. All this while, the water at 7, in the middle of the Mediterranean, has not altered ĩts height by any ſenſible quantity. It will be high water at one end of the Mediterranean, and low water at the other, when the middle is in that part of the general ſpheroid where the ſurface makes the moſt unequal angles with the vertica. This will be nearly in the octants, and therefore about 13 hours before and aſter the Moon's ſouthing (ſuppoſing it ſpringtide). Theſe obſervations greatly contribute to the explanation of the ſingular currents in the Straits of Gibraltar, as they are deſcribed by diſſerent authors. For although the Mediterranean is not ſhut up, and altogether ſeparated ſfrom the Atlmtic Ocean at Gibraltur, the communication is extremely ſeanty, and by no means ſuſſicient for allowing the tide of the ocean to diſſuſe itſel? into this baſon in a regular mammer. Changes of tide, always different, and frequently quite oppoſite, are obſerved on the caſt and weſt ſide of the narrow neek which connects the Rock with Spain; and the general tenor of thoſe changes has a very great anãalogy with what has now been deſcribed. The tides in the Mediterranean are ſmall, and thereſore eaſily aſſected by windss. But they are remarkably regular. This may be expected. For as the collection or abſtraction neceſſary for producing the change is but ſmall, they are ſoon accompliſnhed. The regiſters of the tides at Venice and ſome other ports in the Adriatic are ſurpriſingly conformable to the theory. See Phil. Tranſ. Vol. LXVII. From this example, it is evident that great deviations may be expected in the obſerved phenomena of the tides from the immediate reſults of the ſimple unobſtructed theory, and yet the theory may be fully adequate to the explanation of them, when the circumſtances of local ſituation are properly conſidered. 838. Tle real ſtate oſ things is ſuch, that there are very ſew parts of the ocean where the theory can be applied without very great modiſications. Perhaps the great Paciſic Ocean is the only part oſ the terriqueous globe in which all the ſorces Iiuve room to operate. When we conſider the terreſtrial globe as placed beſore the acting luminaries, which have a relative motion round it ſfrom eaſt to weſt, and corſider the accumulation of the waters as keeping pice with them on the ocean, we muſt ſce that the tides with which we are moſt familiarly acquiinted, numely, thoſe which viſit the weſtern ſores of Europe and Aſrica, and the eaſtern ſhores of America, muſt alſo be irregular, and be greatly diverſiſied by the ſituation of the conſts. The accumulation on our coaſts muſt be in a great meaſure ſupplied by what comes from the Indiun and Ethiopic Ocean from the eaſtward, and what ĩs brought, or Eept back, ſrom the South Sea; and the accumulation muſt be diſſuſed, as from a collection coming round the Cape of Good ſope, and round Cape Horn. Accordingly, the propagation of high water is entirely conſonant with ſuch a ſuppoſition. It is high water at the Cape of Good IHope about three o'clock at new and full moon, and it hnppens later and later, as ve proceed to the northward along the coaſt of Aſrica; Iater and later ſtill as we ſollow it along the veſt coaſts of Spain and France, till we get to the mouth of the Engliſ Chanmel. In ſhort, the high water proceeds along thoſe ſiores juſt like the top oſ a wave, and it may be ſollowed, hour aſter hour, to the diſerent harbours along the coat. The ſame wave continues its progreſs northwards (for it ſeems to be the only ſupply), part of it going up St George's Channel, part going northward by the weſt ſide of Ireland, and a branch of it going up the Engliſh Channel, between this iſland and France. What goes up by the eaſt and weſt ſides of Ireland unites, and proceeds ſtill northward, along the weſtern coaſts and iſands of Scotland, and then difſfuſes itſelf to the eaſtward, toward Norway and Denmark, and, cireling round the eaſtern coaſts of Britain, comes ſouthward, in what is called the German Ocean, till it reaches Dover, where it meets with the branch which went up the EngIiſh Channel. 689. It is remarkable that this northern tide, aſter having made ſuch a circuit, is more powerful than the branch which proceeds up the Engliſh Channel. It reaches Dover about a quarter of an hour before the Aouthern tide, and forces it backwards for half an hour. It muſt alſo be remarked, that the tide which comes up channel is not the ſame with the tide which meets it from the north, but is a whole tide earlier, if not two tides. For the ſpring-tide at Rye is a tide earlier than the ſpring-tide at the Nore. It even ſeems more nearly two tides earlier, appearing the one as oſten as the other. This may be better ſeen by tracing the hour of high water from the Lizard up St George's Channel and along the weſt coaſts of Scotland. Now it is very clear that the ſuperior tide at the Orkney iſlands is ſimultaneous with the inferior tide at the mouth of the Thames. It is therefore moſt probable that the Orkney tide is at leaſt one tide later than at the Lizard. The whole of this tide is very anomalous, eſpecially aſter getting to the Orkneys. It is a derivative ſfrom the great tide of the open ſea, vhich being very diſtant, is ſubjected to the inſluence oſ hard gales, at a diſtance, and frequently unlike what is going on upon our coaſts. 690. A ſimilar progreſs of the ſame high water ſfrom the ſouthward, is obſerved along the eaſtern ſhores of South America. But, after paſſing Brazil and Surinam, the Atlantic Ocean becomes ſo wide that the eſfect of this high water, as an adventitious thing ſupplied from the ſouthward, is not ſo ſenſible, becauſe the Atlantic itſelf is now extenſive enough to contribute greatly to the formation of the regular ſpheroid. But it contributes chieſly by abſtraction of the waters from the American ſide, while the accumulation is forming on the European ſide of the Atlanticc. By ſtudying the ſucceſſive hours of high water along the weſtern coaſts of Africa and Europe, it appears that it takes nearly two days, or between four and ſive tides, to come from the Cape of Good Hope to the mouth of the Engliſh Channel. This remark is of peculiar importance. 6&1. Few obſervations have, as yet, been made public concerning the tides in the Great Paciſic Ocean. They muſt exhibit phenomena conſiderably diſferent ſrom what aræ ſeen ĩn the Atlantic. The vaſt ſtretch of uninterrupted coaſt from Cape Horn to Cooks Straits, prevents all ſupply from the eaſtward for maæking up the ſpheroid. So far as we have inſormation, it appears that the tides are very unlike the Europemn tides, til we get 40 or 5 weſt ſfrom the conſt of America. In the neighbourhood oſ that coaſt, there is ſcarcely any inferior tidee. Even in the middle of the vaſ Paciſic Ocean the tides are very ſmall, but abundantly regular. 692. The ſetting oſ the tides is aſſected, not only by the form of the ſhores, but alſo by the inequalities which undoubtedly obtain in the bortom of the ocean. A deep and long valley there will give a direction to the waters which move along it, even although they far overtop the higher perts on each ſide, jut as we obſerve the wind ſollow the courſe of the vællies. This direction of the undermoſ vaters aſſects thoſe that ſlow above them, in conſequence of the mutual adheſion oſ the ſilaments; and thus the whole ſtream is deſlected from the direction vhich it would Iave taken, had the ground been even. By ſuch deſlections the path is lengthened, and the time of its reaching a certain place is protracted; and this produces other deviations from the calculations by the ſimple theory. 693. Theſe peculiaritios in the bed or channel alſo greatly aſect the heſght of the tides. When a wave of a certain magnitude enters a channel, it has a certain quantity oſf motion, meaſured by the quantity of water and its velocity. If the channel, keeping the ſame depth, contract in its widih, the water, keeping ſor a while ĩt miomentum, muſt increaſe its velocĩty, or ĩts depth, or both. And thus it may happen that, although the greateſt elevation produced by the joint action oſ the Sun and Moon in the open ſea does not exceed eſſht or nine feet, the tide in ſome ſinguler ſituations may mount conſiderably higher. It ſcoms to be owing to this that the high water oſ the Atlantic Ocean, which at St Ilelena does not exceed ſour or ſive ſeet, ſetting in obliquely on the conſt of North America, ranges along that coaſt, in a channel gradually narrowing, till it is ſtopped in the Bay of Fundy as in a hook, and there it heaps up to an aſtoniſhing degree. It ſometimes riſes 120 ſcet in the harbour of Annapolis-Roya. Were it not that we ſee inſtunces of as ſtrange eſſects of a ſudden check given to the motion of water, we ſhould be diſpoſcd to think that the theory is not adequate to the explanation of the phenomena. But the extreme diſparity that we may obſerve in pluces very near each other, and which derive theix tide ſfrom the very ſame tide in the open ſea, muſt convince us that ſuch anomalies do not impugn the general principle, although we ſhould never be able ſully to account for the diſcrepancy. 694. Nothing cauſes ſo much irregularity in the tides as the reſlection of the tide from ſhore to ſhore. If a pendulum, while vibrating, receives little impulſes, at intervals that are always the ſame, and very nearly equal to its own vibrations, or even to an aliquot part of them, the vibrations may be increaſed to a great magnitude aſter ſome time, and then will gradually diminiſh, and thus have periods of increaſe and decreaſe. So it happens in the undulation which conſtitutes a tide. The ſituation of the coaſts may be ſuch, that the time in which this undulation would, of itſelf, play backward and forward ſrom ſhore to ſhore, may be ſo exactly fitted to the recurring action oſ the Moon, that the ſucceeding impulſes, always added to the natural undulation, may raiſe it to a height altogether diſproportioned to what the action of the Moon can produce in open ſea, where the undulation diſfuſes itſelf to a vaſt diſtance. What we ſee in this way ſhould ſuſſice for accounting for the great height of the tides on the coaſts of continents. Dan. Bernoulli, juſtly thinking that the obſtructions of various kinds to the movements of the ocean ſhould make the tides leſs than what the unobſtructed forces are able to produce, concluded, from the great tides actually obſerved, and compared with the tides producible by the Newtonian theory, that this theory was erroneous. He thought it all derived from Newtons erroneous idea of the proportion of the two axes of the terraqueous globe; vhich miſtake reſults from the ſuppoſition of primitive ſluidity, and uniform denſity. He inveſtigates the form of the Earth, accommodated to a nucleus of great denſity, covered with a rarer ſluid, and he thinks that he has demonſtrated that the height of the tide will be in proportion to the comparative denſity of this nucleus, or the rarity of the fluid. This, ſays he, alone can account for the tides that we really obſerve; and which, great as they are, are certainly only a part of what they would be, were they not ſo much obſtructed. This is extremely ſpecious, and, coming from an eminent mathematician, has conſiderable authority. But the problem oſ the ſigure oſ the Earth has been examined with the moſt ſcrupulous attention, ſince the days o? M. Bernoulli, by the firſt mathematicians of Europe, who are all perfectly agreed in their deductions, and conſirm that of Sir Iſaac Newton. They have alſo proved, and we apprehend that it is ſuſficiently eſtabliſhed in art. 603, that a denſer nucleus, inſtead of making a greater tide, will make it ſmaller than if the whole globe be of one denſity. The ground of Bernoulli's miſtake has alſo been clearly pointed out. There remains no other way of accounting for the great tides but by cauſes ſuch as have now been mentionedc. When the tides in the open Paciſfic Ocean never exceed three or four feet, we muſt be convinced that the extravagant tides obſerved on the coaſts of great continents are anomalies; for there, the obſtructions are certainly greater than in the open ſea. We muſt therefore look for an explanation in the motions and colliſions of diſturbed tides. Theſe anomalies thereſore bring no valid objection againſt the general theory. 695. There are ſome ſituations where it is eaſy to explain the deviations, and the explanation is inſtructive. Suppoſe a great navigable river, running nearly in a meridional direction, and falling into the ſea in a ſouthem coaſt. The high water of the ocean reaches the mouth of this river (we may ſuppoſe] when the Sun and Moon are together in the meridian. It is therefore a ſpringtide high water at the mouth of the river at noon. This checks the ſtream at the mouth of the river, and cauſes it to deepen. This again checks the current farther up the river, and it deopens there alſo, becauſe there is alvavs the ſame quuntity of land water pouring into it. The ſtream is not perhaps ſtopped, but only retarded. But this cannot happen without its growing deeper. This is propagated farther and farther up the ſtream, and it is perceived at a great diſtance up the river. But this requires a conſiderable time. Our knowledge in hydraulics is too imperſect as yet to enable us to ſay in what number of hours this ſenſible check, indicated by the ſmaller velocity, and greater depth, will be propagated to a certain diſtanceo. We may ſuppoſe it juſt a lunar day before it arrive at a certain wharf up the river. The Moon, at the end of the day, is again on the meridian, as it was when it was a ſpring-tide at the mouth of the river the day beſore. But, in this interval, there has been another high water at the mouth of the river, at the preceding midnight, and there has juſt been a third high water, about fifteen minutes before the Moon came to the meridian, and thirty-five minutes after the Sun has paſſed it. There muſt have been two low waters in the interval, at the mouth of the river. Now, in the ſame way that the tide of yeſtrday noon is propagated up the ſtream, the tide of midnight has alſo proceeded upwards. And thus, there are three coexiſtent high waters in ſhe river. Gne of them is a ſpring-tide, and it is far up, at the wharf àbove mentioned. The ſecond, or the midnight tide, muſt be half way up the river, and the third is at the mouth of the river. And there muſt be two low waters intervening. The low water, that is, a ſtate of the river below its natural level, is produced by the paſſing low water of the ocean, in the ſame way that the high water was. For when the ocean falls helow its natural level at the mouth of the river, it occaſions a greater declivity of the iſfuing ſtream of the river. This muſt augment its velocity this abſtracts more water from the ſtream above, and that part alſo ſinks below its natural level, and gives a greater declivity to the waters behind ?t, &e. And thus the ſtream is accelerated, and the depth is leſſened, in ſucceſſion, in the ſame way as the oppoſite eſfects were producedl. We have a low water at different wharfs in ſuceſſion, juſt as we had the high waters. 696. This ſtate of things, which muſt be familiarly nown to all Who have paid any attention to theſe matters, being ſeen in almoſt every river which opens into a tide way, gives us the moſt diſtinct notion of the mechaniſm of the tides. The daily returning tide is nothing but an undulation or wave, excited and maintained by the action of the Sun and Moon. It is a great miſtake to imagine that we cannot have high water at London Bridge (for example) unleſs the water be raiſed to that level all the way from the mouth of the Thames. In many places that are far ſfrom the ſea, the ſtream, at the moment of high water, is down the river, and ſometimes it is conſiderable. At Quebec, it runs downward at leaſt three miles per hour. Thereſore the water is not heaped up to the level; for there is no ſtream without a declivity. The harbour at Alloa in the river Forth is dry at low water, and the bottom is about ſix feet higher than the higheſt water mark on the ſtone pier at Leith. Yet there are at Alloa tides oſ twenty, and even twenty-two ſuet, All Leith would then be under water, iſ it ſtood level from Alloa at the time of high water there. Aſter conſidering a tide in this way, any perſon who has remarked the very ſtrange motions of a tide river, in its various bendings and creeks, and the currents that are frequently obſerved in a direction oppoſite to the general ſtream, will no longer expect that the phenomena of the tides will be ſuch as immediately refult from the regular operation of the ſolar and lunar forces. 697. There is yet another cauſe of deviation, which is perhaps more diſſimilating than any local circumſtances, and the operation of which it ĩs very diſſicult to ſtate familiarly, and yet preciſely. This is the inertia, as it ĩs called, of the waters. No finite change of place or of velocity can be produced in an inſtant by any accelerating force. Time muſt elapſe before a ſtone can acquire ;ny meaſurable velocity by falling. Suppoſe the Earth ſluid to the centre, and at reſt, without any external diſturbing force. The ocean will form a perfect ſphere. Let the Moon now act on it. The waters will gradually riſe immediately under the Moon and in the oppoſite part of the Earth, ſimking all around the equator of the ſpheroid. Each particle proceeds to its ultimate ſituation with an accelerated motion, becauſe, till then, the diſturbing force exceeds the tendency of the water to ſubſidee Therefore, when the form is attained which balances thoſe forces, the motion does not ſtop, juſt as a pendulum does not ſtop when it reaches the loweſt point of its arch of vibration. Suppoſe that the Moon ceaſes to act at this inſtant. The motion will ſtill go on, and the ocean will overpaſs the baIanced ſigure, but with a retarded motion, as the pendulum riſes on the other ſide of the perpendicular. It will ſtop at a certain form, when all the former acceleration is done away by the tendency of the water to ſubſide. It now begins to ſubſide at the poles of the ſpheroid, and to riſe at the equator, and aſter a certain time, it becomes a perſect ſphere, that is, the ocean has its natural ſigure But it paſſes this figure as far on the other ſide, and makes a ſlood where there was ſormerly an ebb; and it would now oſcillate for ever, alternately ſwelling amd contracting at the points of ſyzigy and quadrature. I the Moon do not ceaſe to act, as was juſt now ſuppoſed, there will ſtill be oſcillations, but ſomewhat different ſrom thoſe now mentioned. The middle form, on both ſides of which it oſcillates in this caſe, is not the perſect ſphere, but the balanced ſpheroid. 698. All this is on the ſuppoſition that there is no obſtruction. But the mutual adheſion of the filaments of water will greatly check all theſe motions. The figure vill not be ſo ſoon formed; it will not be ſo far overpaſſed in the ſirſt oſcillation; the ſecond oſcillation will be leſs than the ſirſt, the third will be leſs than the ſecond, and they will ſoon become inſenſible. But if it were poſſible to provide a recurring force, which ſhould tend to raiſe the waters where they are already riſing, and depreſs them where they are ſubſiding, and that would always renew thoſe actions in the proper time, it is plain that this force may be ſuch as will juſt balance the obſtructions competent to any particular degree of oſcillation. Such a recurring force would juſt maintain this degree of oſcillation. Or the recurring force may be greater than this. It will thereſore increaſe the oſcillations, till the obſtructions are alſo ſo much increaſed that the ſorce is balanced by them. Or it may be leſs than what will balance the obſtructions to the degree of oſcillation excitedl. In this caſe the oſcillation will decreaſe, till its obſtructions are no more than what this force will balance. Or this recurring force may come at improper intervals, ſometimes tending to raiſe the waters when they are ſubſiding in the courſe of an oſcillation, and depreſſing them when they are riſing. Such a force muſt check and greatly derange the oſcillations; deſtroying them altogether, and creating new cnes, which it will increaſe for ſome time, and then check and deſtroy them; and will do this again and again. i Now there is ſuch a recurring force. As the Earth rurns round its axis, ſuppoſe the form of the balanced fpherold attained in the place immediately under the Moon. This elevation or pole is carried to the eaſtward by the Earth, ſuppoſe into the poſition D OB (fig. 76., the Moon being in the line OM. The pole of the watery ſpheroid is no longer under the Moon. The Moon will therefore act on it ſo as to change its ſigure, making it ſubſide in the remote quadrant B) C, and riſe a little in the quadrant Ba A. Thus its pole will come a little nearer to the line OM. It is plain that iſ B is carried farther eaſtward, but within certain limits, the ſituation of the particles will be ſtill more unſuitable to the Iunar diſturbing force, and its action on each to change its poſition will be greater. The action upon them all will therefore make a more rapid change in the poſition of the pole of the diſplaced ſpheroid. It ſeems not impoſſible that this pole may be juſt ſo far eaſt, that the changing ſorces may be able to cauſe its pole to ſhift its poſition fifteen miles in one minute. If this be the caſe, the pole of the ſpheroid will keep preciſely at its preſent diſtance from the lIine OM. For, ſince it would ſhiſt to the weſtward ſifteen miles in one minute by the action of the Moon, and is carried ſifteen miles to the eaſtward in that time by the rotation of the Earth, the one motion juſt undoes the effect of the other. The pole of the watery ſpheroid is really made to ſhiſt ſifteen miles to the weſtward on the ſurface of the Earth, and arrives at a place ſifteen miles weſt of its ſormer place the globe; but this place of arrival is carried ſifteen miles to the eaſtward; it is therefore as far from the line OM as beſore. This may be illuſtrated by a very ſimple experiment, where the operation of the acting forces is really very like that of the lunar diſturbing force. Suppoſe a chain or ſlexible rope AB CE DF laid over a pulley, and hanging down in a bight, which is a catenarean curve, having the vertical line OD for its axis, and D for its loweſt point, which the geometers call its vertex. Let the pulley be turned very ſlowly round its axis, in the direction ABC. The ſide CE will deſcend, and F A vill be taken up, every link of the chain moving in the curve CE D F A. Every link is in the vertex D in its turn, juſt as every portion of the ocean is in the vertex or pole of the ſpheroid in its turn. Now let the pulley turn round very briſkly. The chain will be obſerved to alter its ſigure and poſition. OD will no longer be its axis, nor D its vertex. It will now form a curve Ce d rA, lying to the leſt hand of CEDFA. Od will be its new axis, and à will be its vertex. Gravity acts in lines parallel to OD. The motions in the direction CE and FA nearly balance each other. But there is a general motion of every link of the hanging chain, by which it is carried from E towards F. Did the chain continue in the former catenarea, this force could not be balanced. It therefore keeps ſo much awry, in the form Cæ d f A, that its tendency by gravity to return to tions in the links ſrom E towards F. And it will ſhew this tendency by returning to that poſition, the moment that the pulley gives over turning. The more rapidly we turn the pulley round, the farther will the chain go aſide before its attitude become permanent. 700. It ſurpaſſes our mathematical knowledge to ſay with preciſion how far eaſtward the pole of the tide muſt be from the line of the Moon's direction, even in the ſimple caſe which we have been conſidering The real ſtate of things is far more complicated. The Earth is not fluid to the centre, but is a ſolid nucleus, on which flows an ocean of very ſmall depth. In the former caſe, a very moderate motion of each particle of water is ſufſicient for making the accumulation in one place and the depreſſion in another. The particles do little more than riſe or ſubſide vertically. But, in the caſe oſ a nucleus covered with an ocean of ſmall depth, a conſiderable horizontal motion is required for bringing together the quantity of water wanted to make up the balanced ſpheroid. The obſtructions to ſuch motion muſt be great, both ſuch as ariſe from the mutual adheſion of the filaments of water, and many that muſt ariſe from friction and the inequalities of the bottom, and the configuration of the ſores. In ſome places, the force oſ the acting luminaries may be able to cauſe the pole of the ſpheroid to ſiſt its ſituation as faſt as the ſurſace moves away, when the angle M OB is 20 degrees. In other places, this may not be till it is 255, and in another, 15° may be e4 nough. But, in every ſituation, there will be àn arrangement that will produce this permanent poſition of the ſummit. For when the obſtructions are great, the balanced form will not be nearly attained; and when this is the caſe, the change producible on the poſition of a particle is more rapidly effected, the forces being great, or rather the reſiſtance ariſing ſfrom gravity alone being ſmall. 7o1. The conſequence of all this muſt be, in the ſirſt place, that that form which the ocean would ultimately aſſume, did the Earth not turn round its axis, will never be attaimed. As the waters approach to that ſorm, they are carried eaſtward, into ſituations where the diſturbing forces tend to depreſs them on one ſide, while they raiſe them on the other, cauſing a weſterly undulation, which keeps its ſummit at nearly the ſame diſtance ſfrom the line of the acting luminarys direction. This weſterly motion of the ſummit of the undulation does not neceſſarily ſuppoſe a real transference of the water to the weſtward at the ſame rate. It is more like the motion of ordinary waves, in which we ſee a bit of wood or other light body merely riſe and fall without any ſenſible motion in the direction of the wave. In no caſe whatever is the horizontal motion of the water nearly equal to the motion of the ſummit of the wave. It reſcmbles an ordinary wave alſo in this, that the rate at which the ſummit of the undulation advances in any direction is very little aſfected by the height oſ the wave. Our knowledge however in hydraulics has not yet enabled us to ſay with preciſion what is the relation botween the height of the undulation and the rate of its advance. 702. Thus then it appears, in general, that the ſummit of the tide muſt always be to the eaſtward of the place aſſigned to it by our ſimple theory, and that experience alone can tell us how much. Experience is more uniform in this reſpect than one ſhould expect. For it is a mautter of almoſt univerſal experience that it is very nearly 19 or 20 degrees. In a few places it is leſs, and in many it is 5 or 6, or; degrees more. This is inferred from obſerving that the greateſt and the ſimalleſt of all the tides do not happen on the very time oſ the ſyZigies and quadratures, but the third, and in ſome places, the fourth tide aſter. Subſequent obſervation has ſhewn that this is not peculiar to the ſpring and neaptides, but obtains in al. At Breſt ſfor example) the tide which bears the mark oſ the augmentation ariſing from the Moon's proximity is not the tide ſeen while the Moon is in perigeo, but the third aſter. In ſhort, the whole ſeries of monthly tides diſagree with the ſimultaneous poſition of the luminaries, but correſpond moſt regularly vith their poſitions 357 or 38 hours before. 703. Another obſervation proper for this place is, that as diſferent extent of ſea, and diſferent depth of water, will and do occaſion a diſſerence in the time in which a great undulation may be propagated along it, it may happen that this time may ſo correſpond with the repetition of all the agitating ſorces, that the action of to-day may ſo conſpire with the remaining undulation of yeſterday, as to increaſe it by its reiterated impulſes, to a degree vaſlly greater than its original quantity. By giving gentle impulſes in this way to a pendulum, in the direction of its motion, its vibrations may be increaſed to fifty times their ſirſt ſize. It is not neceſſary, for this eſfect, that the return of the luminary into the ſavourable ſituation be juſt at the interval of the undulation. It will do if it conſpire with every ſecond or third or fourth undulation; or, in general, if the amount of its conſpiring actions exceeds conſiderably, and at no great diſtance of time, the amount oſ its oppoſing actions. In many caſes this cooperation will produce periods of augmentation and diminution, and many ſeeming anomalies, which may greatly vary the phenomena. 704. A third obſervation that fhould be made here is, that as the obſtructions to the motion of the ocean ariſing ſrom the mutual adheſion and action of the filaments are known to be ſo very great, we have reaſon to believe that the change of form actually produced is but a moderate part of what the force can ultimately produce, and that none of the oſcillations are often repeated. It is not probable that the repetitions of the great undulations can much exceed four or fivee When experiments are made on ſtill water, we rarely ſee a pure undulation repeated ſo oſten. Even in a ſyphon of glaſs, where all diſfuſions of the undulating power is prevented, they are rarely ſenſible aſter the fiſth or ſixth. A gentle ſmooth undulation on the ſurface of a very ſhallow baſon, in the view of agitating the whole depth, will ſeldom be repeated thrice. This is the form which moſt reſembles a tide. 705. Aſter this account oſ the many cauſes oſ deviation ſfrom the motions aſigned by our theory, many of which are local, and reducible to no rule, it would ſeem that this theory, which we have taken ſo much pains to eſtabliſh, is of no uſe, except that of giving us a general and moſt powerſul argument for the univerſal gravitation oſ matter. But this would be too haſty a concluſion. We ſhall find that a judicious conſideration of the diſſerent claſts of the phenomena of the tides vill ſuggeſt ſuch relations among them, that by properly combining them, we ſhall not only perceive a very ſatisfactory agreement with the theory, but ſhall alſo be able to deduce ſome important practical inferences from it. 706. Each of the diſferent modiſications of a tide has its own period, and its peculiar magnitudee Where the change made by the acting force is but ſmall, and the time in which it is eſfected is conſiderable, we may look for a conſiderable conformity with the theory; but, on the other hand, if the change to be produced on the tide is very great, and the time allowed to the forces for cſſecting it is ſmall, it is equally reaſonable to expect ſenſible deviations. If this conſideration be judiciouſly applied, we ſhall ſind a very ſatisſactory conformity. 707. Oſ all the modiſications of a tide, the greateſt, and the moſt rapĩdly eſfected, is the difſerence between the ſupcrior and inferior tides of the ſame day. When the Moon has great declination, the ſuperior tide at Breſt may be three times greater than the ſucceeding or inferior tide. But the fact is, that they dier very little. M. de la Place ſays that they do not diſfer at al. We cannot ſind out his authority. Having examined with the moſt ſerupulous attention more than 200 of the obſervations at Ereſt and Rocheſort and Port 'Orient, and made the proper allowance ſor the diſtances of the luminaries, we ean ſay with conſidence that this general aſſertion of M. de la Place is not founded on the obſervations that have been publiſhed, and it does not agree with what is obſerved in the other ports of Europe. There is always obſerved a diſference, agreeing with theory in the proportions, and in the order of their ſueceſſion, although much ſmaller. A very ſlight conſideration will give us the reaſon of the obſerved diſcrepancy. It is not poſſible to make two immediately ſucceeding undulations of inert water remarkably diſferent from each other. The great undulation, in retiring, cauſes the water to heap up to a greater height in the oſſing; and this, in diſfuſing itſelf, muſt make the next undulation greater on the ſhoree. That this is the true account of ihe matter is ſully proved by obſerving that when the theoretic diſference between thoſe two tides is very ſmall, it is as diſtinctly obſerved in the harbours as when it is great. This is clearly ſeen in the Ereſt obſervations. 708. The abſolute magnitudes of the tides are greatly modiſied by local eircumſtances. In ſome harbours there is but a ſmall diſſference between the ſpring and neap-tides, and in other harbours it is very great. But, in either caſe, the ſmall daily changes are obſerved to follow the proportion required by the theory with abundant preciſion. Counted half way from the ſpring to the neap-tides, the hourly fall of the tide is as the ſquare of the time from ſpring-tide, except ſo far as this may be changed by the poſition of the Moons perigee. In like manner, the hourly increaſe of the tides aſter neap-tide is obſerved to be as the ſquares of the time ſrom neaptide. 709. The priming and lagęing of the tides correſponds with the theory with ſuch accuracy, that they ſeem to be calculated from it, independent of obſervation. There is nothing that ſeems leſs likely to be deranged than this. Tides which diſfer very little from each other, either as to magnitude or time, ſhould be expected to follow one another juſt as the forces require. There is indeed a deviation, very general, and eaſily accounted for. There is a ſmall acceleration of doubtedly owing to the obſtructions. A ſmaller tide being leſs able to overcome them, is ſooner brought to its maximum. The deviation however is very ſmall, not exceeding 7 of an hour, by which the neap-tide anticipates the theoretical time of its accompliſhment. It would rather appear at firſt ſight that a ſmall tide would take a longer time of going up a river than a great one. And it may be ſo, although it be ſooner high water, becauſe the defalcation from its height may ſooner terminate its riſing. There is no diſference obſerved in this reſpect, when we compare the times of high water at London Bridge and at the Buoy of the Noree. They happen at the very ſame time in both places, and therefore the ſpring-tides and the neap-tides employ the ſame time in going up the river Thames. 710. This agreement of obſervation with theory is moſt fortunate; and indeed without it, it would ſcarcely have been poſſible to make any practical uſe of the theory. But now, if we note the exact time of the high water of ſpring-tide for any harbour, and the exact poſition of the Sun and Moon at that time, we can eaſily make a table of the monthly ſeries for that port, by noticing the difference of that time from our table, and making the ſame diſſference for every ſucceeding phaſis of the tide. 711. But, in thus accommodating the theoretical ſeries to any particular place, we muſt avoid a miſtake cOmmonly made by the compoſers of tide tables. They give the hour of high water at full and change of the Moon, and this is conſidered as ſpring-tide. But perhaps there is no part in the world where that is the caſe. It is uſually the third tide aſter full or change that is the greateſt of all, and the third tide after quadrature is, in moſt places, the ſmalleſt tidee Now it is with the greateſt tide that our monthly ſeries commences. Therefore, it is the hour of rhis tide that is to be taken for the hour of the harbour. But, as winds, freſhes, and other cauſes, may aſfect any individual tide, we muſt take the medium of many cbſervations; and we muſt take care that we do not conſider as a ſpring-tide one which is indeed the greateſt, but chances to be enlarged by being a perigean tide. When theſe precautions are taken, and the tides of one monthly ſeries marked, by applying the ſame correction to the hours in the third column of Bernoullis table (I.), it will be found to correſpond with obſervation with ſuſſicient accuracy for all purpoſes. In making the compariſon, it will be proper to take the medium between the ſuperior and inferior tides of each day, both with reſpect to time and height, becauſe the diſference in theſe reſpects between thoſe two tides never entirely diſappears. 712. The ſeries of changes which depend on the change of the Moon's declination are of more intricate compariſon, becauſe they are ſo much implicated with the changes depending on her diſtance. But when freed as much as poſſible from this complication, and then eſtimated by the medium between the ſuperior and inferior tide of the ſame day, they agree extremely well with the theoretical ſeries. This, by the way, enables us to account for an obſervation which would otherwiſe appear inconſiſtent with the theory, which aſſirms that the ſuperior tide is greateſt when the Moon is in the zenith (676.) The obſervation is, that on the coaſts of France and Spain the tides increaſe as the Moon ĩis nearer to the equator. But it was ſiewn in the ſame article, that in latitudes below 45°, the medium tide increaſes as the Moons declination diminiſhes. Bernoulli juſtly obſerves that the tides with which we are moſt familiarly acquainted, and from which we form all our rules, muſt be conſidered as derived from the more perfect and regular tide formed in the wideſt part of the Atlantic ocean. Extenſive however as this may be, it is too narrow for a complete quadrant of the ſpherold. Therefore it will grow more and more perfect as its pole advances to the middle of the ocean; and the changes which happen on the bounding coaſts, from which the waters are drawn on all ſides to make it up, muſt be vaſtly more irregular, and will have but a partial reſemblance to it. They will however reſemble it in ĩts chief features. This tide being ſormed in a conſiderably ſouthern latitude, it becomes the more certain that the medium tide will diminiſh as the Moons declination increaſes. But although this ſeeming objection occurs on the French coaſts, it is by no means the caſe on ours, or more to the north. We always obſerve the ſuperior tide to exceed the inſerior, if the Moon have north declination. The ſame agreement with theory is obſervable in the ſolar tides, or in the eſſect of the Sun's declination. This indeed is much ſmaller, but is obſerved by reaſon of its regularity. For although it is alſo complicated with the eſfects of the Sun's change of diſtance, this eſfet having the ſame period with his declination, one equation may comprehend them both. M. Bernoullis obſervation, juſt mentioned, tends to account for a very general opinion, that the greateſt tides are in the equinoxes. I obſerve, however, that this opinion is far from being well eſtabliſned. Both Sturmy and Colepreſs ſpeak of it as quite uncertain, and Wallis and Flamſtead reject it. It is agreed on all hands that our winter tides exceed the ſummer tides. This is thought to confirm that point of the theory which makes the Sun's accumulating force greater as his diſtance diminiſhes. I am doubtſul of the applicability of this principle, becauſe the approach oſf the Sun cauſes the Moon to recede, and her receſs is in the triplicate ratio of the Sun's approach. Her accumulating force is therefore diminiſhed in the ſeſquiplicate ratio of the Sun's approach, and her inſluence on the phenomena oſ the tides exceeds the Sun's. 713. The changes ariſing ſfrom the Moons change of diſtance are more conſiderable than thoſe ariſing from her change of declinationn. By reaſon of their implication with thoſe changes, the compariſon becomes more diſſicult. M. Bernoulli did not find it ſo ſatisfactory. They are, in general, much leſs than theory requires. This is probably owing to the mutual effects of undulations which ſhould diſfer very conſiderably, but follow each other too cloſely. In M. de Ia Place's way of conſidering the phenomena (to be mentioned afterwards) the diminution in magnitude is very accountable, and, in other reſpects, the correſpondence is greatly improved. When the Moon changes either in perigeo or apogeo, the ſeries is conſiderably deranged, becauſe the next ſpring-tide is ſormed in oppoſite circumſtances. The derangement is ſtill greater, when the Moon is in perigee or apogee in the quadratures. The two adjoining ſpringtides ſhould be regular, and the two neap-tides extremely unequal. 714. We ſhall firt conſider the changes produced on the times of ſull ſea, and then the changes in the height. M. Bernoulli has computed a table for both the perigean and apogean diſtance of the Moon, from which it will appear what correction muſt be made on the regular ſeries. It is computed preciſely in the ſame way as the former, the only difference being in the magnitude of M and S, and we may imitate it by a conſtruetion ſimilar to fig. 72. To make this table of eaſier uſe, M. Bernoulli introduces the important obſervation, that the greateſt tide is not, in any part of the world, the tide which happens on the lay oſ new or full Moon, nor even the ſirſt or the ſecond tide aſter; and that with reſpect to the Atlantic Ocean, and all ĩts coiſts, it is very preciſely the third tide. S0 that ſiould we have high water in any port preciſely at noon on the full or change of the Moon, and on the ſirſt day of the munth, the greateſt tide happens at midnight on the ſecond day of the month, or, expreſing it in the common way, it is the tide which happens when the Moon is a day and a half old. The ſummit of the ſpheroid is therefore 19 or 20 degrees to the eaſtword of the Sun and Moon. At this diſtance, the tendency of the accumulating forces of the Sun and Moon to complete the ſpheroid, and to bring its pole preciſely under them, is juſt halanced by the tendency of the waters to ſubſide Therefore it is raiſed no higher, nor can it come nearer to the Sun and Moon, becauſe then the obliquity of the force is diminiſhed, on which the changing power depends. That this is the true cauſe, appears from this, that it is, in like manner, on the third tide that all the changes are perceived which correſpond to the declination of the Moon, or her diſtance from the Earth. Every thing falls out thereſore as if the luminaries were 19 or 20 degrees eaſtward of where they are, having the pole of the ſpheroid in its theoretical ſituation with reſpect to this ſictitious ſituation of the luminaries. But, in ſuch a caſe, were the Sun and Moon 200 farther eaſtward, they would paſs the meridian 80 minutes, or one hour and 20 minutes later. Therefore 1' 20 &is added to the hours of high water of the former table, calculated for the mean diſtance of the Moon from the Earth. Thus, on the day of new Moon, we have not the ſpring-tide, but the third tide before it, that is, the tide which ſhould happen when the Moon is 20° weſt of the Sun, or has the elongation 160. This tide, in our former table, happens at 11' o2'. Therefore add to this ib 20, and we have o 22 for the hour of high water on the day of full and change for a harbour which would otherwiſe have high water when the Sun and Moon are on the meridian. In this way, by adding i* 20 to the hours of high water in the former table for a poſition of the Iuminaries 20 farther weſt, it is accommodated to the obſerved elongation of the Moon, this elongation being always ſuppoſed to be that of the Moon when ſhè is on the meridian. Such then is the following table of M. Bernoulli. The ſirſt column gives the Moons elongation from the Sun, or from the oppoſite point of the heavens, the Moon being then on the meridian. The ſecond coIumn gives the hour of high water when the Moon is in perigeo. The third column (Which is the ſame with the former table, with the addition of 1b 20) gives the hour of high water when the Moon is at her mean diſtance. And the fourth column gives the hour when ſhe is in apogeo. TABLE II. 715. This table, though of conſiderable ſervice, being ſar preſerable to the uſual tide tables, may ſometimes deviate a few minutes from the truth, becauſe it is calculated on the ſuppoſition of the luminaries being in the equator. But when they have conſiderable declination, 656 PHYSICAL ASTRONOMY. the horary arch of the equator may diſfer two or three degrees from the elongation. But all this error will be avoided by reckoning the high water from the time of the Moon's ſouthing, which is always given in our almanacks. This interval being always very ſmall (never 12°) the error will be inſenſible. For this reaſon, the three other columns are added, expreſſing the priming of the tides on the Moons ſouthing. To accommodate this table to all the changes of the Moons declination would require more calculation than all the reſtt. We ſhall come near enough to the truth, if ve leſſen the minutes in the three hour-columns,' when the Moon is in the equator, and increaſe them as much when ſhe is in the tropic, and if ve uſe them as they ſtand when ſhe is in a middle ſituation. 716. All that remains now, is to adjuſt this general table to the peculiar ſituation of the port. Therefore, collect a great number of obſervations of the hour of high water at full or changæ of the Moon. In making this collection, note pirticulaly the hour on thoſe days where the Moon is new or full preciſely at noon; for this is the circumſtunce neceſſary for the truth of the elongations in the ſſt column of the table. A ſmall equation is neceſſaryr eorrecting the obſerved hour of high water, when the ſ,Zigy is not at noon, becauſe in this ſituation of the luminarics, the tide lags 35' behind the Sun in a day, as has been already ſiewn. Suppoſe Ibe lagging to hæe 36, this will make the equation  mil nute for every hour that the full or change has happened beſore or aſter the noon of that day. This correction muſt be added to the obſerved hour oſ high water, if the ſyæigy was before noon, and ſubtracted, if it happened ufter noon. Or, if we chooſe to refer the time of high water to the Moon's ſouthing, which, in general, is the beſt method, we muſt add a minute to the time between high ſea and the Moons ſouthing for every hour and half that the ſyZigy is beſore noon, and ſubtract it if the ſyzigy has happened aſter noon. For the tides prime 15 in 24 hours. 71. Having thus obtained the medium hour of high water at full and change oſ the Moon, note the diſference of it from oh 22, and then make a table peculiar to that port, by adding that diſerence to all the numbers of the columns. The numbers of this table will give the hour of high water correſponding to the Moon's elongation for any other time. It will, however, always be more exact to refer the time to the Moon's ſouthing, for the reaſons already given. By means of a table ſo conſtructed, the time of high water for the port, in any day of the lunation, may be depended on to leſs than a quarter of an hour, except the courſe of the tides be diſturbed by winds or freſhes, vhich admit of no calculation. It might be brought nearer by a much more intricate calculation; but this is altogether umneceſſary, on account of the irregularities ariſing from thoſe cauſes. lil It is not ſo eaſy to ſtate in a ſeries the variations which happen in the height of the tides by the Moons change of diſtance, although they are greater than the variations in the rimes of high water. This is partly owing to the great diſferences which obtain in diſferent ports between the græateſt and ſmalleſt tides, and partly from the diſſiculty oſ expreſſing the variations in ſuch a manner as to be eaſily underſtood by thoſe not ſamiliar with mathematical computations. M. Bernoulli, vhom we have followed in all the practical inferences ſfrom the phyſical theory, ĩmagines that, notwithſtanding the great diſproporrion between the ſpring and neap-tides in different places, and the diſferences in the abſolute magnitudes oſ both, the middle berween the higheſt and loweſt daily variations will proceed in very nearly the ſame way as in theory. Inſtead therefore of taking the values of M and S as already eſtabliſied, he takes the height of ſpring and neap-tides in any port as indicative of M + S and M—38 fſor that port. Calling the ſpring-tide A and the neap-tide B, this principle will give us M æ A+ B and 528 From theſe values of M and S he computes their apogean and perigean values, and then conſtructs columns of the height of the tides, apogean and perigean, in the ſame manner as the column already computed for the mean diſtance of the Moon, that is, computing the parts mf and af (ſig. 72.) of the whole tide m a ſeparately. The ſame may be done with incomparably leſs trouble by our conſtruction (fig. 72.) and the values M=22 m s228. Although this is undoubtedly an approximation, and perhaps all the accuracy that is attainable, it is not founded on exact phyſical principles. The local proportion of A to B depends on circumſtances peculiar to the place; and we have no aſſurance that the changes of the lunar force will operate in the ſame manner and proportion on theſe two quantities, however different. We are certain that it will not; otherwiſe the proportion of ſpring and neap-tides would be the ſame in all harbours, however much the ſprings may differ in different harbours. T compared Bernoull's apogean and perigean tides, in about twenty inſtances, ſelected from the obſervations at Breſt and St Malo, where the abſolute quantities diſfer very widely. I was ſurpriſed, but not convinced, by the agreement. I am however perſuaded that the table is of great uſe, and have thereſore inſerted it, as a model by which a table may eaſily be computed for any harbour, employing the ſpring-tide and neaptide heights obſerved in that harbour as the A and B for that place. The table is, like the laſt, accommodated to the eaſterly deviation of the pole of the ſpheroid from its theoretical place. It appears from this table, and alſo from the laſt, that the neap-tides are much more aſſected by the inequalities of the forces than the ſpring- tides aree. The neap-tides vary from 70 to 128, and the ſprings from 90 to 114. The fſirſt is almoſt doubled, the laſt is augmentæd but 3. other, through all their poſſible magnitudes. The laſt table is the only one that is immediately applicable, by interpolation. It would require ſeveral tables of the ſame extent, to give us a ſet of equations, to be applied to the original table of art. 667.; and the computation would hbecome as troubleſome for this approximation as the calculation of the exact value, taking in every circumſtance that can aſſiect the queſtion. For that calcuIation requires only the computation of two right-angled ſpherical triangles, preparatory to the calculution of the place oſ high water. But, with all theſe imperſections, M. Bernoulli's fecond table is much more exact than any fĩde table yet publiſied, Such, on the whole, is the inſormation furniſied by the doctrine oſ univerſal gravitation concerning this curious and important phenomenon. It is undoubtedly the moſt jrrefragable argument that we have for the truth and univerſality of this doctrine, and at the ſame time for the ſimplicity of the whole conſtitution of the ſolar ſyſtem, ſo far as it can be conſidered mechanically. No new principle is required for an operation of nature ſo unlike all the other phenomena in the ſyſtem. 720. The method which I have followed in the inveſtigation is nearly the ſame with that of its illuſtrious diſcoverer. We have contented ourſelves with ſiewing various ſerieſes of phienomena, which tally ſo well with the legitimate conſequences of the theory, that the real ſource of them can no longer be doubtedl. And, notwithſtanding the various deviations from thoſe conſequences, ariſing from other circumſtances, we have obtained practical rules, which iake the mariner pretty well acquiinted with the general courſe of the tides; ſuſſiciently to put him on his guard againſt the dangers he runs by groſtly miſtaking them, and even enabling him to take advantage of the courſe of the tide for proſecuting his voyage. Still, however, a great ſtore of local information is neceſſary. For there are ſome parts of the ocean, where the tides follow an order extremely unlike what we have deſcribed. The bar of Tonquin in China is one of the moſt remarkable; and its chief peculiarity conſiſts in its having but one tide in each lunar day. It has been traced to the cooperation of two great tides, coming from oppoſite quarters, with almoſt ſix hours of diſference in the time of high water. The reſult of which ĩs, that the compound tide is the exceſs of the one above the other, forming a high water when the ſum of both their elevations is a maximum. Dr Halley has given a very diſtinct explanation of this tide in N 162 of the Philoſophical Tranſactions. 721. A very diſferent method of inveſtigating this and a ſimilar phenomenon has been employed by the eminent mathematicians D Alembert and La Place, in which M. La Place, who makes this a chief article of his Mehanique Celeſte, deduces the whole directly from the interior mechaniſm of hydroſtatical undulations. His main inferences perſectly agree with thoſe already deliI vered. The method of Newton and Bernoulli has been preferred here, becauſe by this means the connexion with the operation oſ univerſal gravitation is much better kept in ſight. At the ſame time La Place's method allows us, in ſome caſes, to ſtate the individual fact more nearly as ĩit occurs, without conſidering it as the modiſication oſ another ſact that is more genera. But it may be doubted, whether La Phee has explained all the variety oſf phenomena. Iſis whole applic. tion is limited by the data which furniſh the arbitrary qumtities in his equations. Theſe being wholly tuken from the obſervations in the ports of France and Spain, it muy be qu ſtioned whether the ſameneſs, ariſing from the latitude being ſo near 459, may not have made the ingenious author ſimplify too much his theory. He conſiders every claſs of phenomena as operations completely accompliſed, and the ocean at the end of the action of any one of the forces as in a ſtate of indiſference, ready for the free operation of the next. For example, the equality of the ſuperior and inſerior tides of one day is deduced by La Place immediately from the circumſtance of the ocean being of nearly an uniſorm depth, ſaying that the ſmall inferior tide is not aſſcõted by the greatneſs of the preceding ſuperior tide, becauſe the obſtrucrions are ſuch that all motions ceaſe very ſoon, almoſt immediately aſter the force has ceaſed to act,. We doubt the truth of the near uniſormity of the ſea's depth. The unequal tides are conſeſſedly moſt remarkable on the soaſts, where the depth is the moſt unequal. The other principle, that the eſſects of primitive motions are ali obliterated, and therefore every tide is the completed operation of the preſent force, is ſtill more queſtionable. It is well known that the roll of a great ſtorm in the Bay of Biſcay is very ſenſible indeed for three days. Of this we have hud repeated experience. The ſuperficial agitation of a ſtorm (for it is no more) is nothing in eompariſon with the huge uniform momentum of a tde; and the greateſt ſtorm, even while it blows, cannot raiſe the tide three feet; nor does it even then change what we have called the tide, the diſference between high and low water; it raiſes or keeps down both nearly alike. Beſides, how will M. La Place account for the undeniable duration of every tide wave on the coaſts of Europe and America for a day and a half? There can be no queſtion about this, becauſe the courſe of the tides during a month is preciſely conformable to it. The tide which bears the mark of the perigean tide is not the tide which happens when the Moon is in perigeo, but the third following that tide, juſt as in the ſprings and neaps. In like manner, it is obſerved at Breſt, without one exception for ſix years, that the morning or ſuperior tide at new Moon is ſmaller than the inferior tide in ſummer. In winter it is the contrary, not, however, with ſuch conſtant accuracy Now, it ſhould be juſt the contrary, if the tides obſerved were the tides correſponding with the then ſtate of the forces. But they are not. They are tides correſponding with the ſtate of the forces thirty-ſix hours before. (8ee Mem. Acad. Par. 1720, E- 26, duodecimo). It is the ſame at full Moon, that is, the morning tide in ſummer is leſs than the evening tide. The morning tide correſponding to the then ſtate oſ the forces is what we have called an inferior tide, the Moon being then under the horizon, with ſouth declination. The tide therefore ſiould be greater than the Tubſequent or evening, or ſuperior tide. But, like the laſt example, it is the tide correſponding to the forces in action thirty-ſix hours before. Can we now deny that the preſent ſtate of the waters is aſſected by the action of forces which have ceaſed thirty-ſix hours ago? and if this be granted, it ĩs impoſſible that two tides immediately ſucceeding can be very unequal. The contrary can be ſiewn in an experiment perfectly reſembling the great tides of the ocean. An apparatus, made ſor exhibiting the appenrance oſ a reciprocating ſpring, was ſo conſtructed that one of its rumings was very ſudden and copious, and the next was moderate and ſlow. It emptied into a ſmall baſon, which communicated with a long and narrow horiZzontal channel, ſhut at the far end, the baſon emptying itſelf by a ſmall ſpout on the oppoſite ſidee Thus, two very unequal floods and ebbs preſented themſelves at the mouth of this channel, and ſent a wave along it, which, at the firſt, was very unequal. But, when it was mixed with the returning wave from the far end, they were ſoon brought to an apparent equality. The experiment appearing curious, it was proſecuted, by various changes of the apparatus; and ſeveral eſfects tended very much to explain ſome of the more ſinzular appearances of the tides. There is an exampſe oſ the continuance of former impreſſions in the tides among the weſtern iſlands of Scotland, that conſiderably reſombles the tide on the bar of Tonquin. The general courſe of the flood round the little iſland of Berneray is N. E. and that of the ebb is S W. But at a certain time in the ſpring, both flood and ebb run N. E. during twelve hours, and the next flood and ebb run S. W. The contrary happens in autumn. Yet in the oſſing, the ſlood and ebb hold their regular courſes. This greatly reſembles the tide at Tonquin, and alſo the Grecian Euripus. 722. The reader will recollect that we ſtated as our opinion that, in conſequence of the inertia of the waters, the pole of the ocean is always to the eaſtward of its theoretical place. For which reaſon, the figure actually attained by the ocean is not a figure of equilibration. Did the Earth ſtand ſtill, it would ſoon be brought to its proper poſition, and completed to its due form. Thereſore, there is always a motion owards this completion: And this motion is obſtructedl. Hence we apprehend that there muſt be a perpetual current of the waters, eſpecially in the tropical regions, from eaſt to weſt. We cannot ſee how this can be avoided; and we think that it is eſtabliſed as a matter of nautical obſervation. In regard to the Atlantic, this ſeems to be a general opinion of the navigators. There are two very excellent tain Eckhart, in which there is a very frequent compariſon of the ſhips reckoning with lunar obſervations and the arrivals on known coaſts, from which we cannot help inferring the ſame general current in the Indian and Ethiopic ſeas. It ſeems therwore to obtain over the whole. The part oſ this current which diffuſes itſelf into the Atlantic is but ſmall, it having a freer paſſage ſtraight forward. But the part thus diſfuſed produces the gulf ſtream, in its way along the American coaſts, and eſcapes round the north capes of Europe and America. In all probability, a ſoutherly current may be obſerved in the ſtraits which ſeparate America from the Aſiatic continent. The whole amount of this motion cannot be conſiderable, but there muſt be ſome, if there be two circumpolar communications between the great eaſtern and weſtern diviſions of the oce?n. Without this, it muſt be reduced to a reciprocating motion too intricate for inveſtigation. 723. There is another circumſtance which ſeems to ſtrengthen our conſidence in the reality of this weſterly current of the ocean. The gravity of the waters being more diminiſhed in conjunction and oppoſition than it is augmented in quadrature with the acting luminary, each particle tends to recede from the centre, and to deſcribe a larger circle, employing a longer time. Here is a tendency or niſus to a relative motion eſterly. Woater, being almoſt perfectly ſluid, will obey this tendency, and in time acquire ſuch a motion, were it not obſtructed by ſolid obſtacles. But ſome effect muſt remain, too intricate to admit any calculation, and perhaps not ultimately ſenſible. n24. If the height of the atmoſphere be equal to the radius of the Earth, we ſhall have a tide in the air double of that in the oceann. When all the aſfecting circumſtances are conſidered, it appears that an ebb and ſlood of the atmoſphere may differ in elevation about 120 feet. This might be ſenſible by affecting the barometer. True, the gravity of the mercury is alſo diminiſhed, but not ſo much as that of the more diſtant air. But the height of the atmoſphere is too ſmall to give riſe to any ſuch tides. They cannot ſenſibly exceed thoſe of the ocean, and this cannot change the height oſ the mercury in the barometer 55 oſ an inch. Profeſſor Toaldo at Padua kept a regiſter of the barometer for more than thirty yearss He has added into one ſum all the mercurial heights obſerved at new Moon. Another ſum was made of all the heights obſerved in the quadratures; another of the perigean; and another of the apogean heights, &c. &c. He thinks that diſferences were obſerved in thoſe ſums ſuſſicient for proving the accumulation and compreſſion of the air by its unequal gravitation to the Moon. Thus, the apogean heights exceeded the perigean by 14 inches. The heighta in ſyZigy exceeded thoſe in quadrature by 1I inches. (See Mem. Berlin 1777, and a book expreſsly on the ſubject). But there is another eſfect of this diſturbing foree hich may be much more ſenſible, namely, the general weſterly current of the air. M. D'Alembert has inveſtigated this with great care, and ſingular addreſs, and has proved that there muſt be a weſterly current in the tropical regions, at the rate of eight ſeet nearly in a ſecond. This is a very adequate cauſe of the trade winds which are obſerved berween the tropics. It ĩs indeed increaſed by the rarefaction of the air occaſioned by the heat of the Sun, which expands the air heated by the ground, and it is both raiſed and diſfuſed Iaterall. When the Sun has paſſed the meridian a proper number of dægrees, the air muſt now cool, and in cooling contract behind the Sun. Air ſrom the eaſt comes in greater abundance than ſrom any other quarter to ſupply the vacancy. 725. The diſ of Jupiter, when viewed through a good teleſcope, is diſtinguiſhable into Zones, like a bit of ſtriped ſatin. Theſe zones, or belts, are of changeable breadth and poſition, but all parallel to his equator. Therefore they are not attached to his ſurface, but ſloat on it, as clouds ſloat in our atmoſphere. This Earth vill have ſomewhat of this appearance, if viewed from the Moon. For each climate has a ſtate oſ the ſky peculiar in ſome degree to itſelſ in this reſpect, and there muſt be a ſort of ſameneſs in one climate all round the globe. A ſeries of obſervations on a particular ſpot of Jupiters ſurface demonſtrate his rotation in 9 56. Spots have been obſerved in the belts, which have Iaſted ſo long as to make ſeveral revolutions before they were eſfaced. They appear to require a minute or two more for their rotation, and thereſore have a weſterly motion relative to the firm ſurface of the planet. This however cannot be depended on from the time of their rotation. But a ſew obſervations have been had of ſpots in the vicinity of the fixed ſpot of his ſurface, and here the relative motion weſtward was diſtinctly obſerved. M. Schroeter at Manheim has obſerved the atmoſphere of Jupiter with great care, and finds it exceedingly variable; and ſpots are obferved to change their ſituations with amazing rapidity, with great irregularity, but moſt commonly eaſtward. The motions and changes are ſo rapid, and ſo extenſive, that we can ſcarcely conſider them as the transference of matter from one place to another. They more reſemble the changes which happen in our atmoſphere, which are ſometimes progreſſive, over a great tract of the country. The ſtorm in 1772 was felt from Siberia to America in ſucceſſion. The gale blew from the weſt, but the chemical operation which produced it was in the oppoſite direction, being firſt obſerved in Siberia; three days aſterward, it was felt at St Peterſburg; two days àſter this, at Berlin; two days more, it was in Britain; and ſeven days aſter, it was felt in North America. Here then, while a ſpectator on the Earth ſaw the clouds moving to the eaſtward, a ſpectator in the Moon would ſee the change of appearance proceed from eaſt to weſt. The motions in the atmoſphere of Jupiter muſt be very complicated, becauſe they are the joint operation f four ſatellites. The inequality of gravitation to the firſt ſatellite muſt be very great. And as each ſatellite produces a peculiar tide, the combination of all their actions muſt be very intricate. We can draw no concluſions from the variable ſpots, becauſe their change of place is no proof of the actual transference of matter. Such a relative motion in our atmoſphere and in the ocean may affect the rotation, retarding it, by its action on the eaſtern ſurface of every obſtacle. Yet no change is obſerved. The year, and the periods of the planets, in the time of Ptolemy are the ſame with the preſent, that is, contain the ſame number of rotations of the Earth. Perhaps a compenſation is maintained by this means for the acceleration that ſhould ariſe from the transſerence of ſoil from the high land to the bottom of the ſea, where it is moving round the axis with diminiſhed velosity. 726. With this we conclude our account of phyſical aſtronomy, a department of natural philoſophy which ſhould ever be cheriſhed with peculiar affection by all who think well of human nature. There is none in which the acceſs to well founded knowledge ſeems ſo effectally barred againſt us, and yet there is none in which we have made ſuch unqueſtionable progreſs; none in which we have acquired knowledge ſo uncontrovertibly ſupported, or ſo complete. How much therefore are we indebted to the man who laid the magnificent ſcene open to our view, and who gave us the optics by which we ęan examine its moſt extenſive, and its moſt minute parts For Newton not only taught us all that we know of the celeſtial mechaniſm, but alſo gave us the mathematics, without which it would have remained unſeen.  Tu Pater et rerum Inventor. Tu potria nobis  Suppeditas praæcepta, tuiſque ex inelyte chartis  Floriferis ut upes in ſultibus omnia libant,  Omnia nos itidem depuſcimur aurea dicla  Aurea, perpetud ſemper digniſſima vitã. LUcCRETIUS. For ſurely, the leſſons are precious by which we are taught a ſyſtem of doctrine which cannot be ſhaken, or ſare that ſluctuation which has attached to all other ſpeculations of curious man. But this cannot fail us, becauſe it is nothing but a well ordered narration of facts, preſenting the events of nature to us in a way that at once points out their ſubordination, and moſt of their relations. While the magniſicence of the objects commands reſpect, and perhaps raiſes our opinion of the excellence of human reaſon as high as is juſtiſiable, we ſhould ever keep in mind that Newton's ſucceſs was owing to the modeſty oſ his procedure. Fle peremptorily reſiſted all diſpoſition to ſpeculate beyond the province of human intellect, conſcious that all attainable ſcience conſired in careſully aſcertaining nature's own laws, and that every attempt to explain an ultimate law of nature by aſſigning its cauſe is abſurd in itſelf, againſt the acknowledged Iaws of judgement, and will moſt certainly lead to error. ĩt is only by following his example that we can hope for his ſucceſo. It is ſurely another great recommendation of this branch oſ natural philoſophy, that it is ſo ſimple. One ſingle agent, a force decreaſing as the ſquare of the diſtance increaſcs, is, oſ itſelf, adequate to the production of all the movements of the ſolar ſyſtem. Ir the directſon oſ the projection do not paſs through the centre of gravity, the bodly will not only deſcribe an ellipſe round the central body, but will alſo turn round its axis. By this rotation, the body will alter its form. But the ſame power enables it to aſſume a new ſform, which is perſectly ſymmetrical, and is permanent. This new ſorm, however, in conſequence oſ the univerſulity of gravitution, indues a new motion in the body, by which the poſition oſ te axis is ſlowly changed, and the whole hoſ oſ heaven appears to the inhabitants oſ, this Earth to change its motions. Laſtly, if the revolving planet have a covering oſ ſuid matter, this ſluid is thrown into certohn regular undulations, which are produced and modiſied by the ſame power. Tlhus we ſee that, by following this ſimple fact of gravitation of every particle of matter to every other particle, through all ĩits complications, we ſind an explanation of almoſt every phenomenon of the ſolar ſyſtem that has engaged the attention of the philoſopher, and that nothing more is needed for the explanation. Till we were put on this track oſ inveſtigation, theſe different movements were ſolitary facts; and, being ſo extremely unlike, the wit of man would certainly have attempted to explain them by cauſes equally diſſi4Q milar. The happy detection oſ this ſimple and eaſily obſerved principle, by a genius qualiſied for ſollowing it into its various conſequences, has freed us from numberIeſs errors, into which we muſt have continually run vhile pertinaciouſly proceeding in an improper path. But this detection has not merely ſaved us from errors, but, which is moſt remarkeble, ĩt hns brought into view many ciredmſtances in the phenomena themſelves, many peculiarities of motion, which would never have been obſerved by us, had we not gotten this monitor, pointing out to us where to lock ſor peculiurities, We ſhould never have been able to predict, with ſuch wonderful preciſion, the complicated motions of ſome of the planets, had we not had this key to all the equations by which every deviation from regular elliptical motion is expreſſcd. On all theſe accounts, phyſical aſtronomy, or the mechaniſm of the ccleſtial motions, is a beautiful department of ſcience. IT do not know any body of doctrine ſo comprehenſive, and yet ſo exceedingly ſimple; and this conſideration made me the more readily accede to thoſe reaſons of ſcientiſic propriety which point it out as the firſt article oſ a courſe of mechanical philoſophy. Its ſimplicity makes it eaſy, and the exquiſite agreement with obſervation makes it a fine example of the truth and competency of our dynamical doctrines. ; 727. But it has other recommendations, of a ſar greater value. Nothing ſurely ſo much engages a heart poſſeſſed oſ a proper ſenſibility, as the eontemplation of order and harmony. No philoſophy is requiſite for bei-g ſuſceptible oſ this impreſion. We ſee it inſluence the conduct of the moſt uncultivated. What elſe does man aim at in all the buſtle of cultivated ſocicty? Nuy, even the ſavage makes ſome rude aim at order and ornament. But what we contemplate in the ſolar ſyſtem is ſomething more than mere order and ſymmetry, ſuch as may be obſerved in a fine ſpecimen of cryſtullization. The order oſ the ſolar ſyſtm is made up of many palpable ſulſirviences, where we ſee one thing plainly done ſfor the ſuke of another thinz. And, to render this ſtill more intercſling, a maniſet utility appears in every circumſtunce oſ the conſtitution of the ſyſtem, as far as we underſtand its applicahillty to what we conceive to be uſeſul purpoſes. We can mean notling by utility but the ſubſerviency to the enjoyments of ſentient beings. Our opportunities for obſervations of this kind are no doubt very limited, conſined to our own ſublunary habitation. Lut this circumſcribed ſcene of obſervætion is even crowded with examples of utility. Surely it is unneceſiury to recal our attention to the numberleſs adptations of the ſyſtematie connexion with the Sun and Moon to the continuanee and the diſfuſion of the means oſ animal life and enjoyment. As our knowledge of the celeſtial phenomena is enlarged, the probobility becomes ſtronger that other planets are alſo ſtored with inhabitants who ſhare with us the Creator's bounty. Their rotation, and the evident changes that we ſee going on in their atmoſpheres, ſo much reſemble what we experience here, that I imagine that no man, who clearly conceives them, can ſhut out the thought that theſe planets are inhabited by ſentient beings. And there is nothing to forbid us from ſuppoſing that there is the ſame inexhauſtible ſtore of ſubordinate contrivance ſor their accommodation that we ſce here for living creatures in every ſituation, with appropriate ſorms, deſires, and abilities. I fear not to appeal to the heart of every man who has learned ſo much of the celeſtial phenomena, even the man who ſcouts this opinion, whether he does not ſcel the diſpoſition to entertain it. And I inſiſt on it, that ſome good reaſon is required for rejecting it. 728. When beholding all this, it is impoſſible to prevent the ſurmiſe, at leaſt, of purpoſe, deſign, and contrivance, from ariſing in the mind. We may try to ſut it outWe may be convinced, that to allege any purpoſe as an argument for the reality of any diſputed fact, is againſt the rules of good reaſoning, and that final cauſes are improper topics of argument. But we cannot hinder the anatomiſt, who obſerves the exquiſite adaptation of every circumſtance in the eye to the forming and rendering vivid and diſtinct a picture oſ external objects, from believing that the eye was made for ſeeing or the hand for handling. Neither can we prevent our heart ſrom ſuggeſting the thought oſ tranſcendent wiſdom, when we contemplate the exqu ſite fitneſs and adjuſtment which the mechaniſm of the ſolar ſyſtem exhibits in all its purts. 720. Newton was certhnly thus aſl tcd, when he took a conſiderate view of all his own diſcoveries, and pereæived the almoſt eternal order and ſumeny vhich reſclts ſrom the ſimple and u. mixed operton oſ univerſal gravitation. This ſingle ſuct zrodves all this fair order and utility. Newton was a muſhomtician, and ſaw that the law of g2rivitition obſerved in the ſyſtem is the only one that can ſecure the continuance of order. IIe wos a philoſopher, and ſaw that it was a contingent Iow of gravitation, and might have been otherwiſe. Tt therefore appeared to Newton, as it would to any unprejudiced mind, a law oſ gravitation ſelected as the moſt proper, out of many that were equally poſſible; it appeared to be a choice, the act of a mind, which comprehended the extent of iĩts inſluence, and intended the advantages of its operation, being prompted by the deſire of gving happineſs to the works oſ almighty power. Impreſſtd with ſuch thoughts, Newton breaks out into the following exclamation.  Elegontiſſima haæcce compages  Solis Planetarum et Cometurum, non niſi conſilio et dominio  Entis cujuſdam potentis et intelligentis oriri potuit. Haæe  omnia regit, non ut anima mundi, ſed ut univerſorum § Dominus mundorum. Et propter dominium Dominus  Deus, Tuonurag; dici ſolet. Deitus eſl dominatio Dei,  non in corpus proprium, uti ſentiunt quibus Deus ſt ani-  ma mundi, ſed in ſerus,  &e. Theſe were the eſfuſions oſ an aſfecionate heart, ſympathiſing with the enjoyment oſ thoſe who ſired with him the advantages oſ their ſituation. Yet Nevton did not know the full extent of the harmony that he had diſcovered. e thought that, in the courſe of ages, things would go into diſorder, and need the reſtoring hand of God. But, as has been already obſerved (543.), De la Grange has demonſtrated that no ſuch diſorder will happen. The greateſt deviations ſrom the moſt regular motions will be almoſt inſenſible, and they are all periodical, waneing to nothing, and again riſing to their ſmall maximum. 730. Theſe are ſurely pleaſing thoughts to a cultivated mind. It is not ſurpriſing therefore that men of aſfectionate hearts ſiould too fordly indulge them, and that they ſiould ſometimes be miſtaken in their notions of the purpoſes anſwered by ſome of the infinitely varied and conplicated phenomena of the univerſe. And it would be nothing but what we have met with in other paths of ſpeculation, ſould we ſee them conſider a ſubſerviency to this fancied purpoſe as an argument that an operation of nature is eſfccted in one way, and not in another. In this way, the employment of final cauſes has ſometimes obſtructed the progreſs of knowledge, anũ has been productive of error. But the impropriety of this kind of argumentation proceeds chieſly ſfrom the great chance of our being miſtaken with reſpect to the a2im of nuture on the occaſion. Could this be properly eſtabliſied as a fact, and could the ſubſerviency of a preciſe mode of accompliſhing a particulur opcration be as clearly made out, I apprehend that, however unwilllng the logiciam my be to admit this as a good reaſon, he cannot help feeling its great forcee. ſhat this is true, is pluin from the rules oſ evidence that are admitted in all courts; where a purpoſe being proved, the ſubſerviency of a certain deed to that purpoſe is allowed to be evidencę that this was the intention in the commiſſion oſ that deed. It is, however, very rarely indeed that ſuch argument can be uſed, or that it is wanted, and it never ſuperſedes the inveſtigation of the eſſicient cauſe. 731. But ſpeculative men have of late years ſhewn a wonderful hoſlility to ſinal cauſes. Lord Bacon had ſaid, more witiily than juſtly, that all uſe of ſinal cauſes ſiould be baniſhed ſrom philoſophy, becauſe, c like Veſtals,  they produce nothing. This is not hiſtorically true; for much hus been diſcovered by reſcarches conducted entirely by notions oſ final cauſes. What other evidence have we ſor all that we know concerning the nature of man? Is not this a part of the book of Nature, and ſome oſ ĩts moſt beautiſul pages? We know them only by the appearances of deſign, that is, by the adaptations of thing in evident ſubſerviency to certain reſults. Are there no ſuch adaptations to be ſeen, except in the works of nan? Nature is crowded with them on every hand, and ſome oſ her moſt important operations have been aſcertained by attending to them. Dr Harvey diſcovered the chrculãation of the blood in this very way. He ſaw that the valves in the arteries and velns were conſtructed preciſely Iike thoſ of a double ſorcing pump, and that the ruſcles of the heart were alſo fitted for an alternate ſyſtole and dũſcle, ſo correſponding to the ſtructure oſ thoſe valves, thet the whole was fit for perſorming ſuch an oſice. With buldneſs thereſore he aſerted that the beatings oſ thq Leart were the ſtrokes oſ this pump; and, Iaying the heart ſſ a living animal open to the view, he had the pleaſure oſ ſeelng rhe alternate expanſion and contractions of its auricles and ventrieles, exactly as he had expectedc. Here was a diſcovery, as curious, as great, as important, as univerſal gravitation. In preciſely the ſone way have all the diſcoveries in anatomy and phyſclov bcn made. A new objuct is ſeen. The diſcoverer imm: liately examines its ſtructurwhy? To ſec what it can perſorm; and if he ſees a number of coadaptations to a particular puryoſe, he does not heſitate to ſay,  tſĩs is its purpoſe. He has oſten been miſtaken; but the mſſſakes have been gradually corrected how? By diſeovering what is the real ſtructure, and miſt never imagines that what he has diſcovered is of no uſe. 732: S0 ſar therefore from baniſhing the conſideration of ſinal cauſes from our diſcuſſions, it would look more like philoſophy, more like the love of true wiſdom, and it would taſte leſs of an idle curioſity, were we to multiply our reſearches in thoſe departments of nature where final cauſes are the chieſ objects of our attentionthe ſtructure and œconomy of organiſed bodies in the animal and vegetable kingdoms. I cannot help remarking, with regret, that of late years, the taſte of naturaliſts has greatly changed, and, in my humble opinion, for the worſe. The ſtudy of inert matter has ſupplanted that of animal lifeo. Chemiſtry and mineralogy are almoſt the ſole objects of attention. Nay, the ruins of nature, the ſhattered relicks of a former world, ſeems a more engaging object than the numberleſs beauties that now adorn the preſent ſurface of our globe. I acknowledge that, even in thoſe inanimate works, God has not left himſelf without a witneſs. Yet ſurely * I would earneſtly recommend to my young readers ſome excellent remarks on the argument of final cauſes (without which Cicero thought that there is no philoſophy) in the preface by the editor of Derhams Phyſico- Theology, publiſhed at London in 1798. He there conſiders the proper province of this argument, its uſe, and incautious abuſe, with the greateſt perſpicuity and judgement. ſurely we do not, in the bowels of the Earth, nor even in the curious operations of chemical aſſinity, ſee ſo palpably, or ſo pleaſantly, the incomprehenſible wiſdom and the providential beneſicence of the Father of all, as in the animated objects.* It is not eaſy to account for it, and perhaps the explanation would not be very agreeable, why many naturaliſts ſo faſtidiouſly avoid ſuch views of nature as tend to lead the mind to the thoughts of its Author. We ſee them even anxious to weaken every argument for the appearance of deſign in the conſtruction and operations of nature. One ſhould think, that, on the contrary, ſuch appearances would be moſt welcome, and that nothing would be more dreary and comſortleſs than the belief that chance or fate rules all the events of nature. 733. I have been Ied into theſe reſlections by reading a paſſage im M. de la Place's beautiful Synopſis of the Newtonian Philoſophy, publiſhed by him in 1796, under  A naturaliſt repeats a ſaying of his own to the celebrated ceryſtallographer Haly,  That, in future, the name of God  would be as diſtinctly written on a eryſtal as it had hitherto  been ſeen in the heavens. This ſeems to me little better than declamation, if it be not irony. Haliy is the diſcoverer of the neceſſity of the cryſtalline forms; and this philoſopher thinks himſelf the diſcoverer of a ſimilar neceſſity in the celeſtial mechaniſm. (See Nicholſus Fournal, Oũober 1804, under the title of S;ſẽme du Monde. In the whole of this work, the author miſſes no opportunity of leſſening the impreſſion that might be made by the peculiar ſuitbleneſs of any circumſtance in the conſlitution of the ſolar ſyſtem to render it a ſcene of habitation and enjoyment to ſentient beings, or which miZht lead the mind to the notion oſ the ſyſtems being contrived for any purpoſe whatever. He ſometimes, on the contrary, endeavours to ſiew how the alleged purpoſe may be much better accompliſhed in ſome other way. IIe labours to leave a general impreſſion on the mind, that the whole ſrame is the ncceſſary reſult oſ the primitive and eſſential properties of matter, and that it could not he any thing but what it is. He indeed concludes, like the illuſtrious Newton, with a ſurvey oſ all that has been done and diſcovered, followed by ſome reſlections, ſuggeſted (as he ſays) by this ſurvey.  Aſtronomy, ſavs M. de la Plee, cin ĩts preſent ſtate, s is unqueſtionably tie moſt brilliant ſpecimen oſ the pows ers of the human underſtanding. Iſe does not however tell us how ihis is ſo maniſeſt, He does not ſay that this object, which hus engaged, and ſo properly occupſed this ſine underſtanding, has any thing to juſtiſy the choice, either on account of its beautiſul ſymmetry, or exquiſite contrivance, or multiſarious utility; or, in ſiort, that is an objoct that is worth looking at. But he gives us to underſtand that aſtronomy has now taught us how much we were miſtaken, in thinking ourſelves an important part of the univerſe, ſor whoſe accommo4R dation much has been done, as if we were objects of peculiar caree But we have been puniſhed, ſays he, for theſe miſtaken notions of ſelf-importance, by the fooliſh anxieties to which they have given riſe, and by the ſubjugation to which we have ſubmitted, while under the influence of theſe ſuperſtitious terrors. Miſtaking our relations to the reſt oſ the univerſe, ſocial order has been ſuppoſed to have other foundations than juſtice and truth, and an abominable maxim has been admitted, that it was ſometimes uſeful to deceive and to ſubdue mankind, in order to ſecure the happineſs of ſociety. But nature reſumes her rights, and cruel experience has ſhewn that ſhe will not allow thoſe ſacred laws to be broken ith impunity. 734. I think it will require ſome inveſtigation before we can find out what connexion there is between the diſcoveries of Sir Iſaac Newton and this myſterious detection that M. de la Place has at laſt deduced from the ſurvey. It is communicated in the dark words of an oracle, and we are leſt to interpret for ourſelves. I can aſix no meaning but this, that ignorance and ſelf-conceit have made us imagine that this Earth is the centre, and the principal object of the univerſe, and that all that we ſee derives its value from its ſubſerviency to this Earth, and to man its chief inhabitant. We fondly imagined that we are the objects of peculiar care,that it is for us that the magnificent ſpectacle is diſplayed,and that our fortunes are to be read in the ſtarry heavens. But it is now demonſtrated that this Earth, when compared, even with ſome ſingle objects of our ſyſtem, is but like a peppercorn. The whole ſyſtem is but as a point in the univerſec How inſigniſicant then are vel But we have been juſtly puniſhed for our ſelſ-conceit, by imagining that the ſtars inſluence our fortunes, and have made ourſelves the willing dupes oſ aſtrologers and ſoothſayers. Thus far I think that M. de la Place's words have ſome meaning, but, ſurely, very little importance; nor did it call for any congratulatory addreſs to his contemporaries on their emancipation ſfrom ſuch ſears. It is more than a century ſince all thoughts oſ the central ſituation and great bulk of the Earth, and of the inſluence of the ſtars on human aſſairs, have been exploded and forgotten. But the remaining part of the remarks, about ſocial order, and truth, and juſtice, and about deceiving and enſlaving mankind, in order to ſecure their happineſs, is more myſterious.  More is meant than meets the ear.” M. de la Place carefully abſtains, through the whole of this performance, from all reference to a Contriver, Creator, or Governor of the univerſe, particularly in the preſent reflections, which are ſo pointedly contraſted with the concluding reflections of the great Newton. The oppoſition is ſo remarkable, that it ſtartles every reader who has peruſed the Principia. I cannot but ſuſpect that M. de la Place would here inſinuate that the doctrine of a Deity, the Maker and Governor of this World, and of his peculiar attention to the conduct of men, is not conſiſtent with truth; and that the ſanctions of religion, which have long been venerated as the great ſecurity of ſociety, are as lirtle conſiſtent with juſtice. The duties which we are ſaid to owe to this Deity, and the terrors of puniſiment in a future ſtate of exiſtence for the neglect oſ them, have enabled wicked men to enſlave the world, ſubjecting mankind to an oppreſſive hierarchy, or to ſome temporal tyrant. The prieſthood has, in all ages and nations, been the great ſupport of the deſpots throne. But now, man has reſumed his natural rights. The throne and the altur are overturned, and truth and juſtice are the order of the day. 735. This is by no means a groundleſs interpretation of De la Place's words. He has given abundant proofs of theſe being his ſentiments. It accords completely with his anxious endeavours, on all occaſions, to flatten or depreſs every thing that has the appearance of order, beauty, or ſubſerviency, and to reſolve all into the irreſiſtible operation of the eſſential properties of matter. 736. OF all the marks of purpoſe and of wiſe contrivance in the ſolar ſyſtem, the moſt conſpicuous is the ſelection of a gravitation in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances. Till within theſe few eventſul years, it has been the profeſſed admiration of philoſophers of all ſects. Even the materialiſts have not always been on their guard, nor taken care to ſuppreſs their wonder at the almoſt eternal duration and order which it ſecures to the ſolar ſyſtem. But M. de la Place annihilates at once all the wiſdom of this ſelection, by ſaying that this law of gravitation is eſſential to all qualities that are diſſuſed from a centre. It is the law of action inherent in an atom of matter in virtue oſ its mere exiſtence. Therefore it is no indication of purpoſe, or mark of choice, or example of wiſdom. It cannot be otherwiſe. Matter is what it is. M. de la Place was aware that this aſſertion, ſo contrary to a notion long and fondly entertained, would not be admitted without ſome unwillingneſs. He thereſore gives a demonſtration oſ his progoſition. He compares the action of gravity at different diſtances with the illumination of a ſurface placed at diſſerent diſtances from the radiant point. Thus, let light, diſfuſed from the point A (ſiz. 77.) ſhine through the hole B CDE, which we ſhall ſuppoſe an inch ſquare, and let this light be received on a ſurface bc d e parallel to the hole, and twice as far from A. We know that it will illuminate a ſurface of four ſquare inches. ſherefore, ſince all the light which covers theſe four inches came through a hole of one inch, the light in any part oſ the illuminated ſurface is four times weaker than in the hole, where it is four times denſer. In like manner, the intenſity, and eſſiciency of any quality diſfuſed from A, and operating at twice the diſtance, muſt be four times Ieſs or weaker; and at thrice the diſtance it muſt be nine times weaker, &e. &e. 737. But there is not the leaſt ſnadow of proof here, nor any ſimilarity, on which an argument may be founded. We have no conception of any degrees or magnitude in the intenſity oſ any ſuch quality as gravitation, attraction, or repulſion, nor any meaſure of them, except the very effect which we conceive them to produce. At a double diſtance, gravity will generate one fourth of the velocity in the ſame time. But this meaſure of its ſtrength or weakneſs has no connexion whatever with denſity, or figured magnitude, on which connexion the whole argument is foundedl. What can be meant by a double denſity of gravity? What is this denſity? It is purely a geometrical notion, and in our endeavour to conceive it with ſome diſtinctneſs, we find our thoughts employed upon a certain determined number of lines ſpreading every way from the radiant point, and paſſing through the hole BCD E at equal diſtances among themſelves. It is very true that 1he number of thoſe lines which ill be intercepted by a given ſurface at twice the diſtance will be only one fourth of the number intercepted by the ſame ſurface at the ſimple diſtance. But IT do not ſee how this can apply to the intenſity of a mechanical force, unleſs we can conſider this force as, an effect, and can ſhew the inſluence of each line in producing the effect which we call the force, and which we conſider as the cauſe of the phenomenon called gravitation. But if we take this view of it, it is no longer an example of his propoſitiona force diſfuſed from a centre. For, in order to have the eſſiciency inverſely as the ſquare of the diſtance, it is meaſured by the number of eſſicient lines intercepted. Here it is plain that the eſſiciency of one of thoſe lines is held to be equal at every diſtance from the centre. Such incongruity is mere nonſenſe. This conception of a bundle of lines is the ſole foundation for any argument in the preſent caſe. La Place indecd tries to avoid this by a diſſerent way of expreſſing his example. A certain quantity of light, ſays he, goes through the hole. This is uniformly ſpread over four times the ſurface, and muſt be four times thinner ſpread. But this, beſides employing a gratuitous notion of light, which may be reſuſed, involves the ſame notion of diſcrete numerical quantity. If light be not conceived to conſiſt of atoms, there can be no diſſerence of denſity; and if we conſider gravity in this way, we get into the hypotheſis of mechanical impulſon, and are no longer conſidering gravity as a primordial force or quality. l 738. But this pretended demonſtration is ſtill more deſicient in metaphyſical accuracy. The propoſition to be demonſtrated is, that the gravitation towards an atom of matter is in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtance, in whatever point of ſpace the gravitating atom is placed. But, if we take our proof of the ratio from the conception oſ theſe lines, and their denſity, we at once admit that there are an inſinity of ſituations in which there is no gravitation at all, namely, in the intervals of theſe lines. The number of ſituations in which the atom gra45 vitates is a mere nothing in compariſon with thoſe ĩr which it does not. We muſt either ſuppoſe that both the quality and the ſurſace influenced by it are continuous, uninterrupted,or both muſt be conceived as diſcrete numerical quantities, the quality operating along a certuin number of lines, and the ſurface conſiſting of a cerruin number of points. We muſt take one of theſe vies. But neither of them gives us any conception of a diſferent energy at diſferent diſtances. If the ſurface be continuous, and the quality every where operative, there can be no difference of effect, unleſs we at once admit that the energy itſelf changes with the diſtance. But this change can have no relation to a change of denſity, a thing altogether inconceivable in a continuous ſubſtance; vhere every place is ſull, there can be no more. On the other hand, if the quality be exerted only along certain lines, and the ſurface only contain a certain number of points, we can find no ground for eſtabliſhing any proportion. 739:. The ſimple and true ſtate of the queſtion is this. Suppoſe only two indiviſible atoms, or two mathematical points of ſuch atoms, in the univerſe. If theſe atoms be ſuppoſed to attract each other, wherever ihey are placed, do we perceive any thing in our conception of this force that can enable us to ſay that the attraction is equal or unequal, at diſferent diſtances? For my own part, I know nothing. The gravitation, and its law of action, are mere phenomena, like the thing which I call matter. This is equally unknown to me. I merely obſerve certain relations, which have hitherto been conſtant, and I am led by the conſtitution oſ my mind to expect the continuation oſ theſe relations. My collection of ſuch obſervations is my knowledge oſ its nature. This gravitation is one of them, and this is all that I know about it. 730. The obſerved relations may be ſuch that they involve certain conſequences. This, in particular, has conſequences that cannot be diſputed. If gravitation in the ratio of æ be the primordial relation of all matter, and the ſource of all others (which is a part of La Place's ſyſtem), it is impoſſible that a particle compoſed of ſuch atoms can act with a force which deæ creaſes more rapidly by an increaſe of diſtance. But there are many phenomena which indicate a much more rapid decreaſe of force. Simple coheſion of ſolid bodies is one of theſe. The expanſion of ſome exploding compoſitions ſnew the ſame thing. We may add, that no compoſition of ſuch atoms can form repelling particles, nor give riſe to many expanſive ſluids, or indeed to any of the ordinary phenomena of elaſtic bodies. But theſe things are not immediately before us, and we ſhall have another and a better opportunity of conſidering many things connected with this great queſtion. 781. De la Place is not the firſt perſon who has attempted a demonſtration of this propoſition. Dr Da45 vid Gregory, in his valuable work on aſtronomy, has done the ſame thing, and nearly in the ſame way with La Place. Leibnitz, in that ſtrange letter to the editors oſ the Leipæzig Review, in which he anſwers ſome of Gregorys objections to his own theory of the celeſtial motions, mentions an Italian profeſſor who gave the ſame argument, and aſſected to conſider this ratio of planetary ſforce as known to him before Newton's diſcovery. Leibnit thinks the argument a very good one, becauſe, mathematically ſpeaking, it is the ſame thing whether the rays be illuminative or attractive. If this be not nonſcaſe, ITdo not know what is.Several compilers of elements employ the ſame argument. But nothing can be leſs to the purpoſe. Nothing can be more illogical thun t0 ſpeak of demonſtrating any primordial quality. Newton was ſurely more intereſted in this queſtion than any orher perſon, and we may be certain that if he could have ſupported his diſcovery of this law of gravitation by any argument from higher principles, he moſt certainly would have done it. But there ĩs no trace of any attempt of the kind among his writings; doubtleſs becaufe he ſaw the folly of the attempt. 722.  truſt that the reader will forgive me for taking up ſo much of his time with this queſtion. It ſeems to me oſ primary importance. Clarged as I am with the inſtruction oſ youththe future hopes of our countryit is my bounden duty to guard their minds from cery thing that T think hozardous,. ſhis ĩs the more incumbent on me, when I ſee natural philoſophy calumniated, and accuſed of lending her ſupport to doctrines which are the abhorrence of all the wiſe and good. I cannot better diſcharge this duty than by wiping oſf this ſtuin, with which careleſs ignorance, or atheiſſical perverſion, has disfigured the fair features of philoſophy. I was grieved when I firſt ſav M. de Ia Place, aſter having ſo beautiſully epitomiſed the philoſophy of Sir Iſac Newton, conclude his performance with ſuch a murked and ungraceful parody on the eloſing refſlections of our illuſtrious maſter; and, as I warmly recommend this epitome to my pupils, it became the more nece ſſiry to take notice of the reprehenſible peculiarities which occur in diſſerent parts of the work; and purticulatly of this propoſition, ſfrom which the materialiſts ſcem to entertain ſuch hopes. Nor am I yvet done with it. A demonſtration has been recently oſſered, in a work which profeſſc; to explain 1he intimate conſtitution of matter, and to account ſor all the phenomena of the univerſe. This will come in my way when we ſhall be employed in conſiderĩng ihe force of coheſion. Till then, requieſcat in pace. It is ſomewhat amuſing to remark how the authority oſ 5ir Iſaac Newton has been eagerly catched at by the atheĩſtical ſophiſts to ſupport their abject doctrines. While ſome hankering remuined in France ſor the Atomiſtic philoſophy, and there was any chance of bewildering the ini ginations, ?nd miſleading the underſtandings, of ſuch as wiſlied to acquire a conſident faith in the reveries of Pemocritus and Epicurus, M. Diderot worked into a better ſnape the ſlovenly performance of Robinet, the S;ſtẽme de la Nature, and aſfected to deduce all his vibrations and vibratiuncles from the elaſtic æther of Sir Iſaac Newton, dreſſing up the ſcheme with mathematical theorems and corollaries. And thus, Newton, one of the moſt pious of mankind, was ſet at the head of the atheiſtical ſect. But this mode, having had its day, is now paſſed, and is become obſoletethe tide has completely turned, and the æther is no longer wanted. But the ſect would not quit their hold of Sir Iſaac Newton. The doctrine of univerſal fate is now founded on Newton's great diſcovery of gravitation in the inverſe duplicate ratio of the diſtances. It is ſtill called the diſcovery of the illuſtrious Engliſhman, and is paſſed from hand to hand vith all the authority oſ his name. 743. But ſurely to us, the ſcholars of Newton, the futility oſ this attempt is abundantly manifeſt. As the worthy pupils of our accompliſhed teacher, we will join with him in conſidering univerſal gravitation as a noble proof of the exiſtence and ſuperintendance of a SUPREME MixD, and a conſpicuous mark of rrs tranſcendent wiſdom. The diſcovery oſ this relation between the particles of that matter of which the ſolar ſyſtem conſiſts is acknowledged, even by the materialiſts, to have ſet Newton at the head of philoſophers. They muſt therefore grant that it has ſomething in it of peculiar excellence. Indeed whoever is able to ſollow the ſteps of Newton over the magniſicent ſcene, muſt be aſſected as he was, and muſt pronounce è all very good M. de la Place ſeems to think the leſs of man on account of the ſmallneſs of his habitation. Is ABA TULE, King oſ Pelev, a leſs noble creature than M. de la Place's Corsican MasTER? Or, does the ſmallneſs of this globe ſhew that little has been done for man ?2/It is peculirly deſerving of remark, that we ſee many contrivances in this ſyſtem, which are of maniſeſt ſubſerviency to the enjoyments of man, and which do not appear to have any farther importance. Mun is unqueſtionably the lord of this lower world, and all things are placed under his feet. But we ſee nothing to which man is excluſively ſubſervientnothing that is ſuperior to man in excellence, ſo far as we can judge of what is excellentnothing but that wiſdom, that power, and that beneſicence, which ſeem to indicate and to characteriſe the Author and Conductor of the whole;and, I may add, that it is not one of our ſmalleſt obligations to the Author of Nature, that He has given us thoſe powers of mind which enable us to perceive and to be delighted with the ſight of this bright emanation of all Lis perſections. i s Sanctius his animal, mentiſque capacius altæ,  Finxit in effigiem moderantũm cuncta Deorum,  Pronaque cum ſpectent animolia cætera terram,  Os homini ſublime dedit, cœlumque tueri s Juſſit, et erectos ad ſidera tollere vultus.? OvD. llow me to conclude in the words of Dr Halley. Talia monſtrantem mecum celebrate Camenis, Vis, à cœlicolim gaudentes nectare veſci, NEWTONUM, clauſi reſerantem ſerinia Veri, NEWTONUM, Muſis charum, cui pectore puro Phabus adeſt, totoque inceſſit Numine mentem, Nec fas ęſt propilis mortali attingere divos. HALLEY. 