COURSE OF LECTURES ON ATURAL PHILOSOPHY MECHANICAL ARTS. BY THOMAS YOUNG, M. D. R.S. P. L. S. MEMBEROF EMMANUEL COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, LATE PROPESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE ROYAI INSTITUTION OF GREAT BRITAIN IN TWO VOLUMES. VOLUME I. LONDON: INTED FOR JOSEPH JOHNSON, T. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD, BY WILLIAM SAVAGE, BEDFORD BUMAY. 1807. A MAN EQUALLY ESTEEMED FOR HIS PRIVATE VIRTUES AND RESPECTED FOR HIS DISTINGUISHED TALENTS WHO LATELY PRESIDED AS FIRST LORD OF THE ADMIRALTY OVER THAT DEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE TO WHICH THE PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICAL SCIENCE MAY WITH THE GREATEST NATIONAL BENEFIT BE PRACTICALLY APPLIED THIS WORK IS DEDICATED BY THE AUTHOR. 5EGB. HAVING undertaken to prepare a course of lectures on natural philosophy, to be delivered in the theatre of the Royal Institution, I thought that the plan of the Institution required something more than a mere compilation from the elementary works at present existing; and that it vas my duty to collect from original authors, to examine with attention, and to digest into one system, every thing relating to the principles of the mechanical sciences, that could tend to the improvement of the arts subservient to the conveniences of life. I found also, in delivering the lectures, that it was most eligible to commit to writing, as nearly as possible, the whole that was required ſo be said on each subject; and that, even when an experiment was to be performed, it was best to deseribe that experiment uninterruptedly, and to repeat the explanation during its exhibition. ſince it became necessary that the written lectures should be as clearly and copiously expressed, and in a language us much adapted to the comprehension oſ a mixed audience, as the nature oſ the investigations would allow; and that each ex periment, which was to he performed, should also he minutely described in them. IF therefore there was any novelty either in the matter or the arrangement of the lectures, as they were delivered for two successive years, it is obvious that they must have possessed an equal claim to the attention of a reader, had they been published as a book; and upon resigning the situation of Proſessor of Natural Philosophy, I immediately began to prepare them for publication. I had in some measure pledged myselſ, in the printed syllabus of the lectures, to make a catalogue of the best works already published on the several subjects; with reſerences to such passages as appeared to be most important: it was therefore necessary, as well for this purpose, as in order to procure all possible information that could tend to the improvement oſ the work, to look over a select library of books entirely with this view, making notes of the principal subjects discussed in them, and examining careſully such parts as appeared to deserve more than ordinary attention. Hence arose a catalogue of references; respecting vhich it is sufſicient to, say, that the labour oſ arranging about tventy thousand articles, in a systematic form, was by no means less considerable than that oſ collecting them. The transactions of scientific societies, and the best and latest periodical publications, which have so much multiplied the number of the sources of information, constituted no small part oſ the collection, which was thus to be reduced into one body of science. With the addition of the materials acquired in making this compilation, and oſ the resulis oſ many original investigations, to which they had given rise, it became almost indispensable to copy the whole oſ the lectures once more, and to exchange some of them for others, which vere wholly new; al the same time all possible pains were taken to discover and to correct every obscurity oſ expression or of argument. Drawings were also to be made, for representing to the reader the apparatus and experiments exhibited at the time of delivering the lectures, for showing the eunstruction of a variety oſf machines and instruments connected with the different subjects to be explained, and for illustrating them in many other ways. These figures have been extended to more than forty plates, very closely engraved, and the execution of the engravings has heen minutely superintended. But the text of the lectures has been made so independent of the ſigures, that the reader is never interrupted in the middle of a chain of reasoning, but is referred, at the end of a paragraph, to a plate, which has alvays a suſiicient explanation on the opposite page. The bulk of this work is not so great, as to require, ſor its entire perusal, any unreasonable portion of time or of labour. There may, however, be some persons vho would be satisfied with attending to those parts in which it difſers most ſrom former publications, without having leisure or inclination to study the whole. To such it may be desirable to have those subjects pointed out, which appear to the author to he the most deserving of their notice. The fundamental doctrines of motion have, in the first place, been more immediately reſerred to axioms simply mathematical, than has hitherto been usual; and the application of these doctrines to practical purposes has ptrhaps in some instances been ſacilitated. The passive strength of materials oſ all kinds has been very fully investigated, and many new conclusions have heen formed respecting it, which are oſf immediate importance to the architect and to the engineer, and which appear to contradict the results of some very elaborate calculations. The theory of waves has been much simpliſied, and somewhat extended, and their motions have been illustrated by experiments of a peculiar nature. A similar method of reasoning has been applied to the circulation of the blood, to the propagation of sound, either in fluids or in solids, and to the vibrations of musical chords; the general principle of a velocity, corresponding ſo half the height of a certain modulus, being shown to be applicable to all these cases: and a connexion has been established between the sound to he obtained ſrom a given solid, and its strength in resisting a flexure oſany kind; or, in the case of ice and water, between the sound in a solid and the compressibility in a fluid state. The doctrine of sound and of sounding bodies in general has also received some nev illustrations, and the theory of music and of musical intervals has been particularly discussed. With respect to the mathematical part of optics, the curvature of the images, formed by lenses and mirrors, has been correctly investigated, and the inaccuracy of some fſormer estimations has heen demonstrated. In the department oſ physical optics, the phenomena oſ halos and parhelia have been explained, upon principles not entirely new, but long forgotten: the functions of the eye have been minutely examined, and the mode of its accommodation to the perception of objects at different distances ascertained: the various phenomena of coloured light have been copiously described, and accurately represented by coloured plates; and some new cases of the production of colours have been pointed out, and have been referred to the general law of double lights, by which a great variety oſ the experiments of former opticians have also been explained; and this law has heen applied to the establishment of a theory of the nature of light, which satisfactorily removes almost every difficulty that has hitherto attended the subject. The theory of the tides has been reduced into an extremely simple form, which appears to agree better with all the phenomena, than the more intricate calculations which they have commonly been supposed to requiree. With respect to the cohesion and capillary action of liquids, I have had the good fortune to anticipate Mr. Laplace in his late researches, and I have endeavoured to shov, that my assumptions are more universally applicable to the facts, than those which that justly cclebrated mathematician has employed. I have also attempted to throw some nev light on the general properties of matter in other forms: and on the doctrine oſ heat, which is materially concerned in them; and to deduce some useſul conclusions ſfrom a com parison of various ex periments on the elasticity of steam, on evaporation, and on the indications of hygrometerss. I have enumerated, in a compendious and systematical form, the principal facts which have heen discovered with respect to galvanic electricity; and I have ſortunately heen able to proſit by Mr. Davy's most important experiments, vhich have lately been communicated to the Royal Society, and vhich have already given to this branch of science a much greater perſection, and a ſar greater extenſ, than it heſore possessed. The historieal part oſ the work can scarcely be called new, but several uſ the circumstances, vhich are related, have escaped the notice of former vriters on the history of the sciences. Besides these improvements, if I may be allowed to give them that name, there are others, perhaps of less importunce, which may still be interesting to those who are particularly engaged in those departments of science, or of mechanical practice, to which they relate. Among these may be ranked, in the division of mechanics, properly so called, a simple demonstration of the law of the force by which a body revolves in an ellipsis; another of the properties of cycloidal pendulums; an examination of the mechanism of unimal motions; a comparison of the measures and veights of diſſerent countries; and a convenient estimate oſ the effect of human labour: with respect to architecture, a simple method of draving the outline of a column: an investigation oſ the hest forms for arches; a determination of the curve which afſords the grealest space for turning; considerations on the structure oſ the joints employed in carpentry, and on the firmness of wedges; and an casy mode of ſorming a kirb roof: for the purposes of machinery oſ diſſferent kinds, an arrangement oſf bars for obtaining rectilinear motion; an inquiry into the most eligible proportions of wheels and pinions; remarks on the frietion of vheel work, and of balances; a mode of finding the form oſ a tooth for impelling a pallet without ſrietion; a chronometer for measuring minute portions of time; a clock scapement; a calculation of the effect of temperature on steel springs: an easy determination of the best line of draught for a carringe; an vOL. I. b investigation of the resistance to be overcome by a wheel or roller and an estimation oſ the ultimate pressure produced by a blow. In the hydraulic and optical part, may be enumerated an overflowing lamp; a simplification of the rules for finding the velocity of running water; remarks on the application of force to hydraulic machines; a mode of letting out air from water pipes; an analysis of the human voice; and some arrangements ſor solar microscopes, and for other optical instruments of a similar nature. In the astronomical and physical division of the work, will be found a general rule for determining the correction on account of aberration; a comparison of observations on the figure oſ the carth; a table of the order of electrical excitation; a chart of the variation of the compass, and of the trade winds; formulae for finding the heat of summer and vinter; remarks on the theory oſ the winds; and a comparative table of all the mechanical properties of a variety of natural bodies. A few of these subjects have been more fully discussed in the miscellaneous papers, which have already been published, in the Philosophical Transactions and elsewhere, and which are now reprinted with corrections and additions; others are summarily investigated in the mathematical elements, which form a part of the second volume, or in. the remarks, which are inserted, in their proper places, in the catalogue of references. The arrangement of the whole work is probably different in many respects from any other that has yet been adopted; the extent of the subjects, which have been admitted, rendered it necessary to preserve a very strict attention to a methodical and uniform system; and it is presumed, that this arrangement will be considered as in itself of some value, especially in a work calculated to serve as a key, by means of which, access may be obtained to all the widely scattered treasures oſ science; and vhich will enable those, vho are desirous of extending their researches in any particular department, to obtain expeditiously all the information that books can afſord them. It will not be thought surprising, that the execution of this plan, allowing for some professional engagemenis of a diſferent kind, and for a variety oſ accidental interruptions, should have occupied more than three years, from the resignation of the professorship to the publication of the work. Some part of ĩt is in its nature incapable of permanent perfection, since the catalogue must require to be continually extended by the enumeration of new publications; and it might perhaps be desirable that an appendix should be added to it at least every ten years: but the lectures themselves may be expected to remain tolerably commensurate to the state oſ the sciences for a much longer period; since, in investigations so intimately connected with mathematical principles, the essential improvements will always bear a very small proportion to the number of innovations. I do not, however, mean to assert, that the catalogue is by any means complete, even with regard to older vorks, but I believe that the references, which it contains, are at least sufficient to lead those, vho ma y consult the passages quoted, to the works of every author oſ eminence that has treated oſ the respective subjeets. Nor do I profess to have excluded all references that are oſ little importance; but I trust that the number, which I have admitted, will be found inconsiderable ; and it wvould have been very difficult to have rejected any of them, without some chance of omitting others of greater value. Whatever the deficiencies of this work may be, I thin it right to observe, that my present pursuits will not allow me to look forwards to any period, at which I shall be able to remove them, or even to atlend to the correction of the press, or the revision of the engravings, in case oſ the necessity oſ a second edition. T have already begun to collect materials for a work, in a form nearly similar, relating to every department of medical knowledge: this work will not, however, be specdily ready for publication: it will be comparatively more concise than these lectures, in proportion to what has been said and written respecting physic, but, I hope, much more complete, vith regard to all that is known with certainty, and can be applied with utility. Welbeck Street, 50th March, 1807. T. MECHANICS.. LECTURE V. On conſined motion; 49. Motion limited by suspension, or by a smooth sufuce; Effect oſ friction ond oſ rotatory motion; Inclined plane; 42. Descent in the chords of a circle; Velocity of descent; 43. Ascending ſorce; Energy; Cyeloidal pendulum; 44. Laws oſ pendulums; 45. Swiſtest descent; Circular pendulums, 46. PenduIums with resistance; Revolving pendulums; Composition of vibrations; Regulutor ſor steam engines; 4T. Circular rond; Principle oſ the lenst action; 48, 49. LECTURE VI. On the motions of simple masses; 50. Defſinition oſ a movenble body, without regar to its extension; 50. Iuertia; Cæntre oſ inertia; Its properties; 51. Reciprocal ſorces; Quontity of motion; 52. Momentum; Centre oſ inertia of a system; 58. Motion of the centre oſ inertin; 534. Action and rnotion; Newton's illustrutions; 55. Magnitudo of reciprocal ſorces; 56. Fall oſ a fenther and oſ a piece oſ gold; Lucretius; Relution between ſorces and ditmnces; 57. Displacement oſ the earth by the eſſect oſ n machine; 58. LECTURE VII. On pressure and equilibrium; 59. Presire, a forcœ counæmcted; Presure and momentum incommensurable; 50. Laws of prossure included in thosæ oſ motion; Opposition oſ presures; 60. Equilibrium of mechanicnl powers; Contre oſ grity; 61. Stbility of equilibrium; 62. Stubility inlependent of equilibrium; 08. Situion ũ motions oſ the cæntre oſ gravity oſ anmals; 61. Iævers of two hinds; Fundamental property of the lever; 65. Series of levers; Bout lovers; Obliqua levers; 66. Wieel and axis; Wheels and pinions; Double axis; tes oſ springs, 198, Expansion oſ pendulums; Compensations for clocks; 1909. Compensations ſor watches; 200. Resistanco oſ the air; Striking purt; 201. Supports oſ clocks; Mutual inſluence oſ two clocks; 202. LECTURE XVIII. On raising and removing weights; 20S8. Counteraction of gravitation; Levers: 208. Porraults lever; Axis with a winch; 203. Water whinse5; Gin; Capstan; 205. Double capstan; Wheelvork; String oſ buckets; Pullies; 2086. Inclined plane; Duke oſ Bridgwaters canal; 907, Scres; Crunes; 208. Walking wheels; White's crane; 909; Weighi ise for a chain; Removing weights; Porters; 910. Distribution of weight; 211. Sunple dray; Eſſcct oſ agitation; Oil substances; 212. Rollers; Friction wheels; 213. Permultvs ; Wheels oſ ingea; 2 14. Magui oſ wheels; 215. Line oſ draught; Conicul wheels; 2165 Efiect of springs; 217. Attachment oſ horses; Wheel vays; 21; String oſbuskets or carts; 210. LECTURE X1X. On modes of changing the forms of bodies; 220. Compression; Presses; Effuct of momentum; 920. Printing press; Sugar mill; 221. Oĩl mills; lommering; lyiostaric press; Extension; Luminating machine; Gluziers vice; 292. Wire drawing; Pottery; Glasshlowing; Percussion; 223. Forges; Goldbeating; Coining; Stamping; Penetration; 924; Pile driving engiue; 225. Sling; Bow and arrow; 206. Whnip; Dirision; Cutting instruments; Slitting mill; 227. Lathes; Boring; 228. Agricultural instruments; Mining; Sawing; 229. Stonecutting; Grinding; 200. Polishing; 231. Trituration; Powder mills; Agitation; Threshing machines; 232. Com mills; 453. Knending; Levigating; Demolition; Bolt druwer; 285. Burning; Hlasting; 295. LECTURE XxX. On the history of mechanics; 236. Origin oſ the Grocian learning in Egypt; Thales; 436. Ionian school; Italian school; Pythugoras; 257; Democritus; Invention oſ the arch; 238. Seę correctons. Archytas and Endoxus; Aristotle; Foundation oſ Alexandrin; 239. Epicurus; Archimedes; 240. Siege oſ Syracuse; 241. Athenacus; Ciosibius; 249. Vitruvius; Middle ages; 243. British manuſacturos; 23. Anglonorman nnd Gotbic architecture; 915, Ttobins; Dalembert; Kuestuer; 360. Euler; Smeaton; Borda; Waut; Speciſication oſf Mr. Wau's patent; 861, 362. Bosut; Juan; Prony; 368. Clop mun; Romme; Hutton; Rumſord; Du Buat; 364. Black; Montgolſier; 365. Chronological table; 566. LECTURE XXXI. On the propugation of sound; 567. Importance oſ acustics; Division oſ the suhjeet; Deſinition oſ sound; 367. Propugation oſ svund; Velocity oſ sound; 368. Delineation oſ a sound; ĩ69. Compressibility oſ hard buãies; Transmission oſ sound by dierent mediums; 370. Correction on nccount oſ heat; 871. Trunsmission in gnses oſ diſerent inds; In liquids; 572. In solids; Divergence oſ sound; 378. Reilection of sound; 374. Illustration woves of water; trumpet; Whspering gullery; 375. Invisible girl; Partial intorcoption of sound; Decay oſ sound; 876, 577. LEcTuRE xxx1. On the sources and cefſects of sound; 78. Origin oſ a simple sound; O a continued sound; 578. Musical sounds derived from vibrations; Open pipes; Stopped pipes; 379. Hormonic sounds; Eſect oſ temperature; Longitudinal sounds oſ solids; Lateral vibrations; 80. Flexible chords and membrancs; 381. Ilarmonic sounds of chords; 382. Loaded wire; Revolutionn oſ chords; 388. Vihrations of elustic rods; 384, Vibrations oſ plates, rings, and veasels; Mixed vibmtions oſ solids and ſuids; 385. Symputhetic sounds; ſlearing; 586 Description of the ear; 357. Delicncy oſ the eur; 588. LECTURE RxxſII. On harmonics; 389. Theory oſ harmonics; Combinations oſ sounds; à89. Beats; 390. Gravæe harmunics; Concords; 301. Melody; Rhythm; Simple compositions; Diatonic scule; 302. Inlſ noles or semitones; 303. Minor mode; Discords; Rules oſ accompaniment; 394. Temperament; 305. Distinction oſ the notes; 306. LECTURE xxx1V. On musical instruments; 397. Division oſ musical instruments; Harp; Lyre; 30T. Ilurpsichord; Spinet; Pianoſorte; Dulcimer; Clavichord; Guitar; 398. Violins oſ dierent hinds; Vielle; Trumpet Murigni; Aeolian harp; 399. c buman voice; 400. Drum; Stacada; Bell; Harmonicn; Vox humana pipe; 401. Simple wind instruments; Mixed wind instruments; 402, History oſ music; Lyre; Hermes; Terpunder; P oras; Simonides; 408. Tibin; Aristotle; Ctesibius; Pope Gregory; 103. Guido; ſacon; Galileo; Mersænne; Kircher; Meibomius; Wallis; Newton; Brook Taylor; Sauveur; 405. e; Euler; Bernoulli; Dalemhert; Sounds oſ rods; Grave harmonics oſ Romieu and Tartini; Sounds oſ pipes Chladui; 406. Luploce; Chronological tuble; 407. LEcruRE xxxv. On the theory of optics; 408. Importance of optics; Diision oſ the subject; Deſinition oſ light; 408. Ray oſ light; Motion oſ light; Homogeneous mediums; 109. Ræſlection; 410. Reſraction; 411. Polished surſaces; Return oſ a ruy; Reſructive density; 412. Index oſ reſractive power; Intermedinte reſraction; Total reſlection; 413. Dioptrics and catoptrics; Focus; 414. Plane speculum; Principul focus; Convergence by reſlection; 415. Concave and convex mirrors; Prism; Multiplying glass; Lens; 416, Eſiects oſ lenses; Focus oſ a lens; 417, Joint ſocus; Iimage; Optical centre; 418. Curvature of the imsge; 419, LECTURE XxxVI. On optical instruments; 420. Divergence oſ light; Photometers; 420. Measurement oſ reſractive densities; Instruments strictly ical; 421. Im ſormed by lenses and mirrors; iſiers; Simple microscopes; Globules; 479. Illumination oſ an image; Burning Glasses; Materials oſ lenses und mirrors; 393. Images visible in every direction; Camera obscura; 424, Solur microscope; 495. Lucernal microsope: Phantasmagorin; 426. Astronomical telescope; Double microscope ; 497. Galileantelescope: Commonday telescope; Dr. Herschel's telescope; 4983. Newtonian reſlector; Gregorian telescope; Cassegraius telescope; Smiths microscope; Curvature oſ images in telescope-, 199. Mauniſying powers oſ telescopes; Field glass; 430. Double magniſier; Aberration ſrom eolour; Achromatic glases; 431. Achromatic eye piece; Micrometers; 4393. Divided speculum; 433. LECTURE xXXVI, On physical optics; 434. or; Porterſicld; Jurin; Smith; Dollond; Hall gu T65, Euler; à70. Lnmbert; Mothematical opti480. Delaval; R. Darwin; Atmospherical reſraction; Wollaston; Ritter; Herschel; a81. Laplace; Attempts oſ the author; 482. Chronological table; 483. PHYSICS; 485. Moon's rotation; Orbits of comets; 521. Predictions of Halley and Clairaut; 508. Chronological table; 433. LECTURE XLIV. On the appear- ances of the celestial bodies; 523. Apparent motions 1o be descrihed aſtor the real ones; Motions oſ the stars and sun; Motions oſ the curth; 528., Apparent revolution oſ the sun; 524. Sun's appurent diameter; Length oſ summer and winter; Day and night; Sun's npparent path; 525. Centriſugol force; Pluces oſ the stars; Twilight, 526. Relative positions and phases of the planets; 527. Phases oſ the moon: Lunar eclipses; 528. Eclipses of the sun; Series oſ eclipses; 520. Harvest moon; Eclipses oſ Jupiter's sutellites; 530. Comels; Light oſ the heavenly bodies; Planetary worlds; 531. Fontenelle; Mercury; Venus; 532. Moon; 558. Mrs; Neuly discorered planets; Jupiter; 551 Suturn; Georgian planet; 535. LECTURE XLV. On practical astronomy; 536. l Real motions neglected; Situation oſa point in the heavens; Meridian; 536. Astronomical instruments; Time; Sidereal day; Solur day; Equation oſ time ĩ 587. Dinlling; Chronology; 588, Calendur; 580. Improvement suggested; Republican calendar; Metonie cycle; Golden number; 50. Epact; Moons age; Julian period; Astronomical time; Quadrants; Transit instrumenis; 541. Hadleys quadrant; Declinations; Reſraction and parallax; 542. Latitudes: Longitudes; 543. Lunar ohservations; Distance oſ the sun; Trunsits; 544. Deusities oſ the sun and planets; Artificinl globe;  565. Planispheres;1366Orreries; 567. LECTURE X LVI. On Geography; 568. Particular account oſ the enrth; Curvature oſ ia surſace; Direction oſ the ꝑlumb lino; 568. Ellipti- city; Measurements oſ degrees; 500, Zones; 570, Climates; Sen and lund; Continents; 571. Itiven; Elevations; 57. Mountains; 578. Diſerent orders oſ mountans; Internal parts oſ the enrth; 574. Denty oſ the carth; 575. LECTURE XLVII. On the tides: 576. Tides noticed by the nncients; Daily changes; 576. Monthly chunges; Yearly chonges; Connexion with the moon; Eſcet oſ gravitation on a ſluid sphere; 577. Primitive lunar tides; Comparison with a pendulum; 578. Direct and nverted tides; Tides uſa lake; 570. Resistance; Tiles oſ the Atluntie;. 560. Particular mod iſications; 581. Tides oſ the Channels, and oſ rivers; 62. Inſerior and superior tides; Luws oſ elevation and oſ depression; 585. Mode oſ olrerving the tides; Solar tides; Combination oſ tides; 584. Returdution oſ spring and neop tideæ; à85. Increased height in converging channels; Combinations in particular ports; 586, Currents; Tides oſ ihæ atmosphere; 87, 588. See corræctions LECTURE X LVIII. On the histor of astronomy; 589. Enarliest nstronomy; Signs oſ the 20diac; 589. Bubylonian observations; Chuldeans; lermes; Fgyptiuns; Chinese; 500. Indians; Greeks; 501. Thales; Pythagoras; Meto; Alexandrion school; 502. Eratosthenes; Hippurchus; 508. Polemy; 504. Arubinns; Persians; 505. Copernicus; Tycho Brahe; 506. Kepler; 507. Napier; Huygens; Cassini; Gravitation; 508., Newton's discoveries; Extract from Pemberton; 500, 600. British astronomers; Observatory at Greenwich; 601. Determination oſ the longitude; Iate discoveries; 602, 603. See correctiuns. Chronological table; co1, LECTURE XLIX. On the essential properties of matter; 6GO5. Importance of minute ohjects; 605. Deſinition of mater; Place oſ the investigation; 606. Essential ani accidentl properties of matter; Extension; Dvisihility; 607. Actual division oſ matter; 608. Impenetrability; 605. Permealility; Orders oſ substunces; 610. Hepulsion; Apparent contact; 611. Ias oſ repulsion; 612. Dalton's hypothesis; Re- LECTURE LV. On magnetism; 685. Resemblance of mugnetism and electricity; Theory; 685. Conducting powers; Magncet~cul substances; 686. Aurora boreulis; North and South poles; Atractions and repulsions; 687. Polarity; Arrangement oſ ſilings; Directive force; 608. Terrestrial magnetism; Compass; Dipping needle; Illustration; 689. Tempurary magnetism: Natural mognet; Magnetic poles oſ the earth; 690. Diurnal changes; Variation oſ the declinatiun; Line of no declination; 691. Dip; Artificial mugnets; 692. Donble tuuch; Magnetic paste; Division of a magnet; 693, Striking and ringing a magnet; Hammerinz brass; Solution in an acid; 691. Resemblunce oſ ity o LECTURE LVI. On climates and vinds; 696. Meteorology; Division oſ the subject; Climates; Meteorological thermometers; 696. Immediate eſſects oſ the sun; 607. Prvosts ealeulations; Variations of temperature; Slow changes; 698. Heat oſ the sen; Efcet oſ ſreering and thaving; Iſent of ihe atmosphere; 600. Summer and winter; Temperatures of diſerent places; Local variations; 700. Winds; Periodical winis; Trule winds; Hadley; 701. Halley's theory; Atimosphere of Jupiter; Greater heat oſ the northern hemisphere; 702. Westerly winds; Local modiſications; Monsoons; 708; Land and sen T04, Tu5. : Lrorune iviOn aqueous and igneous meteors; 706. Evuporation, and its eſſects; Theory oſ Delue and Dalton; 706. Quuntity oſ ater evaporating; Preciũãton; 7057. Moòtre; Moũicrmnean; Corrent at ihe Struights; Attraction oſ moisture; 7085. B. Prévost; Hygrometers; 709. Natural hygrometer; Water contained in air; 710. Visſble vapuur; Dew; ist; 71I. Rain; Indications oſ the barometer; Eſects oſ mountains; 712 Periodical mins; Thunder and lightning; 713. Atmuspherical electricity; Thundertorms; 71ã. Conductors; Sudden condensations; 715. Waterspouts; Aurora borenlis; Earthquakos and Volcnos; 7186. Volennic countries; Furthquukes of Calobrin; 717. Eruptions oſ Vesu- vius; T18, 719. Geological changes; Reality oſ various changes; 790. Efecti oſ rivers and oſ tho sea; Shooting stars; 721. Falling stones; 722. LECTURE LVIII. On vegetation; 783. Sheteh oſnotural history; Minerals Vegetables ; 7u8. Animals; 724. Distinctions oſanimals and vęl les; 725. Deseription oſ a vegetahle: Germination, TFarũ oſ plonts; 736. Vesscls; 727. Motion oſ *e plonts; 725 Vessels; 727. Motion oſ tſe s°p; 798. Mr. Knight's experiments; Graſting; 729. Disenses oſ plans; Exposure to the nir; Linnean 37510m; 780, 731. System oſ Jussien; TãQ. LECTURE LIX. On animal life; 38. Classification oſ animuls, according to Linnẽ; 733. Mammalia; Birds; 733. Amphibin; Fishes; 755. Inscets; 736. Vermes; 787. Senses; Nutrition; 738. Nervous system; 789. Nature oſ the nerves; Disenses; T40. Nutural cures; 74l. EXPLANATION OF CONTENTS. LEcTurE LXx. On the history of terrestrial physics; 742. General retrospect; Knovledge oſ the ancients; 742. Chinesæ; Numa; Thales; Anaxinnnder; Anaximenes; T43. Pythugoras; Annxagoras; Democritus; Heraclitus; Pluio; 744. Aristotle; Fryicurus; 715. ;t. Bocon; Discovery oſ the compuss; Gesner; Aldrovaudus; Gilhert oſ Colchester; 746. Vuriation oſ the compuss; F, Bacon; Opinions oſ heat; Drebel; 147. Iarvey; Circulation oſ the blovd; Harometer; Bauhins; Ra ; Willughby; 748. Philusophical societies; Varintion churts; 749. Electricity; Linnean system; Discoveries respecting heat; 750. Theory oſ mugnetism and eloctricity; Boscovich; Hygrometry; 751. Galvanism; Pile of Volta; 752. Mr. Davy's experiments; Dalton; Rumſord; 753. Herschel; Leslio; Capillary tubes; Lapluce; 754. Advantages to be expected ſrom modern institutions; 755. Chronological tablo; 756. THE PLATES; 75T. P. 146. L. 3, aſter  124, insert, 125. L 8 from the bottom, ſur ⸗ IX, read, X. P. 169. L. 7, ſfor XIV, read, XIII. P. 176. L. 19, ſor  the circle read, a second circle. P. 196. L. 5.. 2, ſrum the bottom, ſor  Iſ the ſrietion.. to obviate this read, Since ſriction is alway: increased by n increuse oſ pressure, the eſſect oſ any addition to the sustaining ſorce must tend, in some degree, to returd the vibrations, even iſ the ſriction be somewhat less inerenser thun the ſorce propelling the bulance. In order to obviate this retardation. P. 238. L. 5 ſrom ihe bottom, aſter* arches,” insert, since they must have leſt oo smnll a space for the passage oſ the water. Iſ, however, we muy helieve Herodotus, whom Mr. King has quoted, this was in reality a kind oſ drawbridge. According to this nuthor, it was Luilt by Nitocris, the inmediate sucessor oſ Semirumis: the stones were united by iron md lend, and beams were lnid across them, which were removei at night, in order to prevent the mutual depredations oſ the inhabitants of diſſerent parts oſ the city. j P. 2951. L. 19, for XX, read, XIX. P. 267. L. 18, ſor  heel, read, piteh. P. ?73. L. 3 ſfrom the bottom, omit  logarithm of L. 2 ſrom the hottom, ſor numhers; read, corresponding logarithms. P. 292. L. O, ſor  de, read, du. P. 420. L. à, for more, rend, most. P. a24, nſter line 5, insert, Dr. Wollaston hus very ingeniously applied the effect of the reſlection of two plane surſces, inclined to each other, tu the construction oſ an instrument ſor draving, which he calls a camera lucida. Ie usually employs the internal reſleetion oſ a prism oſ ghss, oſ which the ſour surſaces are ground so as to form proper angles with ench other. The imuge ſformed by the ſirst surſace is inverted, and the second reſlection restores it to its original position, but places ĩt in n direction which is at right augles with the direction of the object; s0 that when we look down throngh the prism on a sheet oſ paper, we see a perſect picture oſ the objects immediately beſore us, while at the same time the aperture, through which e look, is only partly occupied by the edge oſ the prism, the remaining purt being leſt open, or simply covered with a lens, ſor the admisiion oſ the direct rays oſ light, by which we may see, at the same tine, the paper and the pencĩ to be employed, ſor making a drawing or æ eopy oſ any ulject placed beſore us. P. au5. L. 16, for XXVII” reni, XXVIII. P. 464. L. 15, ſur  other points at, reud, at other points. P. 477. Lust line hut one, aſter telescopes,” insert, but with res;eet to the theory oſ halia and parhelin, he was less successſul than Mariote had buen some years beſore. P. 505. L. 7 ſrom the bottom, ſor  ecipses, read, PpCcius. P. 545... Running title. The numbers oſ all the pages are to grent by 20, P. 587. L. 15.. 11, for  the attraction.. ĩs produced, read, a current ĩis ohæerved in its most exposed paris. P. 568. I. 14, 15, for on account.. moon read, These currents, us well as the general current oſ the seu, have hęen attributeid hy some astronumers io the immedinte nuraction oſ the sun and moon, and oſ the stellites oſ Jupiter, which they have supposed to act in the sume manner ns the uttraction oſ ihe sun operates in retarding tie lunur motions; but the ſoct is, that, according to Mr. Laplace, the disturhing ſorce of the sun produces this eſſect on the moon only in proportion as it increnses her distance ſrom the earth; consequently no such retardution can possibly be proiluced by the ſorce oſ gravitation in the rotation oſ ihe sen or oſ the atmosphere, and the whole eſſect must be attributed to the operation oſ meteorological causes, producing first the trnde winds, and secondly ocensioning, by means of ſe ſriction oſ these winds, a sſmiInr motion in the seea. In the case oſ the atmosphere oſ Jupiter, the eſects oſ heat can indeed scarcely be rupposd to be very perceptible, und the rotation oſ this planet being extremely rapid, ĩt ĩs not at all impossible that the sate llites may excrt an action on the atmosphere somewhat analogous to the returdation oſ the moon's motion hy the disturbing ſorce oſ ihe sun. P. 565, L. 12, for Almamoun, was the son, reud, Almamoun, the son. P. 603. L. à. ſor The obscrvations oſ the transit of Venus were twice made in tho South Neas, read, Observations oſ the trunsit of Venus were made with great cure in the Suuth Seas. At the end, insert, For the lutest improvement that has hoen made in astronomy, we are also indebted to the zeal and ingenuity oſ Dr. Olbers, who, in pursuit ON TURAL PHILOSOP AND THE MECHANICAL ARTS PART I. MECHANICS. COURSE OF LECTURES ON NATURAL PHILOSOPHY AND THE MECHANICAL ARTS. LECTURE I. INTRODUCTION. TT is to be presumed, that most of those who honour the theatre of the Royal Institution with their attendance, are already acquainted with the nature of the objects which its founders and promoters have been endeavouring to attain: yet it appears to be by no means superfluous, that I should define vith accuracy my own views of the utility that is likely to be derived from it, and of the most effectual means of accomplishing its purposes; in order that we may be able to distinguish, without diſſiculty, the most eligible track for our common progress through the regions of science; and that those vho are desirous of accompanying me in the journey, may know precisely vhat route ve are to follow, and vhat departments will more particularly arrest our attention. Societies, which are merely literary and philosophical, have in general principally proposed to themselves, to eulighten the understanding by the discovery of unknown phenomena, and to exercise the reasoning povers, by VOL. I. B opening ne ſields for speculation. Other associations have been more purticularly intended for the encouragement of the arts, of manufactures, and of commerce. The primary and peculiar ohject of the Royal Institution oſ Great Britain is professedly of an humbler, but not of a less interesting nature. It ĩs, to apply to domestic convenience the improvements which have been made in science, and to introduce into general practice such mechanical inventions as are of decided utility. But while it is chieſly engaged in this pursuit, it extends its views, in some measure, to the promotion of the same ends which belong to the purticular provinces of other literary societies; and it is the more impossible that such objects should be wholly excluded, as it is upon the advancement of these that the speciſic objects of the Institution must ultimately depend. Ilence the dissemination of the knowledge of natural philosophy and chemistry becomes a very essential part of the design of the Royal Institution: and this department must, in the natural order of arrangement, be anterior to the application of the sciences to practical uses. To exclude all knovwledge but that which has already been applied to immediate utility, would be to reduce our faculties to a state of servitude, and to frustrate the very purposes which we are labouring to accomplish. No discovery, however remote in its nature from the suhjects of daily observation, can with reason be declared wholly inapplicable to the benefit of mankind. It has therefore always appeared to me, to be not only the best beginning, but also an object of high and permanent importance in the plan of the Institution, to direct the public attention to the cultivation of the elementary doctrines of natural philosophy, as vell speculative as practical. Those vho possess the genuine spirit of scientiſic investigation, and vho have tasted the pure satisfaction arising from an advancement in intelleetual acquirements, ure contented to proceed in their researches, vithout inquiring at every step, vhat they gain by their nely discovered lights, and to what practical purposes they are applicable: they receive a suſficient gratiſication from the enlargement of their views of the constitution oſ the universe, and experience, in the immediate pursuit of knovledge, that pleasure which others wish to obtain more cireuitously by its means. And ĩt is one of the principal advantages of a liberal education, that it creates a susceptibility of an enjoyment 80 clegant and so rational. A considerable portion of my audience, to whose information it will be my particular ambition to accommodate my lectures, consists of that sex, which, by the custom of civilised society, is in some measure exempted from the more laborious duties that occupy the time and attention of the other sex. The many leisure hours, which are at the command of females in the superior orders of society, may surely be appropriated, with greater satisfaction, to the improvement of the mind, and to the acquisition of knowledge, than to such amusements as are only designed for facilitating the insipid consumption of superſluous time. The hours thus spent will unquestionably become, by means of a little habit, as much more agreeable at the moment, as they must be more capable of affording self approbution upon reflection. And besides, like the seasoning which reconciled the Spartuns to their uninviting diet, they will even heighten the relish for those pursuits vhich they interrupt: for mental exercise is as necessary to mental enjoyment, as corporal labour to corporal health and vigour. In this point of view, the Royal Institution may in some degree supply the place of a subordinate university, to those whose sex or situation in life has denied them the advantage of an academical education in the national seminaries of learning. But notwithstanding the necessity oſ introducing very copiously speculations of a more general nature, we must not lose sight of the original ohjects of the Roval Institution; and ve must therefore direct our attention more particularly to the theory of practical mechanics, and of manufactures. In these depurtments we shall find some deficiencies which may vithout much difficulty be supplied from scientific principles; and by an ample collection and display of models, illustrative of machines, and of inventions of all kinds, ve may proceed in the most direct manner to contribute to the dissemination of that kind of knowledge which is most particularly our objeet. So that ve must be more practical than academies of sciences, and more theoretical than societies for the improvement of arts; while we endeavour at the same time to give stability to our proceedings, by an annual recurrence to the elementary know ledge which is subservient to the purposes of both; and, as ſfar as ve are able, to apply to practice the newest lights, which may from time to time be thrown on particular branches of mechanical seience It ĩs thus that we may most efſectually perform, what the idolized sophists of antiquity but verbally professed, to bring down philosophy from the heavens, and to make her an inhabitant of the earth. To those who are engaged in the practical cultivation of various arts, subservient to the conveniences of life, these lectures may be of some utility, by furnishing them with well established principles, applicable to a variety of cases, vhich may occasionally occur to them, vhere a little deviation from the ordinary routine of their profession may be necessary. Unfortunately, the hands that execute are too often inadequately supported by the head that directs; and much labour is lost for want of a little previous application to the fundamental doetrines of the mechanical seiences. Nor is any exorbitant portion of time or industry necessary for this purpose; for it happens singularly enough, that almost all practical applications of science depend on principles easily learnt; and, except in astronomy only, it has seldom been found that very abstruse investigations have been of great importance to society. Our most reſined analytical caleulations are by far too imperfeet to apply to all possible cases of mechanical actions that can he proposed; and those problems which most frequently oceur, may in general be solved by methods suſficiently obvious; although, from a want of proper order and perspicuity in the treatment of first principles, ĩt has often happened that the most elementary propositions have been considered as requiring great study and application. We may also be able to render an important service to society, and to eonfer a still more essential heneſit on individuals, hy repressing the premature zeal of unskilful inventors. We need only read over the monthly accounts of patents, intended for seeuring the pecuniory advantages of useſul discoveries, in order to be convinced what expense oſ time and fortune is continually lavished on the feehlest attempts to innovate and improve. If we can he successful in convincing such inconsiderate enthusiasts of their real ignorance, or if ve can show them, that even their own fuiry ground has been preoccupied, ve may save them from impending ruin, and may relieve the publie ſrom the distraction of having its attention perpetually excited by unworthy ohjects. The ridicule attendant on the name of a projector has been in general but too well deserved; for ſew, very few, who have aspired at improvement, have ever had the patience to submit their inventions to such experimental tests us common sense would suggest to an impartial observen. We may venture to afſimm that out of every hundred of fancied improvements in arts or in machines, ninety at least, if not ninety nine, are either old or useless; the object of our researches is, to enable ourselves to distinguish and to adopt the hundredth. But while we prune the luxuriant shoots of youthful invention, we must remember to perform our task with leniency, and to show that we vish only to give additional vigour to the healthful branches, and not to extirpate the parent plant. The Repository oſ the Royal Institution, as soon as ĩt can he properly furnished, vill be considered as a supplementary room for apparatus, in which the most interesting models, exhibited and deseribed in the lectures, will be placed for more frequent inspection, and where a few other artieles may perhaps deserve admission, which will not require so particular an explanation To those who have profited by the lectures, or who are already too far advanced to stand in need of them, our rooms for reading and for literary conversation may be a source of mutual instruetion. Our Library in time must eontain all those works of importance vhieh are too expensive for the private collections of the generality of individuals; which are necesary to complete the knowledge oſ particular sciences, and to which references will occasionally be given in the lectures on those sciences. Our Journals, free from eommercial shackles, will present the publie, from time to time, with concise accounts of the most interesting novelties in science and in the useful arts; and they vill furnish a perpetual incitement to their editors to appropriate, as much as possible, to their own improvement, whatever is valuable in the publications of their cotemporaries. When all the advantages, which may reasonably he expected from this Institution, shall be fully understood and impartially considered, it is to he hoped that few persons of liberal minds vill be indifferent 10 ĩts success, or unwilling to contribute to it and to participate in ĩt. To that regulation, which forbids the introduction of any discussions connected with the learned professions, I shall always most willingly submit, and most punctually attend. It requires the study of a considerable portion of a man's life to qualify him to be of use to mankind in any of them; and nothing can he more pernicious to individuals or to society, than the attempting to Phoeni practically upon an imperfect conception of a few ſirst principles only. In plysie, the wisest can do but little, and the ignorant can only do worse than nothing: and anxiously as we are disposed to seek whatever relief the Iearned and experienced may be able to ufford us, so cautiously ought ve to avoid the mischievous interference oſ the half studied empirie: in politios and in religion, we need but to look hauck on the history of kingdoms and republies, in order to be avare oſ the mischieſs which ensue, when fools rush in where angels fear to tread.” Deeply impressed with the importance of mathematical investigations, both for the advancement of science and for the improvement of the mind, I thought it in the first place an indispensable duty to present the Royal Institution, in my Syllabus, with a connected system of natural philosophy, on a plan seldom, if ever, before executed in the most copious treatises. Proceeding ſfrom the simplest axioms of abstract mathematics, the syllabus contains a striet demonstration of every proposition which I have found it necessary to employ through. out the whole extent of natural philosophy. In the astronomical part only, some observations occur, unsupported by mathematical evidence: here, however, ĩt was as impracticable, as it would have been useless, to attempt to enter into investigations, which in many instances have been extended far beyond the limits even of Newton's researches. But for the sake of those who are not disposed to undertake the labour of following, with mathematical accuracy, all the steps of the demonstrations on which the doctrines of the mechanical sciences ære founded, I shall endeavour to avoid, in the whole of this course of lectures, every intricacy which might he perplexing to a beginner, and every argument which is ſitter for the closet than for a public theatre. Here I propose to support the same propositions by experimental prooſs: not that I consider such proofs as the most conclusive, or as more interesting to a truly philosophic mind than a deduetion from general principles; but because there is a satisfaction in discovering the eoincidence oſ theories with visible effects, and because objects of sense are of advantage in assisting the imagination to comprehend, and the memory to retain, what in a more abstracted form might fail to excite suſiicient attention. : This combination of experimental with analogical arguments, constitutes the prineſpal merit of modern philosophy. And here let the citizen of the world excuse the partiality of an Englishman, it I pride myself, and congia- tulate my àudience, on the decided superiority of our own country, in the first establishment, and in the subsequent cultivation, of the true philosophy oſ the operations of nature. I grant that we have at times been culpably negligent of the labours of others; that we have of late suffered our neighbours to excel us in abstract mathematios, and perhaps, in some instances, in patient and persevering observation of naked phenomena. We have not at this moment a Lagrange or a Laplace: what we have, I do not think it necessary to enumerate: but there is a certain combination of theoretical reasoning with experimental inquiry, in which Great Britain, from the time of the reformation of philosophy, has never been inferior to any nation existing. I need only refer to the Transactions of the Royal Society, for abundant instances of the mode oſ investigation to which I allude; and I vwill venture to affirm, that their late publications are equal in importance to iny that have preceded. It was in England that a Bacon ſirst_taught the world the true method of the study of nature, and rescued science from that barbarism in which the followers oſ Aristotle, by a too servile imitation of their master, had involved it; and with which, even of late, a mad spirit of innovation, under the name of the eritical philosophy, has, in a considerable part of Europe, again been threatening it. It was in this country that Newton advanced, vith one gigantic stride, from the regions of twilight into the noon day of science. A Boyle and a Hooke, who would otherwise have been deservedly the boast of their century, served but as obscure forerunners of Newtons glories. After these, a crowd of eminent men succeeded, each of great individual merit; but, absorbed in the prosecution of the Newtonian discoveries, they chose rather to be useful by their humble industry, than to wander in search of the brilliancy of novelty. It is difficult to judge of our cotemporaries; but we appear at present to he in possession of more thun one philosopher, whose names posterity will be eager to rank in the same class vith the few that have been enumerated. But it is not our present business to enter into the history of science; respecting vhat is supposed to be wholly unknown, wve can have little curiosity: a short sketch oſ the progress of each branch of natural philosophy will be more properly introduced, after we have finished our investigation oſ the principal doctrines belonging to it. With regard to the mode of delivering these lectures, I shall in general intreat my audience to pardon the formality of a written discourse, in favour of the advantage oſf a superior degree of order and perspicuity. ITt would unquestionably be desirable that every syllable advanced should be rendered perfeetly easy and comprehensible even to the most uninformed; that the most inattentive might ſind suſficient variety and entertainment in what is submitted to them, to excite their curiosity, and that in all cases the pleasing, and sometimes even the surprising, should he united with the instruetive and the important. But whenever there appears to be a real impossibility of reconciling these various ohjects, I shall esteem it better to seek for substantial utility than temporary amusement; for i we fail of heing useful for vant of being suſticiently popular, ve remain at least respeetable: but i we are unsuccessſul in our attempts to amuse, we immediately appear triſling and contemptible. It shall however at all times he my endeavour to avoid each extreme; and I trust, that Ishall then only be condemned, when I am found abstruse from ostentation, or uninteresting from supineness. The most ditſceult thing for a teacher is, to recolleet how much it cost himself to learn, and to accommodate his instruction to the apprehension of the uninformed: by bearing in mind this ohservation, I hope to be able to render my lectures more and more intelligible and familiar; not hy pussing over diſſiculties, but by endeavouring to facilitate the task of overcoming them; and if at any time I appear to have failed in this attempt, I shall think mysel? honoured by any subsequent inquiries, that my audience may be disposed to make. We have to extend our views over the whole cirele of natural and artificial Enovledge, to consider in detail the principles and application of the philosophy oſ nature and of artt. We are to discuss a great number of subjects, to cach of which a separate title and rank among the sciences has sometimes been assigned; and ĩt ĩs necessary, in order to obtain a distinct conception oſ the foundation and relation of each subdivision, to pay particular attention to the order in which the sciences are to he treated, and to the connexion whieh subsists between them, as well as to the degree oſ importance, which cach of them elaims, with regard either to theory or to practice. To insist on the propriety of a distinet and logical order is unnecessary; for however superſluous we may deem the scholastio forms of rhetorie, it is conſessedly advantageous to the judgment as well as to the memory, to unite those things which are naturally conneeted, and to separate those which are essentially distinct. When a traveller is desirous of becoming acquainted with a city or ountry, before unknown to him, he naturally begins by taking, from some elevated situation, a distant view of the distribution of its parts; and in the same manner, before we enter on the particular consideration of the subjects of our researches, it may be of use to form to ourselves a general idea oſ the sciences and arts which are to be placed among them. Upon the advantages of mathematical and philosophical investigation in general, it is unnecessary to enlarge, because no liberal mind can require any arguments to he convinced how much the judgment is strengthened, and the invention assisted, by hahits of reasoning with caution and accuracy The public opinion is rather, on the contrary, in danger, at least in some parts of the world, of being too exclusively biassed in ſavour of natural philosophy; and has sometimes been inclined to a devotion too much limited to science, vithout a sufficient attention to such literature as an elegant mind always desires to see united with it. As to the practical importance of philosophical theories of the arts, it may have heen overrated by some, but no person is authorised to afſirm, that it has been too highly estimated, unless he has made himself master of every thing that theory is capable of doing; such a one, although he may in some cases be obliged to confess the insuſſiciency of our calculations, will never have reason to complain of their fallacy. The division of the whole course of lectures into three parts, was originally suggested by the periodical succession in which the appointed hours recur: but it appears to be more convenient than any other for the regular classiſication of the subjects. The general doctrines of motion, and their application to all purposes variable at pleasure, supply the materials of the first two parts, of which the one treats of the motions of solid bodies, and the other of those of ſluids, including the theory of light. The third part relates to the particular history of the phenomena of nature, and of the affections of bodies actually existing in the universe, independently of the art of man; comprehending astronomy, geography, and the doctrine of the properties of matter, and of the most general and powerful agents that influence it The synthetical order of proceeding, from simple and general principles, to their more intricate combinations in particular cases, is by far the most compendious for conveying information, with regard to sciences that are at all voL. I. c referable to certain fundamental laws. For these laws being once established, each fact, as soon as it is known, assumes its place in the system, and is retained in the memory by its relation to the rest as a connecting link. In the unalytical mode, on the contrary, which is alisoluſely necessary for the ſirst investigation oſ truth, ve are obliged to begin by collecting a number of insulated cireumstnees, which lead us back hy degrees to the knowledge of original principles, but which, until we arrive at those principles, are merely a burden to the memory. For the phenomena of nature resemble the scattered leaves of the Sibylline prophecies; a word only, or a singſe syllable, is written on each leaf, which, when separately considered, conveys no instruetion to the mind; but when, by the lubour of patient investigation, every fragment is replaced in ĩts appropriate connexion, the whole begi ns at once to speak a perspicuous and a harmonious languigze... Proceeding therefore in the synthetical order, we set out from the abstract doctrines of mathematies, relating to quantity, space, and number, vhich we pass over, as supposed to be previously understood, or as suſſiciently explained in the mathematical elements, and go on to their immeiiate application to mechanies and hydrodynamices, or to such cases of the motions oſ solids and ſluĩds as are dependent on arbitrary assumptions, that is, vhere we do not conſine our inquiries to any particular eases of existing phenomena. By means of principles which are deducible in a satisfactory manner from mathematical axioms, vith the assistance only of the general logic of induetion, we shall be able to draw such conclusions, as are capable of giving us very important inſormation respeeting the operations of natiire and of art, and to lay down such laws, as, to an uninformed person, it would appear to be heyond the powers oſ reason to determine, without the assistance of experiment. The afſeetions of ſalling bodies, and of projectiles, the phenomena of hodies revolving round a centre, the motions of pendulums, the properties of the centre of gravity, the equilibrium of forces in machines oſ different Kinds; the laws of preponderanee, and the eſſtets of collision; all these are vholly reſrable to axiomatical evidence, and are frequently applicable to importãnt uses in practice. Upon these foundations, we shall proceed to the general principles of machinery, and the application of ſorces oſ difſerent kinds? we shall inquire what are the principle sources oſ motion that we can subjeet. to nur command, and vhat advantages are peculiar to cach of them: and then, according to the purposes for which they are employed, we shall separately examine the principal machines nad manufactures i in which thos. foree- are applied to the servieo of nankind 4 : Sucn imstruments and machines as are more or les immediately subservient to mathematical purposes, will he the ſirst in order, ineluding all the mechanism of literature, the arts of writing, engraving, and printing, in their various branohes, ani the comparison of measures, with each other and with different standards; the principles of perspeetive will also form a useful appendage to the deseription of geometrical instruments. The determination of weights, and of the magnitude of moving forces of various kinds, constituting the science bf staties, will hbe the next subject, and will be followed by the consideration of the retarding foree of frietion, and of the passive strength oſ the various materials, that are employed in building and in machinery. A these suljects are in part preparatory to the immediate examination of the mechanical arts and manufactures, which are so numerous and complicated ns not to admit of regulur arrangement vithout some difficulty: they may however be divided imo such as are principally employed for resisting, for modifying, or for counteracting, any motion or force; thus architecture and carpentry are chieſly intended to resist the force of gravitation: these comprehend the employments of the mason, the brieklayer, the joiner, the cabinet maker, and the locksmith. In these departments it is oſten of the utmost importance to the mechanie, to recur, especially in works of magnitude, to philosophical principles; and in many other cases, vhere there is no need of much calculation, we may still be of serviee, by collecting such inventions of ingenious artists, as are convenient and elegant, and which, although simple in their principles, are not obvious in their arrangements; and in the sam manner ve may he ahle, in taking a general view of other arts and manuſactures, to explain their principles, where theory is concerned, and to exhibit practical precedents, where the nature of the subject requires no refined investigation. The modification of motion and foree includes its communication and alteration, by joints of various kinds, by wheelwork, and by cordage, and its equalisation by means of timekeepers. The subject of wheelwork gives eonsiderable scope for mathematical research, and requires the more notice, as it has often been inaccurately treated: the consideration of cordage leads us to that of union by twisting, and by intermixture of ſibres; including the important arts of carding, combing, spinning, ropemaking, weaving, fulling, felting, and papermaking; which constitute the employment of many millions of manufacturers, of all ages and sexes, in every purt of the world, and by which the animal and vegetable producetions of a large portion of the surface of the globe, are made to contrihute, as well to the power and riches of the individuals ho supply them, as to the health and comfort of the public that consumes them. The admirable art of the watch and clock maker is a peculiarly interesting department of practical mechanics, ĩt affords employment for mathematical investigation, for experimental inquiry, and for ingenious invention; and the perfection, which it has derived from a combination of these means, does honour as well to the nations who have encouraged it, as to the individuals who have been engaged in. it. To counteract the powers of gravitation and of frietion, is the object of such machines as are used for raising and removing weights: cranes, friction wheels, and carriages of all inds, are referable to this head, and some of them have been the subjects of much speculation and experiment. Lastly, to overcome and to modify the corpuscular forces of cohesion and repulsion, and to change the external forms of bodies, is the object of machinery intended for compression, extension, penetration, attrition, trituration, agitation, and demolition. For these purposes we employ presses, forges, rolling, stamping, coining, and milling machines; the processes of digging, ploughing, and many other agricultural arts; boring, mining, grinding, polishing, and turning; mills of various kinds, threshing mills, corn mills, oil mills, and powder mills; besides the chemical agents concerned in blasting rocks, and in the operations of artillery. All these arts are comprehended in the department oſ mechunies, which constitutes the first division of this coursee Not that ve shill be able to enter at large into the detail of each; but having formed a general outline, we may ſill up ĩts particular purts with more or less minuteness, us we may ſind more or less matter of importance to insert in each; and those who wish to pursue the subjects further, vill every where he able to derive great assistance from the authors whose works vill hbe mentioned. The doctrines of hydrodynamies relate to the motions and aſſeetions oſ fluids, in which we no longer consider ench distinet particle that is capable of separate motion, but wvhere we attend to the effect of an infinite number of particles, constituting a liquid or aeriform aggregate. The general theory of such motions will he premised, under the heads hydrustatics, or the affections of liquids at rest, pneumatostatics, or the properties of elastic fluids at rest; and hydraulics, or the theory of fluids in motion. The practical application of this theory to hydraulic and pneumatic machines is of very considerable importance, and is as interesting to the philosopher as it is necessary to the engineer. The employment of the force o water and wind to the best advantage, the draining of lands and mines, the supply of water for domestie convenience, the manoeuvres of seamanship, the construetion of the steam engine, are all dependent upon hydrodynamical principles, and are often considered as comprehended in the science of hydraulicss Harmonics and optics, the remaining parts of this division, are more insulated: the doctrine of sound, the theory of music, and the construction of musical instruments, are as pleasing to the intellect in theory, as they are gratifying to the senses in practice; but the science of optics is not less interesting, and at the same time far more useful; the instruments which it furnishes are of almost indispensable necessity to the navigator, to the naturalist, to the physiologist, and even to the man of business or pleasure It is perhaps in this science that many persons of the greatest genius have been the most happily employed. The reasons for which it is elassed as a division of hydrodynamies will be explained hereafter. The contemplation of the particular phenomena of nature, as they are displayed in the universe at large, contributes perhaps less to the perfection of any of the arts, vhich are immediately subservient to profit or convenience, than the study of mechanies and hydrodynamies. But the dignity and magniſicence of some of these phenomena, and the beauty and variety of orhers, render them highly iuteresting to the philosophical mind, at the same tim⸗ that some of them are of the utmost importance in their applieation to the purposes of lifee In all these respects the science of astronomy holds the ſirst rank; its uses in assisting navigation, and in regulating chronology, are beyond all ealculationn. Geography, and hydrography, or the particular histories of the earth and sea, are immediately connected with astronomy. The diseussion of the properties of matter in general, and of the alterations of tempero- ture to which all hodies are liable, has not hitherto received a distinet appellution as a science; but hoth these subjects require a separate considertion, amnd aſſord a vast seope for speculation and for observation Electricity and magnetism are ſartly referable to the aſſeetions oſ matter, and partly to the agenev of substances which appear to agree with eommon mutter in some properties, and to diſler from it in otherss The phenomena produced by these agents are oren such as excite a high degree of euriosity to inquire into their causts, although the inquiry too oſten terminates only in astonishment; but we have reason to expect considerable advancement in these seienees ſrom the singular discoveries of modern chemists. The utility of the philosophy of eleetricĩtv is suſſiciently exempliſied in the general introduetion of eonduetors ſor securing us against lightning, to say nothing oſf the occasionalb employ ment of clectricity in medicine; and since the important discovery of the compass, we have only to lament that the changeable nature of magnetio eſſects so much lIimits the utility oſ that instrument for nautical and geographical purposes. Of meteorology, and of geology, our knovledge is hitherto very impertect; notwithstanding many diffuse treatises which relate to them, we cannot boast of having reduced them to any determinate luws; and yet there are some meteorological facts which vell deserve our attentionn. Natural history is the lust of the sciences that it will be necessary for us to notice; some may think it superſluous to attempt to give so superficial a sketeh of this most extensive suhject, as our plan vill allow; but iĩt is still possible to seleet some general observations respeeting the methods of elassiſication, as vell as the philosophy of natural history, which, although very concise, may yet be in some measure instructive This third division of the course would properly include, together with the general properties of matter, and the purticular actions of its purticles, the whole seience of chemistry, but the variety and importance of ehemical researches, demand a separate and minute discussion; and the novelty and beauty of many of the experiments with which the labours of our cotemporaries have presented us, and which will he exhibited in the theatre of the Roval Institution by the Proſessor of Chemistry, are suſficient to make this department oſ natural philosuphy the most entertaining of all the sciences. Such is the whole outline of our plan, and such are the practical uses, to vhich the arts and sciences, comprehended in it, are principally applicable. - Before we proceer to the examination of its several parts, we must pause to consider the mode of reasoning which is the most generally to be adopted. It depends on the axiom which has always been essentially concerned in every improvement of natural philosophy, but which has heen more and more employed, ever since the revival of letters, under the name induction, and vhich has been sufficiently discussed by modern metaphysicians. That like causes produce like effects, or, that in similar circumstances similar consequences ensue, is the most general and most important lav of nature; it ĩs the foundation of all analogical reasoning, and is collected from constant experience; by an indispensable and unavoidable propensity of the human mind. It does not appear that we can have any other accurate conception of causation, or of the connexion of a cause with its effect, than a strong impression oſ the observation, from uniform experience, that the one has constantly followed the other. We do not know the intimate nature of the connexion hy which gravity causes a stone to fall, or how the string of a how urges the arrow forwards; nor is there any original absurdity i in supposing it possible that the stone might have remained suspended in the air, or that the bowstring might have passed through the arrow as light passes through glass. But iĩt is obvious that we cannot help concluding the stone's weight to be the cause of ĩts fall, and that every heavy hody will fall unless supported; and the pressure oſ the string to be the eause of the arrow's motion, and, that if e shoot, the arrow vill ſly; if ve hesitated to make these conclusions, ve should often pny dear for our scepticism. This explanation ĩs suſſicient to show the identity of the two expressions, that like causes produce like eſſcets, and, that in similar cireumstances similar eonsequences ensue. And such 15 the ground of argument from experience, the simplest principle of reasoning, aſter pure mathematical truths; which appear to be so far prior to experience, as theĩr contradietion hlways implie- an  absuidity repug: ant to the imaginution. en e n In the application of indnction, the greatest caution and circumspeetion are necessary; for it is obvious that, before we ean infer with certainty the complete similarity of two events, we must he perfeetly vell assured thut we ae acqminted vith every ereumstance which ean have any relation to their eauses. The error of some of the ancient schools consisted principally in the El want of suſticient precaution in this respect; for although Bacon is, with great justice, considered as the author oſ the most correet method of induetion, yet, according to his own statement, it was chieſly the guarded and gradual application of the mode of argument, that he laboured to introduce He remarks, that the Aristotelians, from a hasty observation of a few concurring tacts, proceeded immediately to deduce universal principles oſ science, and ſundamental laws of nature, and then derived from these, by their syllogisms, all the particular cases, which ought to have been made intermediate steps in the inquiry. Of such an error we may easily find a familiar instancee We ohserve, that, in general, heavy bodies fall to the ground unless they are supported; it was therefore concluded that all heavy bodies tend downwards: and since ſlame was most frequently seen to rise upwards, it was inferred that ſlame was naturally and absolutely light. Had sufficient precaution been employed in observing the æffects of ſluids on falling and on floating bodies, in examining the relations of flame to the circumambient atmnsphere, and in ascertaining the speciſic gravity of the air at different temperatures, it would readily have been discovered, that the greater weight of the eolder air was the cause of the ascent of the flame; flame heing less heavy than air, but yet having no positive tendency to ascend. And accordingly the Epicurcans, whose arguments, as far as they related to matter and motion, were often more accurate than those of their cotemporaries, had corrected this error; for we find in the second hook of Lucretius a very just explanation of the phenomenon. See with what force yon rivers crystal stream Resists the weight of many a massy beam. To sink the wood the more we vainly toil, The higher it rebounds, with swift recoil. Yet that the beam would of itself ascend No man vill rashly venture to contend. Thus too the ſlame has weight, though highly rare, Nor mounts but when compelled by heavier air. It may he proper to notice here those axioms which are denominated by Newton rules of philosophizing; although it must be confessed that they mender us very little immediate assistance in our investigations. The first is, that no more causes are to be admitted as existing in nature, thun are true, and sufiicient for explaining the phenomena to be considered: the second, t therefore effects of the same kind are to be attributed, as far as is pussible, to the same causes: thirdly, those qualities of bodies which cannot he increased nor diminished, and which are found in all bodies within the reach of our experiments, are to be considered as general qualities oſ all hodies existing:” fourthly,  in experimental philosophy, propositions collected by inducetion from phenomena, are to be esteemed either accurately or very nearly true, notwithstanding any contrary hypotheses, until other phenomena occur, hy which they may either be corrected or confuted. As an illustration of the remark, that these axioms, though strictly true are of little real utility in assisting our investigations, I shall give an instance from the subject of electrieity. Supposing that we wish to determine, whether or no the electric fluid has weight; we are to inquire whether or no gravitation is one of those properties which are described in the third rule, and whether that rule will authorise us to apply it to the electric fluid, as one of those qualities of bodies, vhich canmot he increased nor diminished, which are found in- all bodies within the reach of our experiments, and which are therefore to be considered as general qualities of all bodies existingg. Nov it appears to be in the first place uncertain whether or no the inerease and diminution of gravity, from a change of distance, is strictly compatible with the terms of the definition; and in the second place, we are equally at a loss to decide, whether or no the electrie fluid can with propriety be called a hody, for it appears in some respects to he wholly different from tangible matter, vhile it has other qualities in common vith it. Such are the diſſiculties of laying down general laws on so comprehensive a scale, that we shall ſind iĩt more secure to be contented to proceed gradually by closer inductions in particular casess. We shall however seldom be much embarrassed in the choiee of a mode of argumentationn. The laws of motion, which vill be the ſirst immediate subjects of discussion, have indeed sometimes been referred to experimental evidence; but we shall be able to deduce them all in a satisfactory manner, by means of our general axiom, from reasonings purely mathematical, which, wherever they are applicable, are unquestionably preferable to the imperfeet evidence of the senses, employed in experimental investigations. EE voL. I. ON MOTION. THE whole science of mechanies depends on the laws of motion, either actually existing, or suppressed by the opposition of the forces which tend to produce it. The nature of motion requires therefore to be particularly examined at the entrance of the science of mechanical philosophy; and although the subject is so abstract as to demand some effort of the attention, being seldom capable of receiving much immediate illustration from the objects of sense, yet we shall ſind it indispensable to our progress in the investigation of many particular problems of importance, to obtain, in the ſirst place, a clear conception of the properties and affections of motions of all kinds. One oſ the ancient philosophers, on being asked for a deſinition of motion, is said to have walked across the room, and to have ansvered, you see it, but vhat it is, I cannot tell you. It does not, however, appear absolutely necessary to appeal to the senses for the idea of motion: for a deſinition is the resolution of a complex idea into the more simple elements which compo,e i it; and, ĩn the present instance, these elements ⸗ are, are, the existenee of two  points at a Ccertaĩn distunee, md aſter ac certain interv val oſt time, , the existencẽ of the same points certained according 0  that postulate of geometry, vhich has i in general been tacitly understood, but which I have expressly inserted in the geometrical part of my syllabus; requiring that the length oſ a line be capable of being identified, vhether by the eſſeet of any object on the senses, or merely in imagination. NMotion, therefore, is the change of rectilinear distunce between two points. Allowing the accuracy of this definition, it appears that two points are nel cessary to constitute motion; that in all cases when we are inquiring whether or no any body or point is in motion, ve must recur to some other point which we can compare vith it, and that if a single atom existed alone in the universe, it could neither be said to be in motion nor at rest. This may scem in 5ome measure paradoxical, but ĩt ĩs the necessary consequence of our deſinition, and the paradox is only owing to the diſiculty of imagining the existence of a single atom, unsurrounded by inmumerable points of a space which we represent to ourselves as immoveable. It has been for want of a precise definition of the term motion, that many authors have fallen into confusion with respect to, absolute and relative motion. For the deſinition of motion, as the change of recetilinear distance between two points, appears to he the definition of what is commonly called relative motion; but, on a strict examination, we shall find, that what we usually call absolute motion is merely relative to some space, which we imagine to be vithout motion, but which is so in imagination only. The space which we call quieseent, is in general the earth's surface; yet we well knov, from astronomical considerations, that every point of the eurth's surface is perpetually in motion, and that in very various directions: nor are any material objects accessible to our senses, vhich we can consider as absolutely motionless, or even as motionless with regard to each other; since the continual variation of temperature to which all bodies are liable, and the minute agitations arising from the motions of other hodies with which they are conneeted, will always tend to produce some imperceptible change of their distances. When therefore we assert, that a body is absolutely at rest, we only mean to compare it with some large space in which it is contained: for that there exists a body absolutely at rest, in as strict a sense as an absolutely straight line may be conceived to exist, we cannot positively affirm; and i such a quiescent body did exist, ve have no criterion by which it could be distinguished. Supposing a ship to move at the rate of three miles in an hour, and a person on board to walk or to be drawn tovards the stern at the same rate, he would be relatively in motion, with respect to the ship, yet we might very properly consider him as absolutely at rest: but he would, on a more extended view, be at rest only in relation to the earth's surface; for he would still be revolving round the axis of the earth, and with the earth round the sun; and with the sun and the whole solar system, he would he slowly moving among the starry vorlds vhich surround them. Now vith respect to any effects within the ship, all the subsequent relations are of no consequence, and the change oſ his rectilinear distance from the various parts of the ship, ĩs all that necds to be considered in determining those efieets. In the same manner, if the ship appear, by comparison with the vater only, to be moving through it with the velocity of three miles an hour, and the water he moving at the same time in a contrary direetion at the sume rate, in consequence of a tide or current, the ship will be at rest with respeet to the shore, but the mutuual actions of the ship and the vater will be the same as if the vater were actually at rest, and the ship in motion. It is not suficient to observe the inerease or decrease of distance of a moving point from another single point only: we must compare its suceessive situations with many other points surrounding it; and for this purpose these points must be at rest among themselves, in order to he considered as belonging to a quiescent space or surface; which may be deſined as a space or surface, of which all the points remain always at equal distances from each other, vithout any external influence In this sense we must call the deck of the ship a quiescent surface, whether the ship be at anchor or under sail: but ve must not consider a surface revolving round a centre as a quiescent surface; for it ill appear hereafter that no such motion can exist without the influence of a centripetal foree, which renders ĩt improper for determining the afections of a moving body. When a point is in motion with respect to a quiescent space, it ĩs often simply denominated a moving point, and the right line joining any two of its places, immediately contiguous to each other, is called jts direetion. If it remains continually in one right line drawn in the quiescent space, that line is always the line of its direction; if it describes several right lines, each line is the line of its direction as long as it continues in it; but if its path becomes curved, ve can no longer consider it as perfectly eoinciling at any time vith a right line, and we must recur to the letter of the deſinition, by supposing a right line to be drawn through tvo successive points in which it ĩs found, and then i these points be conceived to approach cach other without Iimit, ve shall have the line oſ its direction. Now such a line is called in geometry a tangent: for it meets the curve, but does not cut ĩt, provided that the curvature be continued. (Plate I. Fig. I... 5.) Having formed an accurate idea of the nature of motion, and of the import oſ the terms employed in speaking of its properties, ve may proceed to consider the mechanical laws to which it is subjected, and which are derivable from the essence of the deſinitions that have been premised. The ſirst ĩs, that a moving poiut never quits the line of its direction without a disturbing cause: for a right Iine being the same with respect to all sides, no reason can he imagined why the point should incline to one side more than another; and the general lav of induetion requires, that the moving point should preserve the same relations towards the points similarly situated on every side of the line. This argument appears to be sufficiently satisfactory to give us groum for asserting, that the law of motion here laid down may be considered as ndependent of experimental proof. It was once proposed as a prize question by the academy of sciences at Berlin, to determine whether the laws of motion were necessary or accidental; that is, whether they vere to be considered as mathematical or as physical truthss Maupertuis, then president of the academy, wrote an elaborate dissertution, in whieh he endeavoured to deduce them from a complicated principle of the production of every efſect in the manner vhich requires the least possible action, a principle which he supposes to be most consistent with the wise economy oſ naturee But this principle has itself heen shown to be capable of accommodation to any other imaginable laws of motion, and the intricacy of the theory tends only to envelope the subjeet in unnecessary obscurity; the lavs of motion appear to he easily demonstrable from the simplest mathematical truths, granting only the homogencity or similarity of matter with respect to motion, and allowing the general axiom, that like couses produce like effects. If, however, any person thinks diſferently, he is at liberty to call these laws experimental axioms, collected from a comparison of various phenomena; for we cannot easily reduce them to direct experiments, since we can never remove from our experiments the action of all disturbing causes; for either gravitation, or the contact of surrounding bodies, will interfere with all the motions which we can examine. Having established the rectilinear direction of undisturbed motion, we come to eonsider its uniformity. Here the idea of time enters into our subject. To define time in general is neither easy nor necessury; but we must have some measure of equal times. Our ahstract idea of time depends on the memory of past sensations; but it is obvious that the results of an intellectual measure of the duration of time would be liable to the greatest uncertainty. We may observe, that, on a journey, the perpetual succession of various objeets will oſten make a week appear, upon retrospection, as long as a month spent in a continuation of such employments as are uniform, without being laborinus; the multitude of new impressions not only serving to increase the apparent magnitude oſ the interval, by ſilling up its vacuitics, but tending also to diminish the vivacity of the ideas which they have superseded, and to give them the character of the fainter recollections of an earlier date We are therefore obliged to estimate the lapse of time by the changes in external ohjects: of these changes, the simplest and most convenient is the apparent motion of the sun, or rather of the stars, derived from the actual rotation of the rarth on its axis, which is not indeed an undisturbed rectilinear motion, but which is equally applicable to every practical purpose. Hence ve obtuin, by astronomical observations, the well known measures of the dustion of time, implied by the terms day, hour, minute, and second. Now the equality of times being thus estimated from any one motion, all other bodies moving without disturbance, will deseribe equal successive parts of their lines of direction in equal times. And this is the second law of motion, which, with the former law, constitutes Newton's first axiom or lav of motion: that every body perseveres in its state of rest or uniform reetilinear motion, except so far as it is compelled by some force to change it. It appears that this second law is strietly deducible from the axioms and deſinitions which have been premised, and principally from the consideration of the relative nature of motion, and the total deſiciency of a eriterion of absolute motion. For, since the velocity of a body, moving without resistance or disturbance, is only a relation to another body, if the second hody has no mechanical connexion with the first, its state with respeet to motion can have no effect on the velocity of the first body, however great its comparative magnitude may he: and if a hody is at rest, there is nothing to determine it to begin to move either to the right hand or to the left; if it is at rest with respect to any other hodies, it will remain in the same condition, whatever the relative motions of those bodies may be, when compared with the surrounding objects; and these relations can only be preserved by its continuance in uniform rectilinear motion. This law is also confirmed by its perfect agreement with all experimental observations, although it is too simple to admit of an immediate proof. For we can never place any body in such circumstances as to be totally exempt from the operation of all accelerating or retarding causes; and the deductions from such experiments as we can make, would require in general, for the accurate determination of the necessary corrections, a previous Eknowledge of the law which we wish to demonstrate. When, indeed, ve consider the motion of a projectile, ve have only to allow for the disturbing force of gravitation, which so modifies the effect, that the body deviates from a right line, but remains in the same vertical plane; whence we may infer, that, in the absence of the force of gravitation, the body would continue to move in every other plane in which its motion began, as vell as in the vertical plane, sincè in that case all these planes would be indifferent to it; it must therefore remain in their common intersection, which could only be a straight line: so that by thus combining arguments with observation, we may obtain a confirmation of the law of the rectilinear direction of undisturbed motion, partly founded on direct experiment. Its uniformity is however still less subjected to immediate examination; yet, from a consideration of the nature of friction and resistance, combined with the laws of gravitation, we may ultimately show the perfect eoincidence of the theory with experiment. The tendency of matter to persevere in this manner in the state of rest or of uniſorm rectilinear motion, is called its inertia. In all these cases it is of importance to attend to the composition of motion, or the joint effect of more thun one motion existing at the same time. The existence of two or more motions, at the same time, in the same body, is not at first comprehended without some difficulty. It is in fact only a combination or separation of relations that is considered: in the same manner as by combining the relation of son to father, and brother to brother, ve obtain the relation of nephew to uncle, so by combming the motion of a man valking in a ship, with the motion of the ship, ve determine the relative velocity of the man with respect to the earth's surface. It is, however, necessary, for ascertaining these relations, to consider the affections of a space or surface in motion, and to examine how it may move in the most simple manner with respeet to another space. If any number of points move in parallel lines, describing equal spaces in equal times, they are at rest with respecet to each other; for it may casily be demonstrated that the rectilinear distance of each, from each of the rest, remains unchanged: and if all the points of a plane move in this manner on another plane, either plane may be said to be in rectilinear motion with respeet to the other. This is easily exempliſied by causing one plane to move on another, so that two or more of its points shall always remain in a given right line in the second plane: as when a square is made to slide along the straight cdge of a board, the surface oſ the square is in rectilinear motion with respeet to the board. (Plate I. Fig. 4.) Ir, besides this general motion of the plane, any point he supposed to have a particular motion in it, the point will have two motions with respect to the other plane, the one in common with its plane, and the other peculiar to itselt; and the joint eſſect oſ these motions with respect to the second plane is called the result of the two motions. Thus, when a carriage moves on a perfeetly level road, all its points describe parallel ſines, and it is in rectilinear motion with respect to the road: its wheels partake of this motion, but have also a rotatory motion of their own; and the result of the two motions of cach point of the wheels is the cycloid or trochoid that it describes in a quiescent vertical plane. Plate I. Fig. 5.) When an arm is made to slide upon a bar, and a thread, ſixed to the bar, is mude to pass, over a pulley at the end of the arm next the bar, to a slider which is moveable along the arm, the slider moves on the arm vith the same velocity as the arm on the bar; but if the thread, instead of being ſixed to the slider, be pussed again over a pulley attached to it, and then hrought hack to be ſixed to the arm, the motion of the slider will be only hulf that of the arm; and this will be true in whatever position the arm be fixcd Here we have 1wo motivns in the slider, one in common with the arm, and the other peculiar to itself, which may be either equal or unequal to the ſirst; and hy tracing a line on a fixed plane, with a point attached to the slider, we may easily examine the joint result of both the motionss. (Plate I. Fig. 6.) The joint result of any two motions is the diagonal of the parallelogram, of which the sides vould be described, in the same time, hy the separate motions; that is, i we have two lines representing the directions and velocities of the separate motions, and from the remoter extremity of each draw a line parallel to the other, the intersection of these lines will be the place of the moving body at the end of the given time. This is the necessary consequence of the coexistence of two motions in the sense that has been defined; iĩt is also capable of a complete illustration by means of the apparatus that has been described. (Plate I. Fig. 7.) Any given motion may be considered as the result of any two or more motions capable of composing it in this manner. Thus the line described by the tracing point of our æpparatus will be precisely the same, whether it be simply drawn along in the given direction, or made to move on the arm with a velocity equal to that of the arm, or, when the arm is in a different position, with only half that velocity. (Plate I. Fig. 8.) This principle constitutes the important doctrme of the resolution of motion. There is some diſficulty in imagining a slower motion to contain, as it were, within itself, two more rapid motions opposing each other: but in fact we have only to suppose ourselves adding or subtracting mathematical quantities, and we must reli nquish the prejudice, derived from our own feelings, vhich associates the idea of effort with that of motionn. When we conceive a state of rest as the result of equal and contrary motions, we use the same mode of representation as when we say that a cipher is the sum of two equal quantities with opposite signs; for instance, plus ten and minus ten make nothing. l The lav of motion here established differs but little in its enunciation from the original vords of Aristotle, in his mechanical problems. He says, that if a moving body has two motions, hearing a constant proportion to each other, it must necessarily deseribe the diameter of a parallelogram, of vhich the sides are in the ratio of the two motions. It is obvious that this proposition includes the consideration not only of uniform motions, but also of motions which are similarly accelerated or retarded: and ve should scarcely have expected, that, from the time at which the subject began to be so elearvOL. I. E ſ ly understood, two thousand years would have elapsed, before this law hegan to be applied to the determination of the velocity of bodies actuated by deſleeting forces, which Newton has so simply and elegantly deduced from it. In the laws of motion, which are the chief foundation of the Principia, their great author introduces at once the consideration of forces; and the first corollary stands thus; a body describes the diagonal of a parallelogram by two forees acting conjointly, in the same time in which it would deseribe its sides by the same forces acting separately. It appears, however, to be more natural and perspicuous to defer the consideration of force, until the simpler doctrine of motion has been separately examined. We may easily proceed to the composition of any number of different motions, by combining them successively in pairs Hence any equable motions, represented by the sides of a polygon, that is, of a ſigure consisting of any number of straight sides, being supposed to take place in the same moveable body, in directions parallel to those sides, and in the order of going round the figure, destroy each other, and the body remains at restt. We may understand the truth of this proposition by imagining each motion to take place in succession for an equal small interval of time; then the point would describe a small polygon similar to the original one, and vould be found, at the end of every such interval, in its original situation. When the motions to be combined are numerous and diversified, it is oſten convenient to resolve each motion into three parts, reduced to the directions of three given lines perpendicular to each other. It is easy to ſind in this manner by addition and subtraction only, the general result of any number of motions. We may deseribe the fſlight of a bird, ascending in an oblique direction, by estimating its progress northwards or southwards, eastwards or westwards, and at the same time upwards, and we may thus determine its place as accurately, as by ascertaining the immediate bearing and angular elevation oſ its path, and its velocity in the direction of its motion. LECTURE III. ON ACCELERATING FORCES. WE have hitherto only considered motion as already existing, without any regard to its origin or alteration; we have seen that all undisturbed motions are equable and rectilinear; and that two motions represented by the sides of a parallelogram, cause a body to describe its diagonal by their joint effect. We are now to examine the causes which produce or destroy motion. Any cause of a change of the motion of a hody, with respect to a quiescent space, is called a force; that is, any cause vhich produces motion in a body at rest, or which increases, diminishes, or modifies it in a body which was before in motion. Thus the power of gravitation, which causes a stone to fall to the ground, is called a force; but when the stone, after descending down a hill, rolls along a horizontal plane, it is no longer impelled by any force, and its relative motion continues unaltered, until it is gradually destroyed by the retarding force of friction. Its perseverance in the state of motion or rest in consequence of the inertia of matter, has sometimes been expressed by the term vis inertiae, or force of inertia; but it appears to be somewhat inaccurate to apply the term force to a property, which is never the cause of a change of motion in the body to which it belongs. It is a necessary condition in the definition of force, that it be the cause of a change of motion with respeet to a quiescent space. Tor if the change vere only in the relative motion of two points, it might happen without the operation of any force: thus, if a body be moving without disturbance, its motion vith respect to another body, not in the line of its direction, will be perpetually changed; and this change, considered alone, vould indicate the existence of a repulsive force: and, on the other hand, two bodies may be subjected to the action of an attractive force, while their distance remains unaltered, in consequence of the centrifugal effect of a rotatory motion. (Plate I. Fig. 9.) The exertion of an animal, the unbending of a bow, and the communication of motion by impulse, are familiar instances of the actions of forcess We must not imagine that the idea of force is naturally connected vith thut of Iubour or difficulty; this association is only derived from habit, since our voluntary actions are in general attended with a certam effort, whieh leaves an impression almost inseparable from that of the force that it ealls into action. It is natural to inquire in what immediate manner any force acts, so as to produce motion; for instance, hy what means the earth causes a stone to gravitate towards it. In some cases, indeed, we are disposed to imagine that we understand better the nature of the action of a force, as, vhen a body in motion strikes anuther, we conceive that the impenetrability of matter is a sufiicient cause for the communication of motion, since the first hody cannot continue its course without displacing the second; and it has been supposed that if we could discover any similar impulse that might be the cause of gravitation, we should have a perfect idea of its operation. But the fact is, that even in cases of apparent impulse, the bodies impelling each other are not ac tually in contact; and if any analogy between gravitation and impulse he ever established, it will not be by referring them both to the impenetrability of matter, but to the intervention of some common agent, perhaps imponderable. It was observed by Newton, that a considerable force was necessary to bring two pieces of glass into a degree of contact, which still was not quite perſect; and Professor Robison has estimated this force at a thousand pounds for every square inch. These extremely miuute intervals have been ascertained by observations on the colours of the thin plate of air included between the glasses:. and vhen an image of these colours is exhibited by means of the solar microscope, it ĩs very easily shown that the glasses are separated from each other, by the operation of this repulsive force, as soon as the pressure of the screws which conſine them is diminished; the rings of colours dependent on their distance contracting their dimensions accordingly. Hence it is obvious, that whenever two pieces of glass strike each other, without exerting a pressure equal to a thousand pounds on a square inch, they may aſſect each other's motion without actually coming into contact. Some persons might perhaps be disposed to attribute this repulsion to the elasticity of particles of air adhering to the glass, but I have found that the experiment succeeds equally vell in the vacuum of the air pump. We must thereſore be contented to acl knovledge our total ignorance of the intimate naturè of forces of every kind; and ve are first to examine the effect of forces, considering only their magnitude and direction, vithout any regard to their origin. ;t was truly asserted by Descartes, that the state o? motion is equally natural with that of rest. When a body is once in motion, it requires no fo eign power to sustain its velocity. If therefore a moving hody is subjected to the influence of any force, which acts upon it in the line of its direction, its motion vill be either accelerated or retarded, accordingly as the direction of the force coincides with that oF the motion, or is opposed to itt. A stone, for instance, heginning to fall, or projected downwards; hy no means retains the same velocity throughout its descent, but acquires more and more motion every instant. We well knov, that the greater the height from which a body falls, the more danger there is of its destroying whatever opposes its progress. In the same manner, vhen a ball is thrown upwards, it gradually loses its motion by the operation of gravitation, which is now a retarding force, and at last begins again to descend. E may here he proper to inquire what is the precise meaning of the term velocty; we appear indeed to understand sufficiently the common use of the word, but it is not easy to give a correct definition of itt. The velocity of a body may be said to be the quantity or degree of its motion, independently oſ any consideration of its. mass or magnitude;. and it might alvays be measured hy the space described in a certain portion of timcj] for instance a second, if there were no other motions than undisturbed or ũniform motions: but the velocity may vary very considerably within the second, and ve must therefore have some other measure of it than the space actually deseribed in any fſinite interval of time:. IF hovever the times be supposod inſinitely short, the elements of space deseribed may be considered as the true measures of velocities. These elements, although smaller than any assignable quantity, may yet be uccurately compared with each other; and the reason that they afford a true criterion of the velocity, is this, that the change produced in the velocity, cluring so short an interval of time, must be absolutely inconsiderable in comparison with the whole velocity, and the element of space becomes a true measure of the temporary velocity, in the same manner as any larger portion of: space may be the measure of a uniform velocity. When the increase or diminution of the velocity of a moving body is uniform, its cause is called a uniform force: the spaces which would be deseribed in any given time, with the actual velocity uniformly continued, being always equally increased or diminished by the action of such a forcee For example, if the velocities, at the heginning of any two separate seconds, be such, that the body would deseribe one foot and ten feet in the respective seconds, if undisturbed, and the spaces actually described become two feet and eleven feet, each being increased one foot, the accelerating force must be denominated uniform. The power of gravitation, acting at or near the earth's surface, may, without sensible error, be considered as such a forcee. Thus, if a body hegins to fall from a state of rest, it describes about I6 feet, or more correctly 16.4, in the ſirst sccond; if it begins a second with a velocity of 39 feet, ĩt describes 32 and I6, or 48 feet, in this second. The decrease of the force of gravitation in proportion to the squares of the distances from the earth's centre, is barely pereeptible, at any heights within our reach, by the nicest tests that we can employ. The velocity produced by any uniformly accelerating force, is proportional to the magnitude of the force, and the time of its operation conjointly. When the forces are the same, æ little consideration will convince us that, since every equal portion of time adds equally to the velocity, the whole veloeity produced or destroyed must be in proportion to the whole time; and when the forces differ, the velocities diſſer in the same ratio; for the forces are only measured by the velocities which they generate. Thus a double force, in a double time, produces a quadruple velocity. That a force producing a double velocity is properly called a double foree, may be shown from the laws of the composition of motion; for when the equal sides of a parallelogram representing two sepurate forces or motions, approach to each other, and at last coincide in direction, the diagonal of the parallelogram, representing their joint effect, becomes equal to the sum of the sides. (Plate I. Fig. 10.) The machine invented by Mr. Atwood furnishes us with a very convenient mode oſ making experiments on accelerating foreess The velocity, produced by the undiminished force of gravity, is much too great to be conveniently submitted to experimental examination; but by means of this apparatus, we can 2 diminish it in any degree that is requiredlc Two buxes, which are attached to a thread passing over a pulley, may be filled with different weights, which counterbalance each other, and constitute, together with the pulley, an inert mass, vhich is put into motion by a small weight added to one of them. The time of descent is measured by a second or half second pendulum, the space described being ascertained by the place of a moveable stage, against which the bottom of the descending box strikes: and when we wish i0 determine immediately the velocity acquired at any point, by measuring the space uniformly described in a given time, the accelerating force is removed, by means of a ring, which intercepts the preponderating veight, and the box proceeds with a uniform velocity, except so far as the friction of the machine retards it ByY changing the proportion of the preponderating weight to the whole weight of the boxes, it is obvious that we may change the velocity of the descent, and thus exhibit the effects of forces of different magnitudes. The most convenient mode of letting the weights go, without danger of disturbance from their vibrations, is to hold the lowest weight only, and to allow it to ascend at the instant of a heat of the pendulum. (Plate I. Fig. 1l.) That the velocity generated is proportional to the time of the action of the force, or that the force of gravitation, thus modiſied, is properly called a uniform accelerating force, may be shown by placing the moveable ring so as to intercept the same har successively at two different points: thus the space uniformly described in a second, by the box alone, is twice as great, when the force is withdrawn after a descent of ten half seconds, as it is after a descent of five. And i we chose to vary the weight of the bar, we might show in a similar manner, that the velocity generated in a given time is proportional to the force employed. We are next to determine the magnitude of the whole space described in a given time with a velocity thus uniformly inereasing. The law discovered by Galileo, that the space deseribed is as the square of the time of descent, and that it ĩs also equal to half the space which would be described in the same time with the final velocity, is one of the most useful and interesting propositions in the whole science of mechanics. Iis truth is easily shown from mathematical considerations, by comparing the time with the hase, and the velocity with the perpendicular of a triangle gradually increasing, of which the area vill represent the space described; and we may observe, by means of Atwond's muchine, that a quadruple space is always described in a double time, whatever may be the magnitude of the forcee OF course, if the forces vary, the spaces are as the forces and as the squares oſ the times conjointly. (Plate I Fig. 12) It may also be demonstrated, that if a body falls through one foot in a second by means of a certain force, it will require a quadruple force to make it fall through the same space in half a second; and in general, where the spaces are equal, the forces are as the squares of the velocitie. Wherever the space and the ſorce remain the same, whether the force be uniform or not, the squares of any two velocities, with which different bodies enter the space, will receive equal additions while they pass through it. When a force acts in a direction contrary to that of the moving hody, ve may readily determine the retardation that it produces, by comparing the motion with that of a body accelerated by the same force. For the degrees, by which an ascending body loses its motion, are the same as those by which it is ngain accelerated at the same points, when it has acquired its greatest height and again descendss. We may thus calculate to what height a body will rise when projected upwards with a given velocity, and retarded hy the force of gravitation. Since the force of gravitation produces or destroys a velocity of 34 feet in every second, a velocity of 320 feet, for instance, will be destroyed in 10 seconds; and aceording to what has been premised, a body will fall in 10 seconds through a hundred times 16 feet, or 1600 feet, which is therefore the height, to which a velocity of 320 feet in a second will carry a body, moving without resistance in a vertical directionn. We may also obtain the same result by squaring one eighth of the velocity: thus one eighth of 520 is 40, of which the square is 1600, the height corresponding to the given velocity; and this yelocity is sometimes called the velocity due to the height LECTURE IV. ON DEFLECTIVE FORCES. IT has been shown that the velocity, generated by an accelerating force, is proportional to the time of its action, and the space deseribed to the square of the time. We are next to consider the more complicated cases of the action of such forces When they are directed to a certain point out of the line or the motion which they affect, they become central forces, of which we have an example in the force of gravitation, considered as ĩit governs the planetary motions; and when this point becomes extremely distant in comparison vith the length of the body's path, so that the force acts very nearly in parallel lines, the body comes under the denomination of a projectile, as, for instance, a cannon ball projected horiZzontally or obliquely. An accelerating force, therefore, tending to a point out of the line of direetion of a moving hody, deſlects it from that line, and is then usually called a centripetal forcee And the natural tendency of the hody to persevere in its rectilincar motion, unless opposed by such a force, is sometimes called a centrifugal force. IIow far the term force is properly applicable to the perseverance of a body in its rectilinear motion, may perhaps be liable to dispute. If we allow the propriety oſ the appellation, we must extend the deſinition of the term force to any change of the relative motion of two points, and ve must also allow the inertia of a boiy to be justly denominated a foreee The fact, however, is certain, that all bodies revolving round a centre, have a tendency to recede from the centre, in the direction of the tangent, and vhen this force is counterbalanced, an equal centrifugal force must be exerted. The effects of a centrifugal foree may be observed in the familiar instance of a stone placed in a sling, whieh may be made to revolve in a vertical direetion, and even at the upper part of its orbit, may adhere, as it were, notwithVOL. I. ? standing its weight, to the sling vhich is above it, in consequence oſ the excess oſ the centrifugal force above the foree oſ gravitation. It is also a centrifugal force that is the foundation of the amusement of a boy driving a hoop. A hoop at rest, placed on ĩts edge, would very quickly fall to the ground; but when it is moving forwarũs, a slight inclination towards cĩther side causes the parts to acquire a motion towards that side, those which are uppermost being most aſſected by it; and this lateral motion, assisted sometimes by the curvature oſ the surface of the hoop, causes its path to deviate ſrom a rectilinear direetion, so that instend oſ moving straight forwards, it turns to that side, towards vhich it began to incline; and in this position, its tendency to fall still further is counteracted by the centrifugal force, and it generally makes several complete revolutions befere it falls The motion oſf a bowl, with its bias, is of a similar nature; the centrifugal force counteracting the tendency to curvilinear motion, so as to diminish it very considerably, until the velocity is so much reduced, as to suffer it to deseribe a puth ævidently curved, and becoming more and more so as the motion is slower. When a body is retained in a circular orbit, by a ſorce directed to its centre, its velocity is every where equal to that which it would acquire, in falling, hy means of the same foree, if uniſorm, through half the radius, that is, through one fourth of the diameter. This proposition affords a very convenient method of comparing the efſects of contral forces with those oſ simple accelerating forces, and deserves to be retuined in memory. We may in some measure demonstrate its truth hy means of the whirling table: an apparatus which is arranged on purpose for exhibiting the properties of central forces, although it is more caleulated for showing their comparative than their absolute magnitude; for accordingly as we place the string on the pullies, the two horizontal arms may be made to revolve either with equal velocities, or one twice as fast as the other. The sliding stages, which may be placed at different distances ſtom the eentres, and which are made to move along the arms with as little friction as possible, are in a certain proportion to the weights, which are to he raised, by means of threads pussing over pullies in the centres, as soon as the centrifugal forces of the stages with their weights are suſſiciently great; and the experiment is to be so arranged, that when the velocity, having heen giadually increased, produces a suſiicient centrifugal ſorce, both stages may raise 1 their weights, and ſly off at the same instant. But, for the present purpose, one of the stages only is required, and the time of revolution may be measured by a half second pendulum. We may make the force, or the weight to be raised, equal to the weight of the revolving body, and ve shall find that this hody will fly off when its velocity becomes equal to that which would be acquired by any heavy body in falling through a height equal to half the distance from the centre, and as much greater as is suflicient for overcoming the ſrietion of the machine. (Plate I. Fig. 13.) From this proposition ve may easily calculate the velocity, with which a sling of a given length must revolve, in order to retain a stone in its place in all positions; supposing the motion to be in a vertical plane, it ĩs obvious that the stone vill have a tendency to fall when iĩt is at the uppermost point of the orbit, unless the centrifugal force be at least equal to the force of gravity. Thus if the length of the sling be two feet, we must find the velocity acquired by a heavy hody in falling through a height of one foot, which vill be cight feet in a second, since eight times the square root of l is eight; and this must be its velocity at the highest point; with this velocity it would perform each revolution in about a second and a half, but its motion in other parts of its orbit will be greatly accelerated by the gravitation oſ the stone. It may also be demonstrated, that vhen bodies revolve in equal cireles, their eentrifugal forces are proportional to the squares of their velocities. Thus, in the whirling tahle, the two stages being equally loaded, one of them, which is made to revolve with twice the velocity of the other, will lift four equal veights at the same instant that the other raises a single one. But when two bodies revolve vith equal velocities at difſerent distances, the forces are inversely as the distances; consequently the forces are, in all cuses, directly as the squares of the velocities, and inversely as the distances. If two bodies revolve in equal times at diſferent distances, the forees by vhich they are retained in their orbits are simply as the distances.. If one of the stages of the whirling table he placed at twice the distance of the other, ĩt will raise twice as great a weight, vhen the revolutions are performed in the sume time. In general, the forces are as the distances directly, and as the squares of the times of revolution inverscly. Thus the same veight revolving in a double time, at the sume distance, will have its effeet reduced to one fourth, but at a double distance the efſect will again be increascd to half of its oririnal magnitude. From these principles ve may deduce the law vhich was discovered by Kepler in the motions of the planetary bodies, but which was ſirst demon strated by Newton from mechanical considerations. Where the forces vary inversely as the squares of the distances, as in the case of gravitation, the squares oſ the times of revolution are proportional to the cubes of the distances. Thus i the distance of one body be four times as great as that of mother, the eube of 4 being 64, which is the square of 8, the time of its revolution will be 8 times as great as that of the ſirst body. It would be easy to show the truth of this propositiom experimentally by means of the vhirling table, but the proof would be less striking than those of the simpler Iaws which have aheady been laid down. Hitherto we ve supposed the orbit of a revolving body to he a perfect circle; but it oſten happens in nature, as, for instance, in all the planetary motions, that the orbit deviates more or less from a cireular form; and in such cases we may apply another very important lav which was also discovered by Kepler; that the right line joining a revolving body and its centre oſ attraction, always describes equal areas in equal times, and the velocity of the body is therefore always inversely as the perpendicular dravn from the centre to the tangent. (Plate I. Fig. 14.) The demonstration of this law, invented by Newton, was one of the most elegant applications of the geometry of inſinites or indivisibles; a branch of mathematics of which Archimedes laid the foundations, vhich Cavalleri and Wallis greatly udvanced, and which Newton brought near to perfection. Its truth may be in some measure shown hy an experiment on the revolution of æ bull suspended by a long thread, and dravn towards a point immediately under the point of suspension by another thread, which may either be heli in the hund, or have a weight attached to it. The ball being made to revolve, its motion becomes evidently more rapid when iĩt is drawn by the ho- rizontal thread nearer to the fixed point, and slower when iĩt ĩs suffered to ſly off to a greater distance. (Plate II. Fig. 15.) It was also discovered by Kepler that each of the planets revolves in an ellipsis, of which the sun occupies one of the foci. It is well known that an ellipsis is an oval ſigure, vhich may be deseribed by ſixing the ends of a thread to two points, and moving a tracing point so that it may alvays be at the point of the angle formed by the thread; and that the two ſixed points are called its foci. The inference respecting the force by which a body may be made to revolve in an ellipsis, was ſirst made by Newton; that ĩs, that the foree directed to its focus must be inversely as the square of the distance. We have no other experimental proof oſ this theorem than astronomical observations, which are indeed perfeetly eoisiæ e, but do not require to be here anticipated. (Plate II. Fig. 16.) There is another general proposition which is sometimes of use in the comparison of rectilinear and curvilinear motions. Two hodies being attracted in the same manner towards a given centre, that is, with equal forces at equal distances, if their velocities be once equal at equal distances, they will remain alvays equal at equal distances, whatever be their directionss. For instance, if one cannon ball be shot obliquely upwards, and another perpendicularly upwards, with the same velocity, the one vill deseribe a curve, and the other a straight line, but their velocities will always remain equal, not at the sume instants of time, but at equal distances from the earth's centre, or after having ascended through equal vertical heights, although in diſſerent directionss. This proposition has usually heen made a step in the demonstration of the luw of the force by which a body is made to revolve in an ellipsis; but there is a much simpler method of demonstrating that lav, by mcans of some properties oſ the curvature of the ellipsis. In treating of the motion of projectiles, the force of gravitation may, vithont sensible error, hbe considered as an equable force, acting in parallel lines perpendicular to the horizon. In reality, i ve ascend a mile from the eartl's surface, the actual weight of a body is diminished about a two thousandth part, or three grains and a half for every pound, and ve may discover this inequality by means oſ the vibrations of pendulums, which become a lit- tle slower when they are placed on the summits of very high mountains. On the other hand, a body not speciſically heavier than water, gains more in apparent veight on account of the diminished density of the atmosphere at great elevations, than it loses by the increase oſ its distance from the earth. But both these differences may, in all common calculations, be wholly disregarded. The direction of gravity is always exactly perpendicular to the horizon, that is, to the surface of the earth, which is somewhat curved, on account of the earth's spheroidical ſigure; but any small portion of this surſuce may be practically considered as a plane, and the vertical lines perpendicular to it, as parallel to each other. The oblique motion of a projectile may be the most easily understood hy resolving its velocity into two parts, the one in a horizontal, the other in a vertical direction. It appears from the doctrine of the composition of motion, that the horizontal velocity will not he affected by the force of gravitation acting in a direction perpendicular to it, and that it will therefore continue uniform; and that the vertical motion will also be the same as if the body had no horizontal motion. Thus iſ ve let fall from the head of the mast of a ship a veight, which partakes of its progressive motion, the weight will descend by the side of the mast in the same manner, and with the same relative velocity, as if neither the ship nor the veight had any horizontal motion. We may thereſore alvays determine the greatest height to which a projectile vill rise, by finding the height from which a body must fall, in order to gain a velocity equal to its vertical velocity, or its velocity of ascent, that is, by squaring one eighth of the number of feet that it would rise in the first second iſit ere not retarded. For example, suppose a musket to be so elevated that the muzzle is higher than the but-end by half of the length, that is, at an angle of 30°; and let the ball he discharged with a velocity of 1000 feet in a second; then its vertical velocity will be half as great, or 500 feet in a second: now the square of one eighth of 500 is 3006, consequently the height to which the hall would rise, if unresisted by the air, is 3906 feet, or three quarteis of a mile. But in fact, a musket ball, actually shot upwards, with a velocity of 1670 feet in a sccond, which would rise six or seven miles in a vacuum, is so retarded by the air, that it does not attain the height of a single mile. We may easily ſfind the time of the body's ascent from its initial velocity; for the time of ascent is directly proportional to the velocity, and may be found in seconds by dividing the vertical velocity in feet by 32; or if ve divide by 16 only, we shall have the time of ascent and descent; and then the horizontal range may be found, by calculating the distance deseribed in this time, with the uniform horizontal velocity. Thus, in the example that we have assumed, dividing 500 by I6, we have 3l scconds for the whole time of the range; but the hypotenuse of our triangle being 1000, and the perpendicular 500, the hase will be 886 feet; consequently the horizontal range is 31 times 886, that is, nearly 28000 feet, or above 5 miles. But the resistance of the air will reduce this distance also to less than one mile. It may be demonstrated that the horizontal range of a body, projected withæ given velocity, is always proportional to the sine of twice the angle of elevation: that is, to the elevation of the muzzle of the piece in a situation twice as remote from a horizontal position as its actual situation. Hence it follows, that the greatest horizontal range will be when the elevation is half a right angle; supposing the body to move in a vacuum. But the resis tance of the air increases vith the length of the path, and the same cause also makes the angle of descent much greater than the angle oſ ascent, as we may observe in the track of a homh. For both these reasons, the hest elevation is somewhat less than 45°, and sometimes, when the velocity is very great, as little as 30°. But it usually happens in the operations oſ natural causes, that near the point where any quantity is greatest or least, its variation is slower than elsewhere: a small ũifference, therefore, in the angle of elevation, is of little consequence to the extent of the range, provided that it continue hetween the limits of 45° and 35; and for the same reason, the angular adjustment requires less accuracy in this position than in any other, which besides the economy of powder, makes it the best elevation for practice (Plate II. Fig. 17, 18.) The path oſ a projeetile, supposed to move without resistance, ĩs always a parabola. This interesting proposition was ſirst discovered by Gualileo: it folIows very readily from the doctrine of the composition of motion, combined with the laws which that philosopher established concerning the full of heavy bodies. If from any points oſ a given right line, as many lines be drawn, parallel to each other, and proportional to the squares of the corresponding segments of the ſirst line, the curve in which all their extremities are found, is a parabola. Now supposing the first line to be placed in the direction of the initial motion of a projectile, and parallel vertical lines to be drawn through any points of it, proportional to the squares of the segments which they cut off, these lines will represent the eſſeet of gravitation, during the times in which the same segments vould have been deserihed, by the motion of projeetion alone; consequently the projectile will always be found at the extremity of the vertical line corresponding to the time elapsed, and will therefore describe a parabola. (Ilate II. Fig. 17, 19.) It is easy to show by experiment, that the path of a projectile is a parahola: if we only Iet a hall descend from a certain point, along a groove, so as to acquire a known velocity, we muy trace on a hoard the parabola which it will afterwards deseribe, during its ſree descent; and by placing rings at diſttrent purs of the curve, we may observe that it will pass through them all without striking them. (late IL. Fig. 19.) In practical cases, on a large scale, vhere the velocity of a projectile is considerable, the resistance of the atmosphere, ĩs so great as to render the Galilean propositions of little or no use; und a complete determination of the path, including all the circumstances which may inſluence it, is attended ith difficulties almost insuperablee. It appears from Robins's experiments, that the resistance oſ the air to an iron hall of 44 inches in diameter, moving at the rate of 800 feet in a second, is equal to four times its weight, and that vhere the velocity is much greater, the resistance increases far more rapidly. But what must very much diminish the probubility of our deriving any great practical advantage from the theory of gunnery, ĩs an observation, made also by Mr. Itubins, that a ball sometimes deviates three or four hundred yards Iuterally, without any appurent reason; so that we cannot he absolutely eertain to come vithin this distance oſ our mark in any direction. The cireumstance is probably owing to an accidental rotatory motion communicated to the hall in its pussage thiough the piece, causing therefore a greater friction ſrom the air on one sile than on the other; and it may in some measure be remedied hy employing a riſe barrel, which determines the rotation of the ball in such a mamner that ĩts axis colncides at first with the path of the ball, so that the same face of the bull ĩs turned in suceession every way, For the ordinary purposes of gunnery, an estimation governed by experience is found to be the best guide; at the same time there is no doubt but that some assistance may he obtained from theory and from experiment. Those who are desirous of pursuing the subject, may ſind much information relating to it, collected by Professor Robison, in the article Projectile of the Encyclopacdia Britannica. VOL. I. G LECTURE V. ON CONFINED MOTION. WE have hitherto considered the principſl cases of motion, either undisturbed, or simply subjected to the action of an acceelerating, retarding, or deflee tive forcee We now proceed to examine the effects of an additional modiſication, which is introduced, when the motion is limited to a given line or surface of any kind; the body either being supposed to slide on the surface of a solid actually extended, or being confined to an imaginary surface hy its attachment to a thread, or still more narrowly restricted, by means of two threads, which allow it to move only in a given linee Suspension is the most convenient mode of making experiments on conſined motion; but it is not alvays easy to cause the hody to remain in the surface that is required; and to conſine ĩt in this manner to a perfectly plane surface, is impossible When we suffer a body to slide along any surface, there is a loss of force from frietion, from the production of rotatory motion, or from both these causes combined. The effect of friction is obvious and well known; and ve may be convinced of the retardation attenlant on the produetion of rotatory motion, by allowing two eylinders, of equal dimensions, to roll down an inclined plane; the one being covered vith sheet lead, the other having an equal veight of lead in its axis, and heing covered with paper; and both having similar projeeting surfaces at the ends, which come into contact with the plane: we may eusily observe that in the ſirst eylinder, much more oſ the foree is consumed in producing rotatory motion, than in the sccond, and that it therefore descends much more slowly. (Plate II. Fig. 20.) When a body is placed on an inclined plane, the force urging it to descend, in the direetion of the plane, is to the whole force of gravity, as the height of the plane is to ĩts length. This is demonstrable from the principles of the composition of motiun, and may also be shown experimentally with great accuracy, vhen ve consider the doctrine of the equilibrium of forces. But the interference of friction will only allow us to observe, with respect to the velocities produced, that they nearly approach to those which the caleulation indicatess. Thus if a plane be inclined one inch in 32, a hall will descend on it in two seconds, instead of GS feet, somewhat less than two feet. DIt may be deduced from the laws of accelerating forces, that when hodies descend on any inclined planes, of equal heights, hut of different inclinations, the times oſ descent are as the lengths oſ the planes, and the final velocities are equal. Thus a body will acquire a velocity of 32 feet in a second, after having descended 16 feet, either in a vertical line or in an oblique direetion; but the time of descent will be as much greuter than a second, as the oblique length of the path is greater than I1G fcet. This may be shown by experiment, as nearly as the obstacles alrendy mentioned will permit, the times being measured hy a pendulum, or by a stop watch. (Plate II. Fig. 21.) There is an elegant proposition, of a similar nature, which is still more capable of experimental confirmation; that is, that the times of falling through all chords drawn to the lowest point of a cirele are equal. If two or more bodies ure placed at difierent points of a cirele, and suffered to descend at the same instant along as many planes, vhich meet in the lowest point of the cirele, they vill arrive there at the same time. (Plate II. Fig. 22.) The velocity of a body, descending along a given surface, is the same as that of a body ſalling freely through an equal height, not only vhen the surface is a plane, but also when it is a continued eurve, in which the body is retainel by its attachment to a thread, or is supported by any regular surface, supposei to be free from frictionn. We may easily show, hy an experiment on a suspended ball, that its velocity is the same when it deseends from the same height, whatever may he the form of its path, by observing the height to vhich it rises on the opposite side of the lowest point. We may alter the form of the path in which it descends, by placing pins at difſerent points, so as to interfere with the thread that supports the hall, and to form in succession temporary centres of motion; and we shall ſind, in all cases, that the body ascends to a height equal to that from which it descended, vith a small deduction on account of friction. (Plate II. Fig. 20.) Hence is derived the idea conveyed hy the term living or ascending force; for since the height, to which a body vill rise perpendicularly, is as the square of its velocity, it will preserve a tendency to rise to a height which is as the square of its velocity, whatever may be the path into which it is directed, provided that it meet with no abrupt angle, or that it rebound at each angle in a new direetion, without losing any velocity. The same idea is somewhat more concisely expressed by the term energy, which indicates the tendency of a hody to ascend or to penetrate to a certain distance, in opposition to a retarding force. The most important cases of the motion of hodies, conſined to given surfaces, are those which relate to the properties oſ pendulums. OF these the simplest is the motion oſ a body in a cycloidal path. The eycloid is a curve which has many peculiarities; we have alrendy seen that it is deseribed by marking the path of a given point in the circumſerence of a cirele which rolls on a right line. Galileo was the first that considered it with attention, but he failed in his attempts to investigate its properties. It is singular enough, that the principal cause of his want of suecess was an inaccurate experiment: in order to obtain some previous information respecting the area included by it, he cut a board into a eycloidal form, and weighed iĩt, and he inferred from the experiment, that the area bore some irrational proportion to that of the describing circle, while in fact ĩt is exactly triple In the same manner it has happened in Iater times, that Newton, in his closet, determined the figure of the earth more accurately, than Cassini from actual measurement. It was Huygens that first demonstrated the properties of the eycloidal pendulum, which are of still more importance in the solution of various mechanical problems, than for the immediate purposes of timekeepers, to which that eminent philosopher intended to apply them. (Plate I. ig 5.) If a body he suspended hy a thread playing hetween two eycluidal cheeks, it will deseribe another equal eycloid by the evolution of the thread, and the time of vibration will be the sume, in whatever part of the curve it may begin to descend. Hence the vibrations of a body moving in a eyceloid are denominated isochronous, or of equal duration.'Ihis equality may be shown by letting go two pendulous balls at the sume instant, at different points oſ the curve, and chserving that they meet at the lowest point. (Plate IL. Fig. 24.) The absolute time of the descent or ascent of a pendulum, in a cycloid, is to the time in. vhich any heavy body would fall through one half of the length of the thread, as half the circumference of a circle to its diameter. It is therefore nearly equal to the time required for the descent oſ a hody through  of the length of the thread; and if ve suffer the pendulum to descend, at the same moment that a body falls, from a point elevated one fourth of the length of the thread above the point oſ suspension, this body will meet the pendulum at the lowest point oſ its vibration. (Plate II. Fig. 24.) Hence it may readily he inferred, that since the times of falling through any spaces, are as the square roots of those spuces, the times of vibration of different pendulums are as the square roots of their lengthss Thus, the times of vibration of pendulums of I foot and 4 foot in length, will be as I to 2: the time of vibration of a pendulum 39, inches in length is one second; the length of a pendulum vibrating in tvo seconds must be four times as great. The velocity, with which a pendulous body moves, at each point of a cycloidal curve, may be represented, by supposing another pendulum to revolve uniformly in a cirele, setting out from the lowest point, at the same time that the ſirst pendulum begins to move, and completing its revolution in the time of two vibrations; then the height, acquired by the pendulum revolving equably, will always be equal to the space described by the pendulum vibrating in the cycloidl. (Plate II. Fig. 24) It may also be shown, that if the pendulum vibrate through the whole eurve, it will everywhere move with the same velocity as the point oſ the. circle vwhich is supposed to have originally descrihed the cycloid, provided that the circle roll onwards with an equable motion. All these properties depend on this circumstance, that the relative force, urging the body to descend along the curve, is always proportional to the distance from the lovest point; and it happens in many other instances of the action of various forces, that a similar lav prevails: in all such cases, the vibrations are isochronous, and the space deseribed corresponds to the versed sine oſ a cireular are inereasing uniformly, that is to the height of any point of a vheel revolving uniformly on its axis, or rolling uniformly on a horizontal plane. The eycloĩd is the curve in which a hody may descend, in the shortest possible time, from a given point, to another obliquely helow it. It may casily be shown that a body descends more rapidly in a eyeloid than in the right line joining the two points. This property is of little practical utility; the proposition was formerly considered as somewhat ditficult to be demonstrated, but of late, from the invention of new modes of calculation, theorems of a similar nature have been much extended with great facility. The experiment naturally suggests a familiar proverb, which cautions us against being led avay too precipitately by an appearance of brevity and facility. (Plate II. Fig. 25.) It has been found that the inconveniences, resulting from the complicated apparatus necessary to introduce a cycloidal motion, for the pendulums of clocks, are more than equivalent to the advantage o? perfeet isochronism in theory. For since, ĩn small cycloidal ares, the curvature is nearly constant, the time of vibration of a simple cireular pendulum must be ultimately the same, as that oſ a eycloidal pendulum of the sume length; but in larger ares, the time must be somewhat greater, because the circulur are falls without the eycloidal, and is less inelined to the horizon at equal distances from the lowest point. This may be shown by a comparison of two equal pendulums, vibrating in ares of different extent: it may also be observed, by an experiment with to simple pendulums of difſerent lengths, that their times of vibration, like those of eycloidal pendulums, are proportional to the square roots oſ their lengths; n half second pendulum being only one ſourth as long as a pendulum vibrating seconds. We have been obliged to suppose the weight, as well as the inertia, of a pendulum, to be referred to one point, since we are not at present prepared to examine the effect of the slight diſſerence between the situations, and the velocities of the different parts of the substances, employed in our experiments. The nature oſ rotatory motion requires to be more fully understood, before we can attend to the determination of the centres of oscillation of bodies of various figures, that is, of the points in which their whole weight may be supposed to be concentrated, vith regard to its eſfect on the times of their vibrations. It is remarkable that the isochronism of pendulums, which is a property so important in its application, may still be preserved, notwithstanding the interference of a constant retarding force, such as the force of friction is in many cases found to he. It has been shown by Newton, that each complete vibration of a cycloidal pendulum, retarded by a resistance of this nature, will be shorter than the preceding one by a certain constant space, but that it will be performed in the same time. There is a great analogy between the vibrations of pendulums, and the revolution of halls suspended from a ſixed point. IF a body, suspended hy a thread, revolve freely in a horizontal circle, the time of revolution will be the same, vhenever the height of the point of suspension, above the plane of revolution is the same, whatever be the length of the thread. Thus, if a number of balls are ſixed to threads, or rather wires, connected to the same point of an axis, which is made to revolve by means of the whirling table, they will so arrange themselves, as to remain very nearly in the same horizontal plane. (Plate II. Tig. 20.) The time of each revolution of the halls is equul to the time occupied hy a double vibration of a pendulum, of which the length is equal to the height of the point of suspension above the plane in which they revolve; consequently all the revolutions vill be nearly isochronous, while the threads or wires deviate but little from a vertical situation. In fact, ve may imugine such a revolution to he composed of two vibrations of a simple pendulum, existing at the same time, in directions at right angles to each other; for while a pendulum is vibrating from north to south, it is liable to the impression of any foree, capable of causing a vibration from cast to west; and the joint result of both vibrations will be a uniform revolution in a cirele, if the vibrations are equal and properly combined; but if they are unequal, the joint vibration vill be ultimately an ellipsis, the joint force being directed to its centre, and always proportional to the distance from that centre. (Plate II. Fig. 27.) The near approach of these revolutions to isochronism las sometimes heen applied to the measurement of time, but more frequently, and more successſully, to the regulation of the motions of machines. Thus in Mr. Watt's steam engines, two halls are fixed at the ends of rods in continual revolution, and as soon as the motion becomes a little too rapid, the balls rise considerably, and turn a cock, which diminishes the quantity of steam admitted. (Plate IIL. Fig. 28.) The same laws are applicable to many other cases of rotatory motion; for instance, if ve wish to determine the height, at which a hall, revolving vith a given velocity, will be retained in a spherical howl; or the inclination of a circular road, capable of counteracting the centrifugal force of a horse, running round it: for the horse, like the ball of the revolving pendulum, has a centrifugal tendency, which is greater as his velocity is greater: this centrifugal force, combined with the force of gravity, composes a result, which, in the case of the pendulum, is completely counteracted by the force of the thread or vire, and must therefore be in the direction of the thread, and which obliges the horse to place his legs in a similar direction, proceeding from an imaginary point of suspension above; since he would otherwise be liable to fall outars, if his velocity were suſſiciently great. But in order to withstand the pressure of the horses legs, the road must be in a direction perpendicular to them; otherwise its materials will naturally be forced outwards, until they produce an elevation sufficient to give the road the required form. Thus, if the diameter of the ring vere 40 feet, and the horse moved at the rate of 12 miles an hour, he would perform about 500 revolutions in an hour, and half a revolution in 3 seconds and a half. Now the length of a pendulum vibrating in 3; seconds, must be 39 inches multiplied by the square of 3, or a little more than 80 ſeet: the rond must therefore he perpendicular to the direction of a line drawn to iĩt from a point 80 feet above the centre of the ring; and its external circumference must be higher than its internal circumference by one fourth of its breadth. It would however be improper to have a road of this form in a manege, since the horse must be taught to perform all his evolutions on a perfect plane. There is a general principle of curvilinear motion, which iĩs in ĩtself of little importance or practical utility, but which so far deserves to be noticed, as it has been magniſicd by some philosophers into a fundamental lav of nature. a ] Among all the eurves that a body can describe, in moving from one point to another, it always selects that, in which, if its velocity be supposed to be every vwhere multiplied by the distance that it deseribes, the sum of the inſinitely small products will be a minimum, that is, less than in any other path that the body could take. For example, if a body move freely, and therefore with a uniform velocity, in any regular curved surface, it will pass from one part of the surface to another by the shortest possible path. This has been called the principle of the least possible action; it is however merely a mathematical inference from the simpler laws of motion, and if those laws were even different from what they are, the principle would be true in another form, and in another sense of the word action. VOL. I. H LECTURE VI. ON THE MOTIONS OF SIMPLE MASSES. TIITHERTO we have considered the motions of one or more single points or atoms only, without any regard to the bulk or mass of a moveable body: but it now becomes necessary to attend also to the diſſerence of the masses oſ bodies in motion. This may however be done, without eonsidering the actual magnitude or extent of the body. We may easily conceive diſterent nasses or bulks to be concentrated in a mathematical point; and iĩt is mosl convenient to define a moveable hody, as a moveable point or particle, comprsed of other elementary particles, differing only in number, and thus constituting the proportionally difierent mass or bulk of the body. Although, in our experiments on motion, we are obliged to have recourse to material bodies, and although such bodies differ considerably from this deſinition of a single moveuble body, yet ſhey serve suſiciently well to represent such hodies, especially when they are small, and regularly formed; and we are here considering the doctrine of motion rather in a mathematical than in a physical sense, so that we are able to neglect all such properties of matter as are not immediately necessary to our purpose. Indeed though the general properties of matter are usually placed at the entrance of elementary works on mechanies, it has yet heen found necessary to omit the consideration of their eſſeets, in examining the laws and aſſections of motion. The forces of cohesion and repulsion, for example, act, in general, in a very complicated manner, in almost all cases of the communication of motion;. but to consider thes? operations minutely in treating of collision, would be to involve the subjeet in very great and very unnecessary difiiculties; and the complete investigation of these properties of matter would require the employment of various branches of mechanical and hydrodynamical sciencee We may therefore tuke a much simpler course, by deferring entirely all theoretical consideration of actual matter; but in the mean time we must have, for our experimental illustrations, some measure of the mass or bulk as here deſimed. We might employ spherical hodies, composed only of homogeneous substances, that is, of substances of the same kind, and ve might estimate the mass by the comparative magnitude, imagining all the particles of each sphere to he united in its contree But it is more convenient to anticipate, from the gravitation oſf matter, a measure of the mass derived from the weight: since it can be proved that the weight of a body is proportional to its absolute quantity of matter, supposing all matter to be alike in its affections relative to motion. So that instead of numbering the particles of each body, the same purpose is answered by determining their comparative weight. Inertia, or a tendency to persevere in a state of rest, or of uniform rectilinear motion, is a property attached to all matter, and may be considered as proportional to the mass or weight of a body. When the motions of a system of bodies are considered, their inertia may in some respects be referred to a single point, which is called the centre of inertia. The centre of inertia of two bodies is that point, in the right line joining them, which divides it into two such portions, that the one is to the other, as the mass of the remoter body to that of the adjacent hbody: For instance, if one body veighs a pound, and another two pounds, and their distance is a yard, then the centre of inertia is at the distance of two feet from the smaller body, and one foot from the larger: and the distance of each is to the whole distance, as the weight of the other to the whole veight. Also the products obtained by multiplying each weight by its distance are equal: thus two multiplied by one, is equal to one multiplied hy tvo. (Plate II. Fig. 299O. This point is most commonly called the centre of gravity; it has also sometimes been denominated the eentre of position. Since it has many properties independent of the consideration of gravity, it ought not to derive its name from gravitation, and the term centre of inertia begins now, vith great propriety, to he generally adopted. The centre of inertia of any two hodies initlally at rest, remains at rest, notwithstanding any reciprocal action of the bodies; that is, notwithstanding any acetion which affects the single particles of both equally, in increasing or dimi- nishing their distance. For it may be shown, from the principles of the composition of motion, that any force, acting in this manner, will cause each of the tvo bodies to describe a space proportional to the magnitude oſ the other body: thus a body of one pound will move through a space twice as great as a hody of two pounds veight, and the remaining parts of the original distance vill still be divided in the same proportion, by the original centre of inertia, which therefore still remains the centre of inertia, and is at rest And it follows also, that if the centre of inertia is at ſirst in motion, its motion will not be afſected by any reciprocal action of the bodies. This important property ĩs very capuble oſ experimental illustration; ſirst ohserving, that all known forces are reciprocal, and among the rest the action of a spring: we place two unequal bodies so as to be separated when a spring is set at liberty, and we find that they deseribe, in any given interval of time, distances which are inversely as their veights; and that consequently the place of the centre of inertia remains unaltered. They may either be made to ſloat on water, or may be suspended by long threads; the spring may be detached by burning a thread that confines it, and it may be observed whether or no they strike at the same instant two obstacles, placed at such distances as the theory requires; or if they are suspended as pendulums, the ares which they deseribe may be measureq, the velocities being always nearly proportional to these ares, and accurately so to their chords. (Plate II. Fig. 30.) The same might also be shown of attractive as well as of repulsive forees. For instance, if we placed ourselves in a small boat, and pulled a rope tied to a much larger one, we should draw ourselves towards the large hoat with a motion as much more rapid than that of the large boat, as its weight is greater than that of our own hoat; and the two hoats would meet in their common centre of inertia, supposing the resistance of the water inconsiderable. Having established this property of the centre of inertia, as a law oſ motion, we may derive from it the true estimate of the quantity of motion in diſferent bodies, in a much more satisfactory manner, than it has usually been explained. For since the same reciprocal action produces, in a body weighing two pounds, only half the velocity that it produces in a hody weighing one pound, the cause being the same, the effects must he considered as equal, and 2 the quantity of motion must always be measured by the joint ratio of mass to mass, and velocity to velocity ; that is, by the ratio of the products, obtained by multiplying the weight of each body by the number expressing its velocity; and these products are called the momenta of the bodies. We appear to have deduced this measure of motion from the most unexceptionable arguments, and we shall have occasion to apply the momentum thus estimated as a true measure of force; at the same time that we allow the practical importance of considering, in many cases, the eſficacy of forees, according to another criterion, vhen we multiply the mass by the square of the velocity, in order to determine the energy: yet the true quantity of motion, or momentum, of any body, is alvays to be understood, as the product of its mass into its velocity. Thus a body weighing one pound, moving witha velocity of a hundred feet in a second, has the same momentum, and the same quantity of motion, as a body of ten pounds, moving at the rate of ten feet in a second. We may also demonstrate experimentally, by means of Mr. Atwood's machine, that the same momentum is generated, in a given time, by the same preponderating force, whatever may be the quantity of matter moved. Thus if the preponderating weight be one sixteenth of the whole veight of the boxes, it vill fall one foot in a second, instead of 16, and a velocity oſ two feet will be acquired by the whole mass, instead of a velocity of 2 feet, which the preponderating weight alone would have acquiredl. And when we compare the centrifugal forces of hodies revolving in the same time, at different distances from the centre of motion, we find that a greater quantity of matter compensates for a smaller force; so that two balls connected by a wire, with liberty to slide either way, vill retain each other in their respective situations, vhen their common centre of inertia coincides with the centre of motion; the centrifugal force of each particle of the one heing as much greater than that of an equal particle of the other, as its weight, or the number of the particles, is smaller. But it is not enough to determine the centre of inertia of two bodies only, considered as single points; since in general a much greater number of points is concerned: we must therefore deſine the sense in which the term is in this case to be applied. We proceed by considering the first and second of three or more bodies, as a single body, equal to both of them, and placed in their com- mon centre of inertia; determining the centre of inertia of this imaginary hody and the third body, and continuing a similar process for all the hodies of the system. And it matters not with which of the hodies ve hegin the operation, for it may be demonstrated, that the point thus found will he the same by whatever steps it be determinedc. When we come to consider the properties of the same point as the centre of gravity, we shall be able to produce an experimental proof of this assertion, since it will be found that there is only one point in any system of bodies which possesses these properties. (Plate III. Fig. 31.) We may always represent the motion of the centre of inertia of a system of moving bodies, by supposing their masses to be united into one body, and this body to receive at once a momentum equal to that of each body of the sy5tem, in a direction parallel to its motion. This may often be the most conveniently done, by referring all the motions of this imaginary hody to three given directions, and eollecting all the results into three sums, vhich vill represent the motion of the centre of inertia of the system. We have alrendy presupposed this proposition, when we have employed material bodies of ſinite magnitude, that is, systems of material atoms, to represent imaginary bodies of the same veight, condensed into their centres; and it nov appears, that the velocity and direetion of the motions of such hodies as we have employed, agree precisely with those of our imaginary material points. We eannot attempt to conſirm this law by experiment, because the deductions from the sensible consequences of an experiment would require nearly the same processes as the mathematical demonstration. It is obvious that the result of any number of uniform and reetilinear motions, thus collected, must also be a uniform and rectilincar motion. The centre of inertia of a system of bodies moving without disturbunce, is, therefore, either at rest, or moving equably in a right line. l The mass, or weight, of each of any number of bodies, being multiplied hy its distance from a given plane, the produets, eollected into one sum, will be equal to the whole weight of the system, multiplied by the distance of the common centre of inertia from the sume plane. And the proposition ill be equally true, if instead of the shortest distances, we substitute the distances from the same plane, measured obliquely, in any directions always parallel to each other. This property is peculiarly applicable to the consideration of the centre of gravity, and aſfords also the readiest means oſ determining its place in bodies of complicated forms. (Plate III. Fig. 32.) We have already seen that the place of the centre of inertia of two bodies is not affected by any reciprocal action between them; aud the same ĩs true of the actions of a system of three or more boidiess We might easily apply our experiment on the reciprocal action of two bodies to a greater number, but we should throw no further light on the subject, and the mode of obtaining the conclusion would be somewhat complicated. All the forces in nature, with which we are acquainted, act reciprocally between different masses of matter, so that any two bodies repelling or attracting each other, are made to recede or approach with equal momenta. This circumstance is generally expressed hy the third law of motion, that action and reaction are equal. There would be something peculiar, and almost inconceivable, in a force which could afſect unequally the similar particles of matter; or in the particles themselves, if they could he possessed of such different degrees of mobility, as to he equally moveable with respeet to one force, and unequally with respect to another. For instance, a magnet and a piece of iron, each weighing a pound, will remain in equilibrium when their veights are opposed to each other by means of a balance; they will be separated with æqual velocities, if impelled by the unbending of a spring placed between them, und it is difficult to conceive that they should approach each other with unequal velocities in consequence of magnetic attraction, or of any other natural ſorce. The reciprocality of force is therefore a necessary law in the mathematical consideration of mechanics, and it is also perfectly warranted by experience. The contrary supposition is so highly improhable, that the principle may almost as justly be termed a necessary axiom, as a phenomenon colEcted from observation. Sir Isaac Newton observes, in his third law of motion, thatè reaction ĩs always contrary and equal to action, or, that the mutual actions of two hodies are alvays equal, and directed contrary ways. IIe proceeds,* if any hody , dravs or presses another, it is itsel? as much dravn or pressed. If any one presses a stone with his ſinger, his ſinger is also pressed by the stone. IF a horse is draving a veight tied to a rope, the horse is also equally drawn hackvards towards the veight: for the rope, being distended throughout, vill in the same endeavour to contract, urge the horse towards the veight, and the veight toards the horse, and will impede the progress of the one as much as it promotes the advance of the other Now although Newton has alvays applied this law in the most unexceptionable manner, yet it must be confessed that the illustrations here quoted are clothed in such language as to have too much the appearance of paradox. When ve say that a thing presses aunother, we commonly mean, that the thing pressing has a tendency to move forvards, into the place of the thing pressed, but the stone would not sensibly advance into the place of the finger, if it were removed; and in the same munner ve understand, that a thing pulling another has a tendency to recede further from the thing pulled, and to drav this after it; but it is obvious that the weight vhich the horse is drawing would not return towards iĩts first situation, with the horse in ĩts train, although the exertion of the horse should intirely cease; in these senses, therefore, we cannot say, that the stone presses, or, that the veight pulls, and we have no reason to offend the just pręjudices oſ a beginner, by introducing paradoxical expressions without necessity. Yet it is true in both cases, that if all frietion, and all connexion with the surrounding bodies, could be instantaneously destroyed, the point of the ſinger and the stone would recede from each other, and the hose and the veight vould approach each other, with equal quantities of motionn. And this is what we mean hy the reciprocality of forees, or the equality of action and reaction. The quantity of action of two attractive or repulsive hodies on each other is partly dependent on their magnitudee When the bodies are of the same Kind, their mutual action is in the compound ratio of their bulks; that is, in the ratio of the products of the numbers expressing their bulks. For instance, i two bodies, each containing a cubic inch oſ matter, attract or repel each other with a force of a grain, and there be two other bodies, the one contuining two inches, the other ten, of the same matter, then the mutual attraction or repulsion of these will be expressed by 20 grains; for each of the 10 inches is attracted hy each oſ the two vith a force of a graim. And the mutual action of 5 and 10 will be 30, of 4 and 10, 40; so that when one of the bodies remains the same, the attraction will be simply as the bulk of the other. Hence the quantity of matter, in every body surrounding us, is considered as proportional to its weight; for it is inferred from experiment, that all material bodies are equally subject to the power of gravitation towards the earth, and are, in respeet to this force, of the same kind. For the apparent difference in the veloeity, with which different substances fall through the atmosphere, is only owing to the resistance of the air, as is sometimes shown by an experiment on a feather and a piece of gold, falling in the vacuum of an air pump; but the true cause vas known long before the invention of this machine, and it is distinctly explained in the second book of Lucretius:  In water or in air vhen veights descend, The heavier veights more swiftly downvards tend. The limpid vaves, the gales that gently play, Yield to the weightier mass a readier vay, But if the weights in empty space should fall, One common sviftness we should ſind in all We are therefore to suppose, that the different weights of equal bulks of diſferent substances, depend merely on the greater or less number of particles contained in a given space, independently of any other characters that may constitute the specific differences of those substances. In some cases it is necessary to consider the sum of the masses of two bodies, in order to estimate their mutual action, that is, vhen ve wish to knov the whole relative motion of two bodies with respect to each other; for here we must add together their single motions with respect to the centre of inertia, which are inversely in the same ratio. This consideration is sumetimes of use in determining the action of the sun on the several planets. If two bodies act on each other with forees proportional to any pover of their distance, for instance to the square or the cube of the distance, the forces vill also he proportional to the same power of either of their distances from their common centre of inerti. Thus, in the planetary motions, when one body performs a revolution by means of the attractive force oſ another, this other cannot remain absolutely at rest; but because ĩt is more convenient to VOL. I. I determine the eſſect of the attraction as directed to a fixed point, we consider the force as residing in the common centre of inertia of the two bodies, which remains at rest, as far as the mutual actions of those bodies only are concerned, and it may be shown, that the force diminishes, as the square of the distance of the bodies, either from this point or from each other, increasess. The reciprocal forces of two bodies may therefore be considered as tending to or from their common centre of inertia, as a fixed point; but it often happens that, the difference of magnitude being very great, the motion of one of the bodies may be disregarded. Thus we usually neglect the motion of the sun, in treating of the planetary motions produced by his attraction, although, by means of very nice observations, this motion becomes sensible. But it ĩs utterly beyond the power of our senses to discover the reciprocal motion of the earth produced by any terrestrial cause, even by the most copious eruption of a volcano, although, speaking mathematically, ve cannot deny that, whenever a cannon ball is ſired upwards, the whole globe must sufſer a minute depression in its course. The boast of Archimedes was therefore accompanied hy an unnecessary condition:' give me, said he, but a firm support, and I will move the earth; but granting him his support, he could only have displaced the earth insensibly by the properties of his machines; and without any such support, when he threw rocks upon the ships of Marcellus, he actually caused the walls of Syracuse and the island of Sicily to move northwards, with as much momentum, as carried his projectiles southwards against the Roman armaments. ON PRESSURE AND EQUILIBRIUM. WE have now examined the principal cases in which a simple force is employed in the production of motion; it is of equal consequence to attend to the opposition of forces, where they prevent each others action. A force counteracted by another force, s0 that no motion is produced, becomes a pressure: thus we continually exert a pressure, by means of our weight, upon the ground on which we stand, the seat on which we sit, and the bed on vhich we sleep; but at the instant when we are falling or leaping, we neither exert nor experience a pressure on any part. It was very truly asserted by the antients, that pressure and motion are absolutely incommensurable as effects; for according to the definition of pressure, the force appears to be what is called in logic a potential cause, which is not in a state of activity: and since an interval of time must elapse after the removal of the opposite force, before the first force can have caused any actual motion, this effect of a finite time cannot with justice be conceived to bear any proportion to the pressure, which ĩs as it were a nascent effect only. It is true that a large weight, pressing on a spring, may keep it hent, in exactly the same place, into which a smaller weight, ſalling bn it with a certain velocity, would inſlect it: but, to retain a spring in a certain position, and to bend it into that position, are effects absolutely incommensurable; the one being a measure of the constant repulsive force of the spring, bent to a certain point, the other of the sum of the effects of the same spring, in various degrees oſ flexure, for a certain time. Hence the smallest possible momentum is said to be more than equivalent to the greatest possible pressure: a very light weight, falling from a very minute distance, will force back a very strong spring, although often through an imperceptible space only. But the impulse of a streum of infinitely small particles, like those of which a fluid is supposed to consist, striking an obstacle in a constant succession, may he eounteracted by a certam pressure, without producing any finite motion. Nothing hovever forbids us to compare two pressures, hy considering the initial motſons which they vould produce, iſ the opposition were removed; nor is there any diſiculty in extending the laws of the composition oſ motion to the eomposition of pressure. For since wve measure forces by the motions vhich they produce, it ĩs obvious that the composition of forces is included in the docetrine oſ the composition oſ motions; and when we combine three forees according to the laws of motion, there can be no question hut that the resulting motion is truly determined in all cases, whatever may he its magnitude; nor can any reason be given why it should be otherwise, vhen this motion ĩs evanescent, and the force becomes a pressuree. The case ĩs similar to that of a ſraction, which may still retain a real value, vhen hoth its numerator and denominator become less than any assignable quantity. Some authors on mechanics, and indeed the most eminent, Bernoulli, Dalembert, and Laplace, have deduced the laws of pressure, more immediately, from the principle of the equality of the eſſects of equal causes; and the demonstration may he found, in an improved form, in the article Dynamies of the Supplement of the Encyclopaedia Britannica; but its steps are still tedious and intricate. We are therefore to consider the momentum, or quantity of motion, vhich would be produced by any foree in action, as the measure of the pressure occasioned by it, when opposed; and to understand by equal or proportionate pressures, such as are produeed hy forces which would generate equal or proportionate momenta in a given time. And ĩt may be inferred, that two enntrary pressures vill balance each other, vhen the momenta, which the forces would separately produce, in contrary directions, are equal; and that any one pressure will counterhalance two others, vhen it vould produce a momentum, equal and contrary to the momentum which vould be derived from the joint result of the other forces. For, supposing each of two forces opposei to each other to act for an instant, and to remain inactive for the next cqual instant, while the other force is exerted, it is obvious that these efieets vill neutralise each other, so that the hody, on which they are supposed to operate, will retain ĩts situation; but such an action is precisely half of the continued actionof each foree; consequently, since the halves completely counteraet Ei E each other, the wholes will do the same. And a similar mode of reasoning may be extended to any number of forces opposed to each other. It follows from the laws of the composition of motion, that the result of two pressures, expressed by the sides of a parallelogram, vill be represented by its diagonal, and that, if a hody remain at rest by means of three pressures, they must be related to each orher in magnitude as the sides of a triangle parallel to their directionss This may be very completely shown by experiment. We attach three weights to as many threads, united in one point, and passing over three pullies; then by drawing any triangle, of which the sides are in the directions of the threads, or in parallel directions, ve may always express the magnitude of each weight, by the length of the side of the triangle corresponding to its thread.. (Plate III. Fig. 33.) The most important of the problems relating to equilibrium are such as coneern the machines which are usually called mechanical powerss We are not, however, to enter at present into all the properties and uses of these machines; we have at first only to examine them in a state of rest, since the determination of their motion requires additional considerations, and their application to practice belongs to another subdivision of our subject. There is a general law of mechanical equilibrium, which includes the principal properties of most of these machines. If two or more bodies, connected together, be suspended from a given point, they will be at rest when their centre of inertia is in the vertical line passing through the point of suspension. The truth of this proposition may easily be illustrated, by the actual suspension of any hody, or system of bodies, from or upon a ſixed point; the vhole remaining in equilibrium, when the centre of inertia is either vertically below the point of suspension, or above the point of support, or when the fixed point coincides with the centre of inertia. And whatever may be the form of a compound body, it may be considered as a system of bodies connected together, the situation of the common centre of the inertia determining the quiescent position of the body. (Plate III. Vig. 34.. 38.) Hence the centre of inertia is called the centre of gravity; and it may be practically found, by determining the interseetion of two lines which become vertical in any two positions in which the body is at rest. Thus, if we suspend a hoard of an irregular form from any two points successively, and mark the situation of the vertical line in each position, we may ſind by the intersection the place of the centre oſ gravity: and it will appear that this intersection will be the same, whatever positions we employ. (Plate III. Fig. 39.) The consideration of the degree of stability of equilibrium is of material importance in many mechanical operations. Like other variable quantities, the stahility may be positive, negative, or evanescent. The equilibrium is positively more or less stable, hen the centre of gravity would be obliged to ascend more or less rapidly, if it quitted the vertical line: the equilibrium is tottering, and the stability is negative, when the centre of gravity would descend if it vere displaced; but when the centre of gravity coincides with the centre of motion, or when its path would be a horizontal right line, the equilibrium has been called insensible, but may more properly be termed neutral, and the body vill rest in any position, without tending either to fall, or to return to iĩts original situation. It is obvious that the centre of gravity cannot move, without descending, when iĩt ĩs vertically over the fixed point, nor without ascending, when it is immediately below it; so that in the one case the equilibrium is tottering, and in the other stablee Hence ve may understand the reason of fixing the moveable handles of a vessel oſ any kindat its upper part, in order that the centre of suspension may be always above the centre of gravity. If they be ſixed too low, the vessel will be liable to overset, unless there be suſficient friction to retain it in its proper situation. (Plate IIL. Fig. 40.) An oval surface, placed on a horizontal plane, is capable of a stable equilibrium, when iĩt rests on its side, or on the extremity of its lesser axis, and of a tottering equilibrium, when it stands on the extremity of its greater axis. But the equilibrium of a circle or a sphere is alvays neutral, for, when disturbed, ĩt neither recovers its first position, nor deviates further ſrom it. A ſlat body, resting on a sphere, will have its equilibrium tottering or stable, accordingly as its centre of giavity is more or less than the semidiameter of the sphere above the point of contact. (Plate III. Fig. 41, 42.) The stability of a body supported on a flat hasis, of a given extent, ĩs of a different kind, and is independent of equilibrium. For here, if the centre of gravity move either way, it must begin its motion in an inclined direction, instead of deseribing a curve which is initially horizonta. The stability of such a body hecomes less and less, as it is more and more inclined, till, vhen the centre of gravity is vertically over the margin of the basis, there is a tottering equilibrium; and if the inclination be still further continued, the body vill fal. (Plate III. Fig. 43.) l The broader the basis, and the lower the centre of gravity, the steeper must the path of that centre be, and consequently the greater the stability. Thus the disposition of the weight in a carriage may considerably affect ĩts stability, by altering the place of the centre of gravity. A waggon loaded vith iron is much less easily overturned, than when it is loaded with an equal weight of hay; supposing the inequality of the road, or any accidental obstacle, to elevate one side of the waggon, it will always recover its position, provided that the centre of gravity remain within the vertical line, passing through the point of contact of the lower wheel and the ground; and it is obvious that the higher the centre of gravity is situated, the sooner it passes this line. If the velocity of the motion were very great, the wheel which is elevated might be lifted off the ground by the momentum, and the centre of gravity might thus be carried beyond the vertical line, by means of an obstacle which would not have overset the vaggon, if it had been moving slowly. (Plate III. Fig. 44) If a person be sitting or standing in a carriage, the part of the carriage on vwhich he sits or stands may be considered as representing the place of his weight, provided that his situation be alvays perpendicular; but if the motion be rapid, he will not be able to remain constantly in a posture perfectly erect, and the centre of gravity oſ the carriage, with its pussengers, will be somevhat more elevated, than it would be on this supposition. The direction of the initiãl motion of the centre of gravity readily explains the suspension of a weight, or a bucket of water, on a rod resting on the end of a table, hen another rod is employed, to keep the bucket at such a distance from the end of the ſirst, that the centre of gravity may be under the table; for although the bucket seems suspended by its handle, yet if the handle hegan to descend, the centre of gravity would be obliged to rise; consequently the vhole vill retain its position, and remain at rest. Plate IIL. ſig. 45.) The apparent ascent of a loaded cylinder on an inclined plane, and the motion of a roller composed of two united cones, with a comnion axis, resting on the edge of a triangle which is inclined to the horizon, may be easily understood from the same consideration. (Plate III. Fig. 46.) We may also observe, in the equilibrium of animals, many circumstances illustrative of the properties of the centre of gravity. When a person stands on one foot, and leans forvards, in the attitude which ĩs usually exhibited in the statues of Mereury, the other foot is elevated behind, in order to bring buck the centre of gravity, so as to be vertically over some purt of the foot on which he stands. But on aceount of the convex and irregular ſorm oſ the foot, the basis that it affords is really very narrow; hence when we attempt to stand on one foot, we ſind it often necessary to use a muscular exertion, in order to bring the point of support to that side towards which we are beginning to fall; and when the hasis is still more contracted, the body never remains at rest, but, by a succession of actions of this kind, sumetimes too minute to be visible, it is kept ina state of perpetual vibration, without ever attaining such a position as would give it any degree of positive stubility; and thus it may be conceived to be supported even on a single point, recovering its position, from time to time, by means of a slight degree of rotatory motion, which is produced by its flexure, and by the changes of the position of the extremities: hence, hy habit, the arts of ropedancers and balancers are acquired. Sometimes, however, the position of the halancer is not so diſficult to be preserved as it appears, the curVature of the wire in contact with the foot tending materially to assist him. When we attempt to rise from a seat, we generally draw our feet inwards, in order to bring the point of support into, or near, the vertical line passing through the centre of gravity, and to ereate a tottering equilibrium, which is favourable for the heginning of motion. And before we rise, we bend the upper part of the body forwards, in order to procure a momentum, capable of carrying the centre of gravity beyond the vertical line, passing through the point of support. When a horse is walking, the centre oſf gravity is sometimes supported only by two feet of the same side, yet for a time so short, that its declension towards the other side is easily recovered, aſter the legs on that side have resumed their activity. Some authors have thought it impossible that a quadruped should stand for an instant with both feet of the same side raised from the earth; but when a horse is walking fast, it may very often be observed, that the print of the hind foot is considerably more advanced than that of the fore foot, which has been raised to make way for it. From the general law oſ the equilibrium of the centre of gravity, we may deduce the properties of levers of all kinds. It follows from the definition of this point, that if two bodies be attached to a straight rod oſ inconsiderable weight, they may be sustained in equilibrium, by a ſixed point, or fulerum, vhich divides their distance into portions which are inversely as their weights. And it is obvious that i any other equivalent forces be substituted ſor veights, acting at the same distance from the fulerum, and with the same inclination to the rod or lever, the' conditions of equilibrium vill be precisely the same. Also if either of the forces be transferred to an equal distance on the other side of the fulerum, and act there in a contrary direction, the equilibrium vill still remain. Hence we have two principal kinds of levers; the first, in which the fixed point, or fulerum, is between the points at which the forces or eights are applied; the second, where the forces are applied, in contrary directions, on the same side of the fulerum. (Plate III. Fig. 47.) The demonstrations oſ the fundamental property of the lever have heen very various. Archimedes himsel? has given us two. Huygens, Newton, Maclaurin, Dr. Hamilton, and Mr. Vince, have elucidated the same subject by different methods of considering it. The demonstration of Archimedes; as improved by Mr. Vince, is ingenious and elegant, but it is neither so general and natural as one of Dr. Hamilton's, nor so simple and convincing as Maclaurin's, vhich it may be vorth our vhile to notice. Supposing two equal weights, of an ounce each, to he ſixed at the ends of the equal arms of a lever oſ the first kind; in this case it is ubvious that there vill be an equilibrium, since there is no reason why either weight should preponderate. It is also evident that the fulerum supports the whole weight of two ounces, neglecting that of the lever; consequently we may substitute for the fulerum voL. I. I5 a force equivalent to two ounces, drawing the lever upwards; and instead oſ one of the veights, ve may place the end of the lever under a firm obstacle, and the equilibrium will still remain, the lever being now of the sccond kind. Here therefore, the weight remaining at the other end of the lever counterbalances a force of two ounces, acting at half the distance from the new fulcrum; and we may substitute for this force a weight of two ounces, acting at an equal distance on the other side of that fulerum, suppusing the lever to he suſiciently lengthened, and there will still be an equilibrium. In this case the fulerum will sustain a veight oſ three ounces; and we may substitute for it a force oſ three ounces acting upwards, and proceed as beforee. In a similar munner the demonstration may be extended to any commensurable proportion of the arms, that is, any proportion that can he expressed hy numbers; and ĩt is casy to show that the same law must be true of all ratios whatever, even if they happen to be incommensurable, such as the side of a square, compared to its diagonal, which cannot be accurately expressed by any numbers whatever; the forces remaining always in equilibrium, when they are to each orher inversely as the distances at which they are applied. It is sometimes more convenient to have a series of levers acting on each other, with a moderate increase of power in each, than to have a single lever equivalent in its effectt. We may also bend cither arm of a lever in any manner that we please, without altering its power, provided that the direetion oſ the force be perpendiculur to the line drawn to the fulerum; or if the foree be applied obliquely, it may always be imagined to act at the end oſ à lever equal in length to the perpendicular let fall from the fulerum on the direction of the force. Thus, if two levers are connected by a rope or bar, when the direction of one of them nearly eoincides with that of the rope, a foree applied transversely to the lever acts with a great mechanical advantage against the rope; but as the inclination increases, the advuntage gradually diminishes, and changes, at lust, to an equal advantage on the side of the rope and the other lever to which it is attachcd. When thereſore a great foree ĩs required in the beginning oſf the motion, and afterwards a much smuller force with a greater velority, this apparatus may be extremely convenient: thus, in opening a steam valve, the pressure of the steam is at ſirst to be overeome, and after this, little or no additional force ĩs required; and Mr. Watt has very ingeniously applied this arrangement of levers to the purpose in his steam engines. In the same manner, it is necessary that the plattèn of a printing press, or the part which presses the paper on the types, should descend from a considerable height, but it is only at the instant of taking off the impression that a great force is required; and both these ends are obtained by similar means in a press lately invented by Lord Stanhope. (Plate III. Fig. 48, 49.) The wheel and axis bear a very strong resemblance to the lever. IF two threads, or perfectly flexible and inextensible lines, be wound in contrary directions round two cylinders, drums, or rollers, moveable together on the same axis, there will be an equilibrium, vhen the weights attached to the threads, or the forces operating on them, are inversely as the radii of the cylinders, or as the diameters of which they are the halvess. It may easily he understood, that the weights have the same power in turning round the cylinders, as if they were immediately attached to the arms of a lever, equal in length to their semidiameter, and that the conditions of equilibrium vill be the same. The demonstration may also be more immediately deduced from the position of the centre of gravity, immediately helow the axis oſ the cylinders, which requires the weights to be inversely as the radii. With respect to stability, the equilibrium is neutral, and the cylinders will remain at rest in any situation. A single cylinder is also often combined with a lever or winch, and in this case the radius of the cylinder is to be compared with the length of the lever or wineh. (Plate III. Fig. 50.) Systems of wheels and pinions, of various kinds, resemble, in their mechanical properties, either a series oſ levers, or the combination of eylinders, which constitutes the wheel and axis; but the form of the teeth may produce a diſſerence in their action, which will be mentioned when the praetical construction of wheelvork is discussed. i Sometimes the axis connected with a winch is composed of two eylinders, one end of the rope heing uncoiled from the smaller, while the other end winds round the larger; the weight being supported hy a pulley running in its anglee Here the conditions oſ equilibrium are easily determined from the place of the centre of gravity, and the effect of the machine is the same, as if the weight were attached to a rope coiled round a simple eylinder, of a diameter equal to half the difference of the diameters of the double axiss. The machine is, however, much stronger than such a eylinder would be, and doe not require so great a curvature in the ropes employed. (Plate IV. Fig. 51 The laws of the equilibrium of pullies have been referred, by some writers on mechanies, to those oſ the lever; but the, comparison is both unnecessarv and imperfect; in the simple case of two equal veights attached to a thread passing over a single pulley, which is the only one that allos us to recur to the properties of the lever, the conditions of equilibrium are axiomaticalty evident, without any further reasoning; and in more complicated cases, the calculations proceed on perfeetly different grounds. We are, therefore, to consider a pulley as a cylinder, moving on an axis, merely in order to change the direction of a thread, without friction; for whatever is demoustrable of pullies or their combinations, would be equally true of as many perſectly smooth grooves, which do not bear the most distant analogy to the lever. Now vhen the direction of a thread is altered, by passing over any perfectly smooth surface, it communicates the whole force acting on it; for the resistance of a surface, without ſriction, can only be in a direetion perpendicular to itself and to the thread, and the operation of any foree remains undisturberd by a resistunce vhich is always in a direction perpendicular to it. A fſixed pulley, therefore, has no effect in gaining a mechanical advantage; but by means of a moveable pulley, it is obvious that a weight may be supported by two forces, each equivalent to half the weight, applied in a vertical direction to the extremities of the thread; and these forces may be derived from two veights, if the thread be made to pass over two fixed pullies in a proper position; and if one of the ends be attached to a ſixed point, and the other remain connected to ĩts weight, the equilibrium vill continue unimpaired, each portion of the thread still supporting one halſ oſ the original veight; s0 that, by means oſ a single moveahle pulley, one body may retain in equilibrium another of double its veightt. (Plate IV. Fig 59, 53.) The modes oſ arranging pullies are very various, but the advantage which they procure may always be estimated, from the consideration that every part of the same thread must be equally stretehed; and where there is only one thread, the veight vill he divided equally among all the portions which help to support the moveable block, each of them bearing a weight equivalent to the foree which is applied at the end of the threadc In the common ships blocks, the pullies or shieves are equal in magnitude, and placed side by side; here their number cannot conveniently exceed two or three, without causing an obliquity in the block, when the force is applied to the rope. Mr. Smeaton, for this reason, invented a system of pullies, arranged in two rows in each block, one larger, and the other smaller: the foree being applied in the middle, the rope passes on the larger pullies, till it arrives at the last, then returns through the whole of the smaller series, to the opposite side, and comes back again on the larger, to be ſinally attached in  the middle. (Plate IV. Fig. 54.. 56.) lt iil a I If the diameters oſ all the pullies, in both blocks, he taken in the ratio of the number of portions of the thread intervening hetween them and the ſixed extremity, their angular velocity will be equal, each of them turning on its axis in the same time. They may therefore be ſixed to a single axis in each block; and in this case the axis heing longer, there vill be less accidental frietion from its want of steadiness, and even the necessary friction may, perhaps, be somewhat diminished. (Plate IV. Fig. 57.) I5 one end of a thread, supporting a moveable pulley, be fixed, and the other attached to another moveable pulley, and the threads of this pulley be similarly arranged, the veight will be counterpoised by a power, which is found by halving it as many times as there are moveable pullies; for ĩt is obvious that cach of these pullies doubles the eſſect of the power. (Plate IV. Fig. 58) l There are also other arrangements, by vhich the effeet of pullies may be increased or diversiſied: for instance, where one end of each rope is attached to the weight to be moved; or where two of the pullies are connected by a 70pC passing over a third; but these methods are of little practical uiiity. (Plate IV. Fi 50, 6O.) . : I UEE ll We have nitherto supposed the ropes, passing over the pullies, t to be either perfectly or very nearly parallel to each other; hut when their directions are oblique, the forces applied to them require to be modiſied accordingly. Thus, if two threads be attached to a weight, and passed over to pullies, fixed at a distance from each other, so that two equal weights may be attached to their extremities, the depression of the ſirst weight below either pulley, will be to its distance from the pulley, in the same proportion as half of the weight to either of the other weights; and if, instead oſ having a weight attached to it, one end of the thread be fixed to a ſirm obstacle, the effect will be precisely the same. A machine of this kind is sometimes called a swig, perhaps by corruption from swing. (Plate IV. Fig. 61.) If all the weights are unequal, we must draw a triangle, of which the three sides are in the same proportions as the weights; and we may determine the directions of the threads, by placing such a triangle, with the side, representing the middle veight, in a vertical position. A force may also be applied obliquely to a wheel and axis. Supposing a rope to be coiled obliquely round the axis, it will require, in order to preserve the equilibrium, a force as much greater than would be suſficient, if it were simply applied in the direction of the motion, as the length of any part of the rope uncoiled is greater than the perpendicular distance of its extremity from the axis. So that when the rope becomes very oblique, a great force is required in order to counteract a much smaller one acting perpendieularly. This remark may be in some measure illustrated by considering the method used by joiners and stonecutters for keeping a sav straight: two ropes or braces are twisted together by means of a pin or lever passing between them, and serve each other in place of an axis, round which they are coiled obliquely, s0 that they act with great force, when they are suſſiciently tight, and not too much twisted. (Plate IV. Fig. 62.) It appears from the laws which have already been laid down, respecting the motions of bodies on inclined surfaces, that a weight, acting vertically, will hold in equilibrium another weight, resting on an inclined plane, without frietion, when the first ĩs to the second as the height of the plane to its oblique length. The pressure on the plane is in this case to the weight resting on it, as the horizontal length of the plane is to its oblique length. This pressure may he measured experimentally, by substituting for the resistance of the plane, that of a thread perpendicular to it. (Plate IV. Fig. 6ò. The same principles are applicable to the equilibrium of the wedge A vedge is a solid which has three plane faces inclined to each other, ænd two triangular ends; and we suppose the faces perfeetly polished, so as to be free from friction, and that no force can act on them otherwise than in a perpendicular direetionn. Now in order that three forces, acting on the faces or sides of a wedge, may hold each other in equilibrium, each oſ them must be in proportion to the length of the side on which it acts: they must also be applied at such parts that their directions may meet in nne point; for otherwise they will not be completely opposed to each other, and a rotatory motion will be produced. (Plate IV. Fig. 64.) If each fuce of the wedge vere e conceived to be capable of receiving a pressure, not only in a perpendicular direction, but in any other direction at pleasure, as some authors have supposed, the instrument would lose its essential character as a wedge; but in such cases, the proportion of the forces required for the state of equilibrium, may alvays be determined by drawing a triangle vith its sidles parallel to their directions. It happens, however, not uncommonly, that the force actually operating on the vedge is derived from another force, acting in a dircetion more or less oblique, as when a heavy body rests on one of the faces of the wedge vhich is inclined to the horizon, the body heing retained in ĩts situatinn, by an obstacle or a thread which conſines it to a vertical line, and the sliding avay of the vedge being prevented by a horizontal force. A wedge so situated, and supposed to be capable of sliding without friction on a horizontal surface, is sometimes called a moveable inclined plane, and it will support the weight resting on it, if the horizoutal force be to the weight, as the height of the plane is to ĩts horizontal length. If the thread, or the obstacle helping to support the veight, be placed in any other direction, the magnitude of the forces must be determined from the genenl lav of the composition of three pressures. (Plate IV. Iig õ5.) LIf a prop or bar, leaning against a mooth vertical surſace or vall, be employed to support or to raise a weight, by means oſ a force which draws its base along a smooth horizontal surface, the horizontal ſoree must be to the veight as the distance oſ the bottom oſ the prop from the wall to its perpen- dicular height. And from similar principles, the conditions of the equilibrium of arches, domes, and roofs may be determined. (Plate IV. Fig. 66, 67.) The action of a screw depends on the same principles as that of an inclined plane; for by rolling a thin and ſlexible wedge, for instance, a triangular piece of card, round a cylinder, we form a serem. We may consider the force tending to turn the screw round its axis, as applied horizontally to the base of the wedge, and the weight which is to be raised as acting vertically on its inelined surface: the circumference of the cylinder will represent the horizontal length of the wedge, and the distance between the threads, measured in the direction of the axis, will be its height, provided that the threads be single; consequently, the forces required for the equilibrium are to each other, as the height of one spire to the circumference of the serev. But besides these forces, it is necessary that some obstacle be present, which may prevent the body, on which the serew acts, from following it in its motion round its axis, otherwise there can be no equilibrium. (Plate V. Fig. 68.) The eylinder, which is the foundation of a screw, may be either convex or concave, making a eylindrical or a tubular screw, and these, hen ſitted together, are sometimes called a serew and a nut. The nut acts on the screw vith the same mechanical power as a single point would do, since it only divides the pressure among the different purts of the spire. In general the screw is applied in combination with a lever, in order to procure an advantage in overcoming the friction, which is always considerable in the simple serew and nut, and vhich would resist a force applied immediately at the circumference, without any diminution of its power. Sometimes the spires oſ a screw are made to act on the teeth of a wheel, when a very slow motion oſ the wheel, or a very rapid motion of the screw, is required for the purposes of the machine. (Plate V. Fig. 69, 70.) The pover of screws may be increased, in a great proportion, by means of an arrangement invented by Mr. Hunter; which is somewhat similar, in its operation, to the double axis already deseribed. A cylindrical screw is bored, and made at the same time a tubular screw, with a little difference in the distances of the threads, so that when it is turned within a fixed nut, it rises or sinks a little more or less than the internal serev which perforates it would rise or sink by the action of its own threads, and a weight attached to this internal screw ascends, in each revolution, only through a spãſte equal to the difference of the height of the two coilss. Here the machine is analogous to a very thin wedge, of which the thickness is only equal to the difference of the distances of the threads, and which of course acts with a great mechanical advantage. It might in some cases be more convenient to make two cylindrical screws, of different kinds, at different parts of the same axis, rather than to perforate it. The friction of such machines is, however, a great impediment to their operation. (Plate V. Fig. 7l.) In all the kinds of equilibrium that ve have considered, and in all other cases that can be imagined, it will he found that the forces, or rather weights, opposed to each other, are so arranged, that if they were put in motion, their momenta in the direction of ſgravity would, in the first instance, be equal and contrary, the velocity being as much greater as the magnitude of the weight is smaller. Thus, if an ounce weight, placed on a lever, at the distance of four feet from the fulerum, counterpoise a weight of four ounces at the distance of one foot, the velocity with which the ounce would descend, if the lever were moved, would he four times as great as that with which the weight of four ounces would descend. A single moveable pulley ascends with half the veIocity of the end of the rope which is drawn upwards, and acts with a force tvice as great; a block of three shieves enables a weight to sustain another six times as great; but the velocity, with which this weight ascends, is only one sixth of that with which the smaller weight must descendc. When a weight rests on an inclined plane, of which the height is one half of the length, it may be retained by the action of a weight of half its magnitude, drawing it up the plane by means of a thread passing over a pulley; here if the weight ascended or descended along the oblique surface, its velocity, reduced to a vertical direction, would be half as great as that of the smaller weight which balances it. Some authors have considered this law as affording a fundamental demonstration of the conditions of equilibrium in all possible cases. For since, wherever two weights are in equilibrium, if one of them descended, the other voL. I. must ascend with an equal quantity of motion, it appears absurd to suppose that the force oſ gravitation could produce these two equal and contrary efſects at the same time. But it ĩs more satisfactory to trace, in every case, the steps by which the immediate actions oſ the different weights are enabled to oppose each other; and the general lav may then be inferred, by induction, from the agreement oſ the particular results, in conſirmation of the general reasoning vhieh tends to establish its truth. ON COLLISION. HAVING inquired into the laws and properties of the motions and rest of single bodies, under the operation of one or more forces, and into the equilibrium of these forces, in different circumstances, we are next to examine some simple cases of the motions of various moveable bodies acting reciprocally on each other. In all prohlems oſ this ind, iĩt is of importance to recolleet the general principle already laid down, respecting the centre of inertia, that its place is not affected by any reciprocal or mutual action of the bodies constituting the system. Whenever two bodies act on each other, so as to change the direction of their relative motions, by means of any forces which preserve their activity undiminished at equal distances on every side, the relative velocities with vhich the hodies approach to, or recede from each other, will always be equal at equal distances. For example, the velocity of a eomet, when it passes near the earth in its descent towards the sun, ĩs the same as its velocity of ascent in ĩts return, although, at different distances, ĩts velocity has undergone considerable changes. In this case, the ſorce acts continually, and attracts the bodies towards each other; but the force coneerned in collision, vhen a body strikes or impels another, acts only during the time of more or less intimate contact, and tends to sepurate the bodies ſfrom each other. Wihen this faree exerts itsel? as powerfully in causing the hodies to separate, as in destroving the velocity with which they meet ench other, the bodies ure ealled perſectly elastic: when the hodies meet each other without a reaction of this kind, they are called more or less inelasticc. Ivory, metals, und elistie zum, are highly, and almost perſeetly elastie: clay, wax, mixed vith a little oĩll, and other soſt bodies, ate almost inelastic: and the eſſeets of inelustic bodies may be imitated by elastic ones, if we eause them to unite or adhere after an impulse, s0 as to destroy the effect oſ the repulsive force vhich tends to sepurate them. When two hodies approach to each other, their form is in some degree changed, and the more as the velocity is greate. In general, the repulsive force exerted is exactly proportional to the degree in which a body is compressed; and when a body strikes another, this force continues to be increased until the relative motion has been destroyed, and the bodies are for an instant at rest with respect to each other; the repulsive action then proceeds with an intensity which is gradually diminished, aud if the bodies are perfectly elastic, they reassume their primitive form, and separate with a velocity equal to that with which they berore approached each other. Strietly speaking, the repulsion commences a little before the moment of actual contact, but only at a distance which in common cases is impereeptiblee The change of form of an elastic substance, during collision, is easily shown by throwing a bull of ivory on a slab of marble, or a piece of smooth iron, coloured with black lead, or printing ink; or by suffering it to fall from various heights: the degree of compression will then be indieated by the magnitude of the black spot which appears on the ball. It may be shown, from the laws of pendulums, that, on the supposition that the force is proportional to the degree of compression, its greatest exertion ĩs to the weight of a striking body, as the height from which the body must have ſallen, in order to acquire its velocity, to half the depth of the impression. For making experiments on the phenomena of collislon, it is most convenient to suspend the bodies employed, by threads, in the mamner of pendulums; their velocities may then be easily measured, by observing the chords of the ares through vhich they descend or ascend, since the velocities acquired in descending through circular ares are always proportional to their chords; and for this purpose, the apparatus Is provided with a graduated are, which is commonly divided into equal parts, although it would be a little more correct to place the divisions at the ends of ares, of which the chords are expressed by the corresponding numberss. Plate V. Fig. 72.) The simplest case of the collision of elastic bodies is when two equal balls descend through equal arcs, so as to meet each other with equal velocities. They recede from each other after collision with the same velocities, and rise to the points from which they before descended, with a small deduction for the resistance of the surrounding bodies. When a hall at rest is struck by another equal hall, it receives a velocity equal to that of the ball which strikes it, and this ball remains at rest. And if two equal balls meet or overtake each other with any unequal velocities, their motions will be exchanged, each rising to a height equal to that from which the other descended. The effect of collision takes place so rapidly, that if several equal balls be disposed in a right line, in apparent contact with each other, and another ball strike the first of them, they will all receive in succession the whole velocity oſ the moving ball before they begin to act on the succeeding ones; they vill then transirit the whole velocity to the succeeding balls, and remain entirely at rest, so that the last hall only vill- ſly off. In the same manner, if two or more equal balls, in apparent contact, be in motion, and strike against any number of others placed in a line, the first of the moving balls will first drive off the most remote, and then the second the last but one, of the row of halls which were at rest: so that the same number of halls will fiy o together on one side, as descended to strike the row of balls on the other side; the others remaining at rest. If the line of balls, instead of being loosely in contact, had been firmly united, they would have been impelled with a smaller velocity, and the ball striking them would have been reſlected. For when a smaller elastic body strikes a larger, it rebounds with a velocity less than its first velocity, and the larger body proceeds also with a less velocity than that of the body striking it. But if a larger body strikes a smaller, iĩt still proceeds with a smaller velocity, and the smaller body advances with a greater. The momentum communicated by a smaller elastic body to a larger one is greater than its own, and when the first body is of a magnitude comparatively inconsiderable, it rebounds with a velocity nearly as great as the velocity of its impulse, and the second hody acquires a momentum nearly twice as great as that of the first When a larger body strikes a smaller one, it communicates to it only as much momentum as it loses. In the communication of motion between inelastic bodies, the want of a repulsive foree, capable of separating them with an equal relative velocity, is prohably owing to a permanent change of form; such bodies receiving and retaining a depression at the point of contact When the velocity is too small to produce this change of form, the bodies, however inelastic, may usually be observed to rehound a little. Bodies, which are perſcetly inelastic, remain in contact aſter collision; they must therefore proceed with the same velocity as the centre of inertia had before collision. Thus, i? two equal bills meet, with equal velocities, they remain at rest; i one ĩs at rest, and the other strikes it, they proceed with half the velocity of the hall which was first in motion. If they are of unequal dimensions, the joint velocity ĩs as much smaller than that oſ the striking hall, as the weight of this bull is smaller than the sum of the weights of hoth hallss. And in a similar manner, the effcets of any given velocities in either ball may be determined. It follows immediately from the properties of the eentre oſ inertia, that in all cases of collision, whether oſf elastic or inelastic hodies, the sum of the momenta of all the hodies of the system, that is, of their masses or weights multiplied hy the numbers expressing their velocities, is the sume, when reduced to the same direetion, aſter their mutual collision, as it was hefore their collisionn. When the budies are perſeetly ælastie, ĩt may also he shown that the sum of their energies or ascending forces, n their respective direetions, remains also unaltered. The term energy may be applied, with great propriety, to the produet of the mass or weight oſ a hody, into the square of the number expressing its velocity. Thus, i a weight of one ounce moves with a velocity of a foot in a second, we may call its energy I; if a second hody of two ounces have a velocity of three feet in a second, ĩts encrgy will be twice the square of three, or 1I8. This produet has heen denominated the living or ascending force, since the height of the body's vertical ascent is in proportion to it; and some have considered it as the true measure of the quantity of motion; but although this opinion has been very universally rejected, yet the foree thus estimated ell deserves a distinct denomination. After the considerations and demonstrations which have heen premised on the subject of forces, there can be no reasonable doubt with respect to the true measure of motion; nor can there be much hesitation in allowing at once that since the same force, continued for a double time, is known to produce a double velocity, a double force must also produce a double velocity in the same time. Notwithstanding the simplicity of this view oſ the subject, Leibnitz, Smeaton, and many others, have chosen to estimate the force of a moving body, by the produet of its mass into the square of its velocity; and though ve cannot admit that this estimation of force is just, yet it may be allowed that many of the sensible effects of motion, and even the advantage of any mechanical power, however it may be employed, are usually proportional to this product, or to the weight of the moving body, multiplied hy the height from whieh it must have fallen, in order to acquire the given velocity. Thus a bullet, moving vith a double velocity, will penetrate to a quadruple depth in clay or tallow: a ball of equal size, hut of one fourth of the weight, moving with a double velocity, will penetrate to an equal depth: and, with a smaller quantity of motion, will make an equal excavation in a shorter time. This appears at first sight somewhat paradoxical: but, on the other hand, ve are to consider the resistance of the clay or tallow as a uniformly retarding force, and it will be obvious, that the motion, which it can destroy in a short time, must he Iess than that which requires a longer time for its destruction. Thus also when the resistance, opposed by any body to a foree tending to break it, ĩs to be overcome, the space through which it may be bent, beſore it breaks, being given, as well as the foree exerted at every point of that space, the power of any body to break it is proportional to the energy oſ its motion, or to its veight multiplied by the square of ĩts velocity. In almost all cases of the forces emploved in practical mechanies, the lahour expended in producing any motion, is proportional, not to the momentum, but to the energy which is obtained; since these forces are scldom to he considered as uniformly accelerating forces, but generally act at some disadvantage, when the velocity is already considerablee For instunce, iſ it be necessary to obtain a certain velocity, by means of the descent of a heavy hody from a height, to which ve carry it by a flight of steps, we must ascend, if ve vish to double the velocity, a quardruple numher of steps, and this will cost us nearly four times as much labour. In the same manner, if ve press with a given force on the shorter end of a lever, in order to move a weight at a greater distance on the other side of the fulerum, a certain portion of the force is expended in the pressure which is supported by the fulerum, and ve by no means produce the same momentum, as would have heen obtained, by the immediate action oſ an equal force, on the body to be moved. An elastic hali, of 2 ounces weight, moving with a velocity of 3 feet in a second, possesses an energy, as ve have already seen, which may be expressed by 18. If it strike a ball of I ounce which is at rest, its velocity will be reduced to I foot in a second, and the smaller ball vill receive a veloeity of 4 feet: the energy oſ the ſirst hall will then be expressed by ę, and that of the second by I6, making together I8, as hefore. The momentum of the larger ball after collision is 2, that of the smaller 4, and the sum of these is equal to the original momentum of the first hall Supposing the magnitude of an elastic hody, which is at rest, to be infinite, it will receive twice the momentum of a small body that strikes it; but its velocity, and consequently its energy, will be inconsiderable, since the energy is expressed by the product of the momentum into the velocity. And if the larger body be of a finite magnitude, but still much greater than the smaller, its energy will be very small; that of the smaller, which rebounds vith a velocity not much less than its original velocity, being but little diminished. It is for this reason, that a man, having a heavy anvil placed on his chest, can bear, without much inconvenience, the blow of a large hammer striking on the anvil, while a much slighter blow of the hammer, acting immediately on his body, vould have fractured his ribs, and destroyed his life. The anvil receives a momentum nearly twice as great as that of the hammer; but its tendency to overcome the strength of the bones, and to crush the man, is only proportional to its energy, which is nearly as much less than that of the hammer, as four times the weight of the hammer is less than the weight of the anvil. Thus, if the weight of the hammer were 5 pounds, and that of the anvil 100, the energy of the anvil would be less than one ſifth as great as that of the hammer, besides some further diminution, on aceount of the want of perfect elasticity, and from the eſſect of the larger surface of the anvil, in dividing the pressure occasioned by the blow, so as to enable a greater portion of the chest to cooperate in resisting it. When a hody strikes another, in a direetion which does not pass through ĩts centre of gravity, the efſect produced involves the consideration of rotatory motion, since in this case the body is made to revolve on an axis. But this can never happen when the body is spherical, and its surface perfeetly polished; since every impulse must then be perpendicular to the surface, and must consequently be directed to the centre of the body. It the motion of a hall, which strikes another, is not directed to its centre, the surface of contact must be oblique with respect to its motion, and the second hall vill only receive an impulse in a direction perpendicular to this surface, while the first receives, from its reaction, an equal impulse in a contrary direction, which is combined vith its primitive motion. The magnitude of this impulse may be determined by resolving the motion of the ſirst ball into two parts, the one parallel to the surface of contact, and the other perpendicular; the first part remaining always unaltered, the second heing modified by the collision. If, for example, the balls were equal, this second part of the motion would bhe destroyed, and the remaining motion would be in the direetion of the surface of contact, and perpendicular to that of the hall impelled. Hence it follows, that i? we vish to impel a billiard ball in a given direction, by the stroke of another ball, we have only to imagine a third ball to be placed in contact with the first, immediately behind it in the line of the required motion, and to aim at the centre of this imaginary ball: the first ball will then be impelled in the required direction, and the second will also continue to move in a direction perpendicular to it. By a similar resolution of the motion of an elastic ball, ve may determine its path, when it is reſleeted from a ſixed obstaclee. That part of the motion, vhich is in a direction parallel to the surface of the ohstacle, remains undiminished: the motion perpendicular to ĩit is changed for an equal motion in a contrary direetion, and the joint result of these constitutes a motion, in a direction, which is equally inclined to the surſace, with the ſirst motion, VOoL. I. n but on the opposite side of the perpendicular. OF this we have also a familiar instance in the motions of billiard balls; for we may observe, that a hall rebounds from the cushion, in an angle equal to that in which it arrives at it; ani if ve vish that our ball, aſter reſleetion, should strike another, placed in a given situation, ve may suppose a third ball to be situated at an equal distance, on the other side of the cushion, and aim at this imaginary ball: our ball will then strike the second hall, aſter reflection, with a direct impulse. We here suppose the reſlection to take place when the centre of the ball arrives at the cushion, while in fact the surface only comes into contact vith it; if we wish to be more accurate, ve may place the imaginary ball, at an equal distance beyond the centre of a ball, lying in contact with the nearest part of the cushion, instead of measuring the distance from the cushion itselfl. (Plate V. Fig. 75.) When the number of bodies, which meet each other, is greater, and their magnitudes and motions are diversiſied, the calculation of the efſects of collision becomes very intricate, and the problem is scarcely applicable to any practical purpose. Those who are desirous of pursuing the investigation as a mathematical amusement, will ſind all the assistance that they require in the profound and elegant vorks of Maclaurin. - LECTURE IX. ON THE MOTIONS OF CONNECTED BODIES. THE motions of single bodies, acting in any manner on each other, which we have been considering, as far as they belong to the effects of collision, are of less importance to practical mechanics, than the aſſections of such bodies as are united, so as either to revolve round a common centre, or to participate in each other's motions, by any kind of machinery. It is only within half a century, that the phenomena and effects of rotatory motion have heen sufficiently investigatedc. Newton committed a mistake, which is now universally acknovledged, in his computation of the precession of the equinoxes, for vant oſ attending sufficiently to the subject; and it is of importance in the calculation of many of the effects of mechanical arrangements, that it should be treated in an accurate manner. The effect of a moving hody, in producing motion in any other bodies, so connected as to he capable of turning freely round a given centre, ĩs jointly proportional to its distance from that centre, and to its momentum in the direction of the motion to be produced. Thus a body, of one pound veight, moving with a velocity of one foot in a second, will have three times as great an effect on a system of bodies, to which its whole ſorce is communicated, at the distance of one yard from the centre of their motion, as if it acted only at the distance of a foot, on the same system of bodies: a double veight, or a double velocity, would also produce a double efſect. For, supposing two unequal bodies to be connected hy an inflexible line, and to move vith equal velocities, in a direction perpendicular to that of the line, it is demonstrable, from the principles of the composition of motion, that they may be wholly stopped by an obstacle applied to the centre of gravity, consequently theĩr eſfects, in turning the line round this point, are equal; here the mo- menta are proportional to the veights, but the produets obtained by multiplying them by the distances from the centre, at which they aet, are equal: these products thereſore represent the rotatory pover of the respective hodies. Ience in a connected system oſ bodies, revolving round a given point, vith equal angular velocities, the cſſeet produced hy the rotatory motion of each body, as well as the force which is employed in producing it, is expressed by the product of the mass multiplied by the square of the velocity, since the velocity ĩs in this ease proportional to the distance from the centre; and this product ĩs the same that I have denominated the energy of a moving body. These propositions are oſ great use in all inquiries respecting the operations of machines; and it is of importance to bear in mind, that although the equilibrium of a system of hodies is determined hy the equality of the products of their weights, into their effeetive distances on each side of the centre, yet that the estimation of the mechanical power of each body, when once in motion, requires the mass to be multiplied by the squure of the distance, or of the velocity. For this reason, together with sume others, which have been already mentioned, some have considered the square of the velocity as aſſording the true measure of force; but the properties of motion, concerned in the determination of rotatory power, are in reality no more than necessary consequences of the simpler laws, on which the whole theory oſ mechanics is founded. The effects of rotatory motion may he very conveniently examined, by means of an apparatus, similar to that which was employed for the same purpose hy Mr. Smeaton. A vertical axis is turned by a thread passing over a pulley, and supporting a scale with weights; the thread may be applied at different parts of the axis, having difſerent diumeters, and the axis supports two arms, on which two leaden veights are ſixed, at distances which may be varied at pleasure. The same force vill then produce, in the same time, but half the velocity, in the same situation of the weights, when the thread is applied to a part of the axis of hilf the diameter: and if the weights are removed to a double distance from the axis, a quadruple foree vill be required, in order to produce an equal angular velocity in a given time. (Plate V. ſig. 74.) When a number of connected bodies, or a single body of considerable mag- nitude, is made to revolve round a centre, it is sometimes necessary to inquire, into what point their masses might be supposed to be concentrated, so as to preserve the same rotatory power, vith the same angular velocity. This point is called the centre of gyration. In a circle, or any portion of a circle, turning round its centre, the square of the distance of this point, from the centre, is half the square of the semidiameter; and the whole eſfect of the momentum of the circle, upon an obstacle at its circumference, is exactly half as great as that of an equal quantity of matter, striking the obstacle with the velocity of the circumference. There is another point, of which the determination is of considerable utility in many mechanical problems: this is the centre of percussion; or the point at vhich an obstacle must be applicd, in order to receive the whole effect of a stroke of a hody, which is revolving round a given centre, without producing any pressure, or strain, on the centre, or axis of motion. In a straight line, or a slender rod, ſixed at one extremity, the distance of this point, from the centre of motion, is two thirds of the whole length The same point is also the centre of oscillation, the distance of which determines the time of oscillation, or vibration, of the body, suspended as a pendulum, upon the given centre of motion. It may easily be shown, that a rod a yard long, and of equable thickness, suspended at one extremity, vibrates in the same time as a ball suspended by a thiea, of which the length is to feet. But if the rod were suspended on a centre, at some point vithin its extremities, the time of its vibration would be prolonged, so as to become equal to that of a simple pendulum of much greater length. This may be illustrated by two balls, fixed at the end of a rod, with a centre of suspension moveable to any part of the rod, for as the centre approaches the middle of the rod, the vibrations are rendered extremely slow. (Plate V. Fig 75.) The rotatory motion of bòdies, not fixed on an axis, might be considered in this place, but the subject involves in its whole extent some intricacy of calculation, and, except in astronomy, the investigation is scarcely applicable to any problems which occur in practicee. We may, however, examiue a few oſ the simplest cases. If two bodies be supposed to he connected by an in- ſlexible line, and to be moving with equal velocities in parallel directions; if an immoveable obstacle be applied, so as to form a fulerum at the common centre of gravity, they will, as we have already seen, be wholly stopped: but if the fulerum be applied to any other part of the line, one of the hodies will move forwards, and the other backwards, with a velocity which may casily be determined by calculating their rotatory power with respeet to the ſulerum. If the fulerum be applied at a point of the line continued beyond the bodies, the one will lose and the other gain velocity, since the quantity of rotatory power will always remain unaltered: that point only which is denominated the centre of oscillation retaining its original velocity. Now the same inequality in the motion of the bodies, and consequently the same angular velocity of rotation will be produced, if the connected hodies be initially at rest, and the fulerum be applied to them with the same relative velocity. TFor example, if a straight rod or wire receive an impulse at one end in a transverse direction, the centre of oscillation, which is at the distance of two thirds of the length from the end struck, will at the first instant remain at rest, consequently the centre will move with one fourth of the velocity of the impulse, and this must be the velocity of the progressive motion of the rod, since the centre of gravity of any body, which is at liberty, moves always with an equable velocity in a right line, while the whole rod will also revolve equably round its centre, except such retardations as may arise from foreign causes. In a similar manner the computation may be extended to bodies of a more complicated form. Thus it has been calculated at what point of each planet an impulse must have operated, in order to communicate to it at one blow its rotation and ĩts progressive motion in its orbit. Those who have asserted that the motion oſ the centre of gravity of a body can unly be produced by an impulse, which is either wholly or partly directed tovards it, have obviously been mistaken. The centre of oscillation is the only point which remains at rest with regard to the ſirst efſect of the stroke, and the centre of gravity, which never coincides with the centre of oscillation, moves in the direction of the impulse, while the parts heyond the centre of oscillation begin to move in a contrary direction. Hence it is, that a thin stick may be broken, hy a blow on the middle, without injuring the glasses on which iĩt is supported: for the ends of the stick, instead of heing depressed hy the stroke, would rise with halſ the velocity of the body which strikes them, if the two portions were separated without the loss of any force. But unless some art has been previously employed in producing a partial separation, it will frequently be found, that the stick has strength enough to break the glasses before it gives vay. The subject of preponderance, or of the action of 'weights or forees counteracted by other forces, and incumbered with foreign matter to be put in motion, requires for its discussion a previous knowledge of the simple operation of forces, of the conditions of equilibrium, and of h estimation of rotatory power. The consideration of the eſfects of preponderance enables us to determine, in some circumstances, the best possible proportions of the povers of machines, for produeing the required effects in the most advantageous manner. For, in order that motion may be produced, it is not suſſicient that there be an equilibrium, in procuring which a part only of the pover is expended, but there must be an excess of force above that which would he necessary for the equilibrium; and ĩt is often of consequence to know what portion of the power must be employed in each way, in order that the greatest effect may be produced in a given time. We are sometimes told, that what ve gain in power, we lose in time. In one sense indeed the remark is true; thus one man can do no more by a powerful machine in ten hours, than ten men can do by a veaker machine in one hour; but in other senses the assertion is often erroneous; for by increasing the mechanical advantage to a given degree, ve may in some cases considerably inerease the performance of a machine, without adding to the force. According to the nature of the force employed, and to the construetion of the machine, a different calculation may be required for finding the best proportions of the forces to be employed; but a few simple instances will serve to show the nature of the determinationn. Thus, in order that a smaller weight may raise a greater to a given vertical height, in the shortest time possible, by means oſ an inclined plane, the length oſ the plane must be to its height, as twice the greater weight to the smaller, so that the acting force may be twice as great as that which is simply required for the equilibrium. This may be shown experimentally, by causing three equal weights, supported on wheels, to ascend at the same time as many inclined planes of the same height, but of difſerent lengths, by means of the descent of three other equal veights, connected with the former three, by threads passing over pulliess. The length oſ one of the planes is twior its height, that of anothe considerably more, and that of a third less: iſ the weights begin to rise at the same time, the first will arrive at the top, before either oſ the others. Plate V. Fig. 76.) IF a given veight, or any equivalent force, be employed to raise another equal veight, by memns of levers, vheels, pullies, or any similur powers, the greatest effect will be produced, if the acting veight be capable of sustuining, in equilibrium, a weight about twice and a half as great as ĩtsel?. This proposition may be very satisfactorily illustrated by an experiment. Three double pullies being placed, independently of each other, on an axis, round which they move freely, the diameters of the two eylindrical portions, which compose the first, being in the ratio of à to 2, thuse of the second as 5 to 2, and those of the third as 4 to 1, six equal veights are attached to them in pairs, s0 that fhiree may be raised hy the descent of the other three, on the principle of the wheel and axis. I then we hold the lower weights, by means of threads, or othervise, and let them go, so that they may begin to rise at the same instant, it will appear evidently that the middle pulley raises its weight the fastest; and consequently, that in this case, the ratio of 5 to 2 is more advantageous, than either a much less, or a much greater ratio. If the weight to be raised were very great in proportion to the descending weight, the arrangement ought to be sueh, that this weight might retain, in equilibrium, a weight about twice as great as that which is actually to be raised. If the descending weight vere a hundred times as great as the ascending veight, the greatest velocity would be obtained in this case, by making the descending veight capable of holding in equilibrium a veight one ninth as great as itself. (Plate VI. Fig. 7T.) The proportion required for the greatest efſect is somewhat different, when the heights, through which hoth the veights are to move, are limited, as they usually must be in practical cases. Ilere, i we suppose the operation to be continually repeated, the eſfeet will be greatest in a given time, when the ascending veight ĩis between two thirds and one half, o? the exact counterpoise to the descending veight. If, however, the force were accumulated during the action of the machine, there would be no limit to the advantage of a slow motion. Thus, if we have a stream of water, ſilling a single reservoir, which is to ruise a weight by means of its descent, the proportion here assigned vill be the best for petforming the most work in a given time; but if we chose to double our machine, so that one reservoir should be fſilled during the descent of another, it would be proper to proportion the weights in such a manner, that the whole time required for ſilling one of tlhe reservoirs should be occupied in the descent and the reascent of the other. In all these cases, if great accuracy were required, it would be necessary in the calculation to add to the mass to be moved, the quantity of moveable matter in the machine, reduced to a mean distance from the fulerum or centre, according to its rotatory power, in the same manner as the centre of gyration is determined. But there is seldom occasion for such a degree oſ precision. The magnitude of the pressure which is exerted on the fulerum, during the motion of the connected bodies, may always be determined, by comparing the actual velocity of the centre of gravity with that of a body descending without resistance. These propositions and experiments must be allowed to require an attentive consideration from those who are engaged in practical mechanics; and it ĩs natural to suppose that the proportions laid down may be adopted with safety, and employed with success, and that wve may sometimes derive important advantages from their application. But on more mature consideration, we shall find some practical reasons for caution in admitting them without material alterations. l If a machine were constructed for raising a solid weight, and so arrangeũ as to perform its oſfice in the shortest possible time vith a given expense of power, the weight wouli still possess, when it arrived at the place of its destination, a considerable and still increasing velocity: in order that it might retain its situation, it would be necessary that this velocity should he destroyed; if it were suddenly destroyed, the machinery would undergo a strain which might be very injurious to it: and if the velocity were gradually diminished, the time would no longer be the same as is supposed in the ealeulation. In the second place, the forces generally employed are by no means uniformly accelerating forces, like that of gravitation, to which the propositions which voL. I. y we have been considering are adapted: they are not only less active when a certain velocity has once been attained, but they are often capable of a temporary increase or diminution of intensity at pleasuree We have seen the inconvenience oſ producing a great ſinal velocity, on account oſ its endangering the structure of the machine: if therefore our permanent force he ealeulated according to the common rule, so as to be able to maintain the equilibrium, and overcome the friction, the momentum or inertia of the veights, vhen once set in motion, vill be able to sustain that motion equably; and it vill not be diſſicult to give them a sufficient momentum, by a greater exertion of the moving force, for a short space of time, at the beginning: and this is in fact the true mode of operation of many machines where animal strength is employed. Other forces, for instance those of wind and water, regulate themselves in some measure, at least with respect to the relative veIocity of the sails and the vind, or the ſloathoards and the water; for we may easily increase the resistance, until the most advantageous efſect is produced. Many authors, considering the pressure of a stream of water as analogous to the impulse of a number of unconnected particles, striking the floatboards, and then ceasing to produce any further effect, have iuferred, that the force obtained by such an impulse must be as the square of the relative velocity, and that the effect of an undershot wheel must be the most advantageous, when its velocity is one third of that of the stream: but it will hereaſter appear, that this estimation of hydraulic force is by no means accurate. I we compare the greatest velocity with which a man or a horse can run or walk without fatigue, to the velocity of the stream, and the actual velocity of that part of the machine to which the foree is applied, to the velocity of the floatboards of a water wheel, the strength whieh can be exerted may be represented, according to the experiments of some authors, by the impulse of the stream, as supposed to be proportional to the square oſ the relutive velocity; consequently the same velocity ould be most advantageous in both cases and the man or horse ought, according to these experiments, to move, when his force is applicd to a machine, with one thir of the velocity with which he could walk or run when at liberty. This, for a man, would he ahout a mile and a half an hour; for a horse, two or three miles: but in general both men and horses appear to vork most advantageously with a velocity somewhat greater than this. Where a uniformly accelerating force, like that of gravitation, is employed in machines, it might oſten be of advantage to regulate its operation, so that it might act nearly in the same manner as the forces that we have been considering; at first with greater intensity, and afterwards with sufficient power to sustain the equilibrium, and overcome the frietion only. This might be done, by means oſ a spiral barrel, like the fusee of a watch; and a similar modification has sometimes been applied, by causing the ascending weight, when it arrives near the place of its destination, to act on a counterpoise, which resists it with a foree continually increasing, by the operation of a barrel of the same Kind, s0 as to prevent the efiect of the shock which too rapid a motion would occasion. On the whole, we may conclude, that on account of the limited velocity which is usually admissible in the operation of machines, a very small portion of the moving force is expended in producing momentum; the velocity of 3 miles an hour, would be generated in a heavy body, descending hy ita own weight, in one seventh of a second, and a very short time is generally suticient for obtaining as rapid a motĩon ũs the machine or the nature of the force will allow; and when this has been effected, the whole force is employed in maintaining the equilibrium, and overcoming- the resistance: so that the common opinion, which has probably been formed without entering minutely into the consideration of the subject, and which appears, when ſirst we examine its foundation with aceuracy, to lead to material errors, is in great measure jutiſied by a more profound investigation. To seek for a source of motion in the construction of a machine, betrays a gross ignorance oſ the prnciples on which all machines operate. The only interest that we can take in the projects which have heen tried for procuring æ perpetual motion, must arise from the opportunity that they afford us to observe the weakness of human reason; to see a man spending whole years in the pursuit of an object, which a weeks application to sober philosophy might have convinced him was unattainablee. The most satisfactory confutation of the notion of the possibility of a perpetual motion, is derived from the consideration oſ the properties of the centre of gravity: we have only to examine vhether it will begin to descend or to ascend, when the machine moves, or whether it will remain at rest. If ĩt be so placed, that it must either remain at rest or ascend, it ĩs clear, from the laws of equilibrium, that no motion derived from gravitation can take place: if it may descend, it must either continue to descend for ever, with a ſinite velocity, which is impossible, or it must first descend and then ascend, vith a vibratory motion, and then the case vill be reducible to that of a pendulum, where it is obvious that no new motion is generated, and that the friction and resistance of the air must soon destroy the original motion. One of the most common fallacies, by which the superficial projectors of machines for obtaining a perpetual motion have been deIuded, has arisen from imagining, that any number of veights ascending by a certain path, on one side of the centre of motion, and descending in the other, at a greater distance, must cause a constant preponderance on the side of the descent: for this purpose, the weights have either been fixed on hinges which allow them to fall over at a certain point, s0 as to become more distant from the centre, or made to slide or roll along grooves or planes, which lead them to a more remote part of the wheel, from whence they return as they ascend: but it will appear on the inspection of such a machine, that although some of the weights are more distant from the centre than others, yet there is always a proportionally smaller number of them on that side on which they have the greatest power; so that these circumstances precisely counterbalance each other. (Plate VI. Fig. 78.) ON DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASTURING. HAVING investigated all the general principles and laws of motion, and of mechanical power, e may now proceed to the consideration of particular departments of practical mechanics. But before e can satisfactorily compare the various forces, which we are to employ or to oppose, we must have some mode of determining their magnitude; and ve must begin hy examining the spaces which are measures of their action: a knovledge oſ the instruments employed for delineation, and of the rules of perspective projeetion, is also Dnecessarily required, as a previous step in the study of practical mechanies. We have therefore to consider, as preliminary subjects, ſirst the arts which may be expressed by the terms instrumental geometry, or the geometry of mechanics; secondly, statics, or the mode of ascertaining the magnitude of weights, and of other uctive forces; and thirdly, the examination of the passive strength of materials of various kinds, and of the negative foree of friction The art of drawing can scarcely be distinguished by any correct definition from painting. In its simplest state, vhen we merely imitate an original laid hefore us, it is called copying; and in writing, we only copy the letters of the alphabet. If ve proceed in a mathematical manner in the operation of drawing, we require a number of geometrical instruments, vhich are still more necessary for the ſirst construetion of diagrams or ſigures. In modelling and sculpture, a solid is simply imitated; but when a solid is represented on a plane, the principles of perspective are employed in determining the position of the lines which are to form the pieturee The productions of the arts of draving and writing are multiplied and perpetuated by means of engraving and printing; inventions which have been the sources of inestimable advantage in the instruction and civilisation of mankind. In drawing, we may employ the pen, the pencil, chalks, crayons, inks, vater colours, or body colours; ve may paint in miniature, in distemper, in freseo, in oils, in varnish, in wax, or in enamel; and we may imitate the effects of painting, by mosaic work, or by tapestry. The ſirst step in copying a drawing, or in painting, is to procure a correct outline: a master of the art can do this with suſſicient accuracy, by such an estimate of the proportions of the ſigures, as the eye alone enables him to form; especially if he be assisted by lines, which divide the original inio a number of squares, and enable him to transfer their contents to the corresponding squares of the copy, which may in this manner be reduced, or enlarged, when it is requiredl. But a copy may sometimes he more expeditiously made, by tracing immediately from the original, when the materials employed are sufſiciently transparent to admit the outlines to be seen through them; or, vhere the original is of no value, by pricking a number of points through it, so as to mark the copy, either at once, or by means of charcoal powder rubbed through the holes, which ĩs called stenciling: and for this purpose, an intermediate copy may be formed on semitransparent paper. Another method is to put a thin paper, rubbed with the powder of black lead, or of red chalk, between the original and the paper intended for the copy, and to pass a blunt point over all the lines to be traced, which produces correspondent lines on the paper; this is called calkingg Where the work is large, it may be covered with a thin gauze, and its outlines traced on the gauze with chalk, which is then to be placed on the blank surface, and the chalk shaken off it, in the way that a carpenter marks a board with his line. The pen was formerly much used for making rough sketches, and it ĩs still sometimes employed for the same purpose, as well as for assisting the effe: t of the penci. The appearances of uniform lights and shades must necessarily be imitated in dravings with the pen, as well as engravings, by a mixture of the whiteness of the paper, with the blackness or colour of the ink, the eye being too remote to distinguish minutely the separate lines, by which the effect is produced, although they do not entirely escape its ohservation. In this respect, drawings in pencils and chalks have an advantage over engrivings; these suhstances, after being laid on in lines, are spread, by means of rubbers, or stumps, of paper, leather, or linen, so as to produce a greater DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING. b5 uniformity of tint. Some, indeed, are of opinion, that engravings derive a great brilliancy from the hatches that are employed in shading them, and that minute inequalities oſ colour make every tint more pleasing In drawings with chalk, however, the advantage of rubbers is unquestionablee. The lines of a drawing may be made to have an appearance of greater freedom than those of an engraving; they should be parallel, and when they are crossed, moderately oblique to each other; their direction should be governed by that of the outline. Engravings in mezzotinto exhibit no lines: but they are deficient in spirit and precision: the effect of aqua tinta approaches much nearer to that of drawing, and it has a similar advantage in the mode of producing its lights and shades. (Plate VI. Fig. 79.) It is well known, that the best pencils are made of English black lead, or plumbago. OF black chalks, the Italian is harder and more generally useful than the French: red chalk has the disadvantage of not being easily removed, either by bread or by Indian rubber, without leaving a brownish mark. All these chalks are of the nature of a soft schistus or slate: they may be made to adhere firmly to the paper, by dipping the drawings in milk frced from cream, or even in water only, which dissolves the sizè or gum of the paper. Sometimes a grey paper is used, which serves for a middle tint, and lessens the labour, the lights and shades only being added. in white and black chalks. Crayons consist of colours mixed up with gum water, or other adhesive substances, and usually also with some chalk, plaster, or pipe clay, so as to be of a proper consistence for working in the manner of chalks. The principal inconvenience attending them ĩs their want of adhesion to the paper: the paper must therefore not be too smooth. For drawings washed in light and shade only, the materials employed are Indian ink, the black Iiquor of the cuttle fish, or bistre, which is extracted from s00t: hoth these last produce a browner and richer tint than the Indian ink. In using these washes, as well as ater colours, there is a great diversity in the methods of difierent artists: some vork with a dry pencil, others with a full one: some begin all their coloured drawings in black only, others use colours from the heginning. When a full pencil is used, care must be taken that no part of the sume tiot dry sooner or later than the rest. When budy eolours are employed, there is less diſſiculty in producing a uniſormity oſ tint than with water colours, each eoat of the colour being laid on in sufficient quantity to cover all that ĩs below it without mixing: hence it hecomes easier to make any alterations that may be requiredc For water colours of all descriptions, a certain quantity oſ gum is used, and sometimes a size made oſ isinglass, with a little sugarcandy. Body colours contain less gum than other ater eolourss. Besides paper, wood, silk, and cotton velvet, are sometimes used for dravings in water colours. In miniatures, the most delicate tints are laid on in points, with simple water colours; but ſor the draperies, body colours are sometimes used. They are commonly executed on ivory. For painting in distemper, the colours are mixed with a size made by boiling shreds oſ untanned leather, or of parchment, for several hours: this method is chieſly employed for eolouring walls or paper, but sometimes for painting on cloth. For delicate purposes, the size may be made with isinglass. When a vall or cieling is pauinted in fresco, the rough coat of the plaster is covered with a coat of fine sand and lime, as far as it can be painted before it is dry, the eolours being partly imbibed by this coat, and thus becoming durablee When they have heen once laid on, no alteration can be made, ithout taking oſf the last coat of plaster, and each part must be completed at once; it is therefore always necessary to have a ſinished drawing for a copy; this is usually executed on paper, and is called a cartoon. The colours can he only of earths or metallic oxids; they are prepared as for painting in distemper. The only paintings oſ the antients, which have been preserved, were executed in fresco. The art of painting in oĩl was ſirst discovered by Van Eyck of Bruges, towards the end of the I4th century: ĩit has now become almost the only manner in which paintings of magnitude are performed. The colours are mixed ith linseed or nut oil, and sometimes vith oil of poppy seed, together with | small portion of oĩl of turpentine, to assist in drying them; and vith the occasional addition of other oily and resinous substances. The work may be executed on wood, cloth, silk, paper, marble, or metals: these substances being first vashed with size, and then primed with an oil colour, whieh is usually white, but sometimes dark. Some puinters have, however, preferred a ground of distemper. The glare oſ the oĩl colours, or of the varnish, which is added in order to give them brilliancy, is considered as an inconvenience attending oil paintings; and some of the colours are too liuble to fade or to blacken by the effect of timee. The encaustic paintings of the ancients were imperfect approximations to the art of painting in oll. Wax or resins were employed for retaining the colours in their places; and they were applied by means of a moderate heat. An effect nearly similar is produced by dissolving the resins in spirits of wine, as is done in painting in varnish. A much greater degree of heat is required for paintings in enamel: for this purpose the colours are mixed vith a glass of easy fusion, and, when ſinely powdered, they are usually applied with oil of turpentine, or sometimes oil of lavender, 1o a ground of metal or porcelain; they are aftervards fixed and vitriſied by exposure to the heat of a furnace. Mosaic work is performed hy putting together small pieces of stone, or baked clay, of various colours, so as to imitate the effeets of painting: in tapestry, and in embroidery, the same is done by eaving, or working i in, threads oſ different hindsThe art of riting is of great antiquity, but it is probably in all countries, and certainly in some, of a later date than that of drawing representations of naturee. The Mexicans, at the ſirst arrival of the Spaniards in South America, are said to have employed drawings as a mode of conveying intelligence; some of them simply resembling the ohjects to which they reluted, others intended as hieroglyphics; that is, like the antient Egyptiun charieters, of a nature intermediate between draving and writing. The Chinese have alvays used arbitrary marks to represent whole words, or the numes of external oljects, not resembling the objects to which they relate, nor composed of letters appropriated to constituent parts of the sound, although they are said to he combined from a few hundred radical characters expressive oſ the most simple ideas. The art of writing vith alphabetical letters must have been suſliciently understood, in the age of Moses, to serve the purpose of the promulgation of laws and of religion: it is generally supposed to huve been invented VoOL. I. o by the Phenicianss. Among the Greeks it was in a very imperfeet state until the time of the siege of Troy, or about 3000 years ago. The Chinese write from above downvards, beginning on the right side; the other eastern nations have always written from right to left. The most ancient Greek inseriptions are turned alternately hackwards and forwards, the letters being reversed in the lines which hegin on the right side; but the Greeks soon conſined themselves to that mode, which has heen since adopted hy all European nutions, and which appears to be in itself the most natural, at least for writing with a pen, and with the right hand. The earliest methods of writing vere probubly such as rather deserve the name oſ engraving; the letters being eut in stune, in vood, on sheets of lead, on hurk, or on leaves. For temporary purposes, they vere formed on tablets oſ wax, vith a point called a stile, and this practice was long continued for epistolary correspondence, and was not vholly out of use in the fourteenth century. The stile was made of metul or of hone; its upper extremity was ſlattened, for the purpose of erasing what had heen writtenn. The Exyptian papyrus is said by Varro to have heen ſirst used for writing, at the time of the foundation of Alexandria; the leaves of palms, the inner burk oſ trees, or sometimes linen cloth, having been before employed. The exportation of the papyrus was forbidden hy Ptolemy, and in consequenee oſ this prohibition, skins of parchment, or of vellum, vere first applied to the purpose of writing at Pergamus, for the library of king Eumenes, whence they vere called membrana pergamena. To make the best paper, the widest and ſinest leaves of the papyrus were matted together, united by a vegetahle glue, and pressed till they became suſſiciently smooth; the coarser kinds were not used for writing, but for commereial purposes. In China, paper is sometimes made of a thin and almost transparent membrane taken from the bark of a tree Paper of cotton vas introduced into Europe from the east in the midile ages: it has been since superseded hy that which is made of linen rags, and which is also an eastern invention; hut for conrse and strong paper, old ropes oſ hemp are also used; and sometimes muny other vegetable substances have heen employed. The strength and consistence of paper is owing to the lateral adhesion derived ſrom the intermixture oſ the ſibres, assisted hy the glutinous size, which is also of use in obviating the bibulous quality oſ the paper, by ſilling up its pores. ? lvory, and prepared ass's skin, are sometimes employed for writing with a black lead pencil; for slates, a pencil of a softer kind of slate ĩs used. The uncient mathematicians usually constructed their diagrams on sand for the instruction of their pupils. Pens of goose quills, swan's quills, or erow quills, were known as early as the seventh century: in Europe they have generally superseded the reeds; which were employed for writing hy the ancients: hut in India, reeds, canes, and bamboos, are still in use. In China a hair pencil is used instead of a pen. The inks of the ancients are said to have heen made of a carhonaceous substance, and the modern Indian ink owes its hluckness to similar materials. Common writing ink consists of a gallate of iron, suspended by means of a little gum; the sulfurie acid, whieh remains mixed with it, ĩs probubly of no consequenee to its blacknesss. It has been observed, that an abundance of the gallie acid produces a much hlacker colour, than is obtained where this acid is used in a smaller proportion. Mr. Ribaucourt's method of making ink, is to hoil eight ounces of galls, and four of logwood, in twelve pounds of vater, until the quantity is reduced to one half; and, having strainer the decoction, to add to it four ounces of sulfate of iron, one of sulfate of copper, three of gum arabic; and one of sugar candy. But for ordinary purposes, ĩt is suſficient to infuse three ounces of galls fora day or two in a pint of vater, and to add to it an ounce o? gum arabic, half an ounce of green sulfate of iron, or copperas, and a drachm of sulfate of copper, or bluę vitriol, or even a much smaller quantity of gum and of eopperas, if a very fluid ink is requiredc The sulfate of copper produces a durable stain, but it does not immediately add to the blackness of the ink: iĩts principal use is to counteract the tendency of the ink to become mouldy. Sometimes a mereurial salt is employed for the same purpose, and a little cotton, if the inkstand: is too open, is also useful in preserving the ink; but the addition or spirits is oſten insuſficient, and is liable to make the lnk run. It has been proposed to use inks of different colours for indicating different numbers; so that by ten kinds of ink applied in diſferent ways, any numhers at pleasure might be expressed. Thus, in making an index of the words of an author, each page might be readily covered with linos of different colours drawn in different directions, so that each vord, when cut out, might indieate the page to which it belongs. An ingenious instrument has Iately been constructed, by means of which copies may be multiplied vith great facility; it is ealled the polygraph, and consists oſ two or more pens, so connected by frames and springs, us to move alvays in parallel directions, each having an inkstand and a sheet of paper for itself. In this manner ſive copies may be made at once vith tolerable facility, and themethod may perhaps hereaſter be extended to a much greater number. A mode of writing, perfectly difſerent from any of those which have been mentioned, ĩs performed hy means of the telegraph, which ĩs justly considered as the invention of the ingenious Dr. Hooke. The ancients had attempted something similar, by the exhibition of torches on elevated situations; but Dr. Hooke observes, that the addition of the telescope is absolutely necessary for the practical success of the process; and the directions which he gives for its. performance differ very little from the plan which has since been generally adopted, first in France, and afterwards, with some variations, in this country. Dr. Hooke proposed the employment of alphabetieal and other arbitrary characters; at present it is usual to have six hoards, each turning on its axis |0 as to appear or disappear at pleasure: these admit oſ sixty ſour combinations, which are sufficient, besides indicating the letters of the alphabet, for every other purpose that can be required. (Plate VI. Fig. 80, 81.) Pens for drawing lines and ſigures diſſer sometimes from those which are used for writing; thay are made oſ two plates oſ steel inelined to each other and adjusted by a serew; or sometimes oſ a plate oſ tin folded up, so as to include a receptacle for the ink; or of a glass tube drawn to a very ſine point, and still remaining perforatedc In all these pens, as well as in common pens, the ink is retained by its cohesion, and by the capillary attraction of the pen; and it attaches itself to the puper by the operation oſ similar powers. It is by no means easy to comply strictly with that postulate of geometry, vhich requires us to draw a straight line from one point to another. The edge of a ruler is made straight by the instrument ealled a plune, which is vorked with a eonsiderable velocity, and therefore naturally tends to move in a right line, besides that it is guided by the ſlatness of ĩts lower surfacee We judge of the straightness of a line, by means of the well known property of light, which moves only in right lines, so that i we look along the edge of a ruler, we easily discover its irregularities; and this may be done vith still greater accuracy, i§ we look through a small hole made with a pin in a card. Rulers of silver, brass, or ivory, have a material advantage over those of wood, as they are not liable to be spoilt by warying. A pen filled with ink cannot be applied close to the edge of a ruler without inconvenience; it is therefore best, for diagrams which require great accuracy, to drav the lines ſirst with a steel point, or a very hard black lead pencil, and to finish them with ink if necessury The paper should also be ſixed on a drawing board; and plates of lead or copper may he employed, instead of paper, for very delicate purposes. The carpenter's chalk line is a useful instrument for supplying the place of a very long ruler; it becomes straight when it is stretched, because a right line is the shortest distance between any two points. For drawing a cirele of a given radius, we use compasses, with one point generally of metal, the other of various deseriptionss Compasses are sometimes made vith a spring, instead of a joint, and opened or shut by a serew: sometimes a graduated are is ſixed in one leg, and passes through the other; and when great accuracy is required, hair compasses may be employed, having a joint with a spring in one of the legs, which is bent a little by means of a fine serew. Beam compasses are useful for draving cireles of larger radii: they have also the advantage of being steadier than the common compasses, and of admitting readily the application of a graduated scale, so as to indicate the measure of the radius of the cirele which is describedd Sometimes, for draving portions of very large cireles, two wheels, differing a little in diameter, are ſixed on a common axis, and thus made to revolve round a point, which is more or less distant, accordingly as the wheels are set at a greater or less distance on the axis, the surface of the wheels tracing the cireles on the paper; or two rulers joined together, so as to form an angle, are made to slide against two points, or edges, projeeting from a third ruler, so that the angular point remains always in the are of a cirele The same effect may be produced, somewhat more commodiously, by means of a thin piece of elastic wood, which is made to assume any required curvature, by the action of screws, appli- ed to difſerent parts of its concavity: it would, however, be more simple and accurate to employ only one screv, in the middle of the are, and to make the ſlexible ruler, or bow, every where of such a thickness, as to assume a circular form in its utmost state of flexure: it vould then retain the circular form, without a sensible error, in every other position. (Plate VI. Fig. 82.. 85.) For drawing a line perpendicular to another, we often employ a square; and if we use a rectangular drawing board, there is an additional convenience in making the square to slide on its margin. Ruleis also, of various descriptions, are commonly made rectangular, in order to answer occasionally the same purpose. Triangular compasses are sometimes used, for luying down a triangle equal to a given triangle; and by repeating the operation, any figure, which can be divided into triangles, may be copied without the intersection of ares: but the same end is more commonly obtained, by pricking off the ſigure with a steel point. (Plate VI. Fig. s6.) Various properties of parallel lines are employed in construeting parallel rulers: a parallelogram with jointed angles is the most commonly used; two equal rulers being united by equal cross hurs placed in an oblique position, and turning on pins ſixed in the rulers: the instrument is much improved by adding a third ruler, similarly united to the second, for then the obliquity of one of the two motions may he made to correct that of the other. A simple cylinder, or a round ruler, answers the purpose in a rough manner, and tvo small rollers, ſixed on the same axis, are also sometimes attached to a ſlat ruler, and cause it to move so as to be alvays in parallel positionss. A very useful instrument for drawing parallel lines, at any given distances, is now generally known by the name of Marquois's seales, although it is by no means of late invention; by sliding a triangle along a graduated ruler, we read off the divisions on an amplified scale with great aceuracy; but where the distances of the lines are great, the obliquity of this motion is a considerable inconvenience. The ruler or square of the drawing board affords us lines parallel to each other, in a eertain position; and if it be made with a joint, or as the vorkmen call it, bevilled, it may be employed for the same purpose, in all other directions. The systems of lines, on which music is written, are drawn at one stroke by a pen with five orifices, usually made of brass. It was long since proposed to rule a whole page at once, with a more complicated pen of the same kind, and the greatest part of the paper, on which music is written in this country, is actually ruled by such a machine, for which a patent has been taken out. (Plate VI. Fig. 87, 88.) The pantograph is used for copying figures, and at the same time reducing or enlarging them; it consists of four rulers, two of them united by a joint at the extremities, and receiving at the middle the other two, which are hut half as long, and are also united together, so as to form vith the others a jointed parallelogram, of which two of the sides are produced beyond the angles; if holes be made in these, and in one of the shorter rulers, s0 situated as to be in the same right line in any position of the instrument, they vill remain in a right line in any other position, and they will always divide this line in the same proportion: so that if one of the holes be placed on a fixed axis or pin, a tracing point inserted in another, and a pencil in the third, any ſigure delineated by the pencil will be similar to that which is described by the tracing point. And instead of holes in the rulers, they may be furnished with sliding sockets, to receive the axis, the point, and the pencil (Plate VI. Fig. 89.) j Proportional compasses are also of great use, in reducing lines and figures to a different scalee This instrument consists of two legs, pointed at each end, and turning on a centre, vhich slides in a groove common to both legs, and is furnished with an index. The divisions of the scale are so laid down, that the centre may divide the length of the legs from point to point in a given proportion; hence, by the properties of similar triangles, vhen the legs are opened to any extent, the intervals between each pair of points must be to each other in the same ratio as the portions of the legs. Sometimes a screw is udded, for the sake of adjusting the centre with greater accuracy; and it is usual to lay down scales for dividing the circumference of a cirele into a given number of parts, and for some other purposes; but the instrument might be much improved by inserting, in the common scale, fractional or decimal divisions, between the whole numbers, so that the legs might be di- vided, for example, in the ratio of 2 to 3, 3 to 4, or 4 to ĩ, or of I0 to 11, 12 or 13, at pleasure. (Plate VI. Fig. 90.) The use of the sector depends also on the properties of similar triungles. The scale of equal parts, which is luid down on each leg, heginning from the centre, serves to determine the length of the legs of two equilateral triangles, in any required proportion to each other, according to the division which we mark, and the transverse distances from the corresponding points are necessarily in the same proportion. Thus, if we have any line in a ſigure which ve wish to call three feet, or three inches, we may take the interval with a pair of common compasses, and open the sector to such an angle, that it ma: extend from the third division of one leg to that of the other; then all the other divisions of the scale will furnish us with the lengths corresponding to any distances that we may vish to lay down. The other scales usually engraved on the sector are principally intended for trigonometrical calculations on similar principless (Plate VII. Fig. 91.) . The magnitude of angles admits an easy determination and deseription, by the comparison of the respective ares with a circle, or with a right angle. We may divide an angle geometrically, by continual bisection, into parts as small as may be required, and by numbering these parts, we may deſine any angle, with an error smaller than any assignable quantity. Bisections of this Xind are sometimes actually employed in the construction of instruments; for instance, in one of the ares of the mural quadrant oſ the observatory at Greenwich, the right angle is divided into Y6 parts, by the continual bisection of one sixth of the circle There are also some practical methods of dividing angles into three or more equal parts, which are sufficiently accurate for many purposes, although it is well known that in theory the perfect trisection of an angle is beyond the reach of plain geometry. This trisection is necessary in the common division of the eirele into 360 degrees, a number which was probahly chosen because it admits a great variety of divisors, and hecause it nearly represents the diurnal and annual motion of the sun among the stars. The circle being divided into 6 parts, the chord of each of which is equal to the radius, these parts are divided into 60 degrees, each degree into 60 minutes, and each minute into 60 seconds: further than this we can- not easily carry the aceuracy of our determination, although, in caleulations, we sometimes descend as far as tenths or even hundredths of a second. The decimal division of a right angle, which has been lately adopted in France, appears to have very little advantage for the purposes, of ealculation, beyond the common method, and its execution in practice must be much more ditſicult. Whole circles, or theodolites, divided into degrees and their parts, quadrants and sextants, are usually employed in measuring angles; and protractors, semicircles, and lines of chords, in laying them of. The most convenient of quadrants for general use is Iadley's reſlecting instrument, which is in faet an octant or a sextant, but in which, for reasons depending on optical principles, ench degree of the are is reckoned for two. Tor the graduation of all instruments of this kind, of moderate dimensions, Mr. Ramsdens dividing engine is of great utility; the instrument being fixed on the revolving plate oſ the engine, its are is made to advance under the cutting tool by very minute steps, regulated hy the turns of a serev, of vhich each revolution is divided into a considerable number of equal partss. The largest and finest instruments are, however, still usually divided by hand, that is, by means of compasses. Some artists have ſirst divided a straight plate, and then made a hoop of it, which has served as a standard for further processes. An are of 7° 10, of which the chord is one eighth of the radius, may be employed as a test oſ the accuracy of the work. A micrometer screw is oſten used in large instruments as a substitute for the minutest divisions; a moveable part of the index being brought to eoincide with the nearest point marked in the are, hy turning the serew through a part of its revolution, which is measured by means of a graduated circle But a simpler method of reading oſf divisions with accuracy in common instruments, is the application of a vernier, an apparatus so called from its inventor. The space occupied by eleven divisions of the scale being divided into ten parts on the index, the coincidence of any of the divisions of the index vith those of the scale, shows, by its distance from the end, the number oſ tenths that are to be added to that of the intire divisions. (Plate VII. Fig. 92.) There are several ways of measuring the angular elevation of an object vOoL. I. æ above the horizon; at sea, the apparent horizon, ſormed by the suiſace of the water, aſſords the most convenient determination; but since the spectator is somevhat elevated above the convex surface of the sea, the apparent horizon is necessarily lower than the true horizon, and a correction ĩs thereſore required aceording to the height. In the open sea this correction may he determined by measuring the vhole angle above and below the apparent horizon, and taking one fourth of the difſerence for the dip or depression. On shore, a plumb line is the simplest instrument for determining the situation of the horizon, and its accidental vibrations may be prevented by suspending the weight in water or in oil. For small instruments, a spirit level, of which the operation depends on hydrostatical principles, is capuble of greater delicacy than a plumb line. It readily indicates, when well made, an error of a single second, but it requires some attention to avoid inequalities of temperature, which would tend to disturb its figuree Well rectified ether is found, on account of its perſeet ſluidity, to be the best liquid for a spirit leve. An artiſicial horizon is a reſlecting surface, employed for obtaining an image, as much below the horizon, as the ohject is above it, and for measuring the angular distance of this image from the object: sometimes a plane speculum of glass or metal is used for this purpose, being previously adjusted by a spirit level; and sometimes the surſace of merceury, treacle, or tar, protected from the wind hy a vessel with holes in it, or by a glass cover, either detached, or simply ſloating on the mercury, when this liquid is employed. It is in many cases simpler and more convenient to estimate angles, not by the ares subtending them, but by their sines, or the perpendiculars ſalling from one leg on the other. Thus, it is usual among miners, to say that the ground rises or falls one foot, or one yard, in ten, when the sine of the angle oſ its inclination to the horizon is one tenth of the radius. Angles of different magnitudes are indeed proportional to the ares, and not to the sines, so that in this sense the sine is not a true measure of the comparative magnitude of the angle; but in making calculations, we are more frequently obliged to employ the sine or cosine oſ an angle than the angle or arc ĩtself. It is, however, easy to pass from one of these elements to the others by means either of trigonometrical tables, or of the scales engraved on the sector. The sines, tangents, and secants laid down on the sector, may be employed according to the properties of similar triangles, in the computation of proportionss. The same purpose is answered by Gunter's scale, by the sliding rule, aund by the logarithmic cireles of Clairaut and of Nicholson, which are employed mechanically in the same manner as a table of logarithms is used arithmetically, the proportion of any two numbers to each other being determined by the distance of the corresponding divisions on the scale; so that if we wish to double or to halve a number, ve have only to find the distance from ] to 2, and to lay it off from the given number either vay. (Plate VII. Fig. 9s, 94.) The measurement of angles is at once applied to the estimation of distances in the dendrometer or engymeter; a part of the instrument forms a hase of Eknown dimensions, and the angle at each extremity oſ this base being measured with great accuracy, the distance oſ the object may be inferred from an easy calculation, or from a tablee The most complete instruments of thia Eind have two speculums for measuring the difference of the angles at once, in the manner of Hadley's quadrant. Telescopie scales or micrometers are also sonietimes useũ for measuring angles subtended hy distant objects, of vhich the magnitude is known or may be estimated, for example, by the height of a rank of soldiers, and inferring at once the distance at which they stand. Arithmetical and even algebraical machines, of a much more complicated nature, have been invented and construeted vith great labour and ingenuity; but they are mather to be considered as mathematical toys, than as instruments capable of any useful application An angle, when once measured, can be verbally and numerically deseribed, by reference to the whole cirele as a unit: hut for the identiſication of the measure oſ a right line, we have no natural unit of this kind, and it is therefore necessary to establish some arbitrary standard with which any given lengths and surſaces may be compared. It might be of advantage in the comniunication betveen diſſerent countries to ſix one single standard to he employed throughout the world, but this dues not appemr to he practically possible, even if it were determined vhat the standard ought to bee. The ohservation of the isochronism of the small vibrations of a pendulum, and the case and certainty with which the length of a pendulum vibrating seconds may be aseertained, have suggested, savs Mr. Laplace, in his account of the system oſ the world, t the idea of employing this length as a universal measure. We cannòt reſlect on the prodigious number of meusures in use, not only among diſterent nations, but even in the same country, their capricious and inconvenient divisions, the diſiculty of determining and comparing them, the emharrassment and the frauds which they occasion in commerce, without regarding, as one oſ the greatest beneſits, that the improvements of the sciences and the ordinances oſ civil governments can render to humanity, the adoption of a system of measures, of which the divisions, being uniform, may be easily employed in caleulations, and which may be derived, in a mammer the least arbitrary, ſrom a fundamental magnitude indicated by nature itsel?. A nation that would introduce such a system of measures, would unite to the advantage oſ reaping the ſirst fruits of the improvenient. the pleasure of seeing its example followed by other countries, of which iĩt would thus become the henefactor: for the slow but irresistible empire of reasor must at length prevail over national jealousies, and over all other obstacles that are opposed to a measure, of which the convenience is universally felt. Such vere the motives that determined the constituent assembly to intrust the Academy of Sciences with this important charge The new system of weights and measures is the result of the labours of the Committee, seconded by the zeal and information of several members of the national representaI i  The identity of the calculation of decial fractions and of vhole numbers, leaves no doubt with respect to the advantage of the division of measures of all kinds into decimal parts: ĩt ĩs suſficient, in order to be convinced of this, to compare the diſſficulty of compound multipliention and division, vith the ſacility of the same operations where whole numbers only are concerned, a facility that becomes still greater hy means of logarithins, of which the use may also be rendered extremely popular hy simple and cheap instruments. The decimal division was therefore adopted without hesitation; and in order to preserve the uniformity of the whole system, it vas resolved to deduce every thing from the same linear measure, and ĩts decimal divisions. The question vas then reduccd to the choice oſ this universal measure, to which the name of metre vas to be given. s The length oſ the pendulum, and that of a meridian of the earth, are the two principal standards that nature aords us, ſor ſixing the unit of lincar measures. Both of these being independent of moral revolutions, they cannot experience a sensible alteration without very great ehanges in the physical constitution of the earth. The ſirst method, which ĩs of easy execution, hus the inconvenience of making the measure of length depend on tvo elements, heterogeneous vith respect to itself and to each other, gravitation, and time; besides that the division of time into small portions is wholly arbitrary. It was resolved, therefore, to employ the second method, vhich,” says Mr. Laplace, appears to be of very high antiquity; iĩt is so natural to man to refer measures of distance to the dimensions of the globe which he inhabits, in order that, in transporting himself from place to place, he may know, by the denomination of the space passed through alone, the relation of this space to the entire circumſerence of the earth. This method has also the advantage of making nautical measures correspond at once vith celestial ones. The navigator has often occnsion to compare with each other the distance that he has passed over, and the are of the heavens corresponding to that distance; it is therefore of consequence that these measures should be readily obtained from each other, by altering only the place of the units. But, for this purpose, the fundamental unit of linear measures must be an aliquot part of the terrestrial meridian, which must correspond to one of the divisiuns of the circumference of a circlee. Thus the choice of the metrè vas reduced to that of the unit of angular measure, and the right angle, as constituting the limit of the inelination of two lines to each other, was considered as entitled to the preference. : The are, which was measured in 1740, from Dunkirk to the Pyrenees, might have served for finding the magnitude of the quadrant of the meridian; but a new and more accurate measurement of a larger arc was more likely to excite an interest in favour of the new measures. Delambre and Mèchain were therefore intrusted with the direction of the operations for measuring an are from Dunkirk to Barcelona, and after making a proper correetion for the ellipticity of the earth, according to the measuremont oſ the are in Peru; the quadrant was determined to he equal to 5130740 of the iron toise used at the equator, its temperature being GI° of Fahrenheit: the ten millionth part of this quadrant was taken for the unit or metree A standard was deposited iu the custody of the legislative body, adjusted at the temperature of melting ice. In order to be able always to identiſy this length, without recurring to an actual measurement of the are, it was of importance to compare it very accurately vith that of the pendulum vibrating seconds, and this has been done with great care by Borda, at the observatory of Paris. The unit of measures of land is the are, or 100 square metres: a cubic metre of wood is called au stere, and a cubic decimetre, or a cube of vhich the side is one tenth of a metre, is a litre, or measure of ſluids.  Uniformity appeared to require that the day should be divided into ten hours, the hour into a hundred minutes, and the minute into a hundred seconds. This division, useful as it will be to astronomers, ĩs of less udvan tage in civil life, where arithmetical operations are seldom performed on the parts of time; and the diſiculty of adapting it to clocks and watches, together with our commereial relations with foreign countries, have suspended its introduction for the present. We may, however, expect that it will ultinately be brought into general use. Such is Mr. Laplace's account of the new system of measures, the result of the joint labours of many of the ablest mathematicians on the continent. There is not at present any great probability that it will ever be employed in this country. It is of little consequence from what the original unit has been derived, unless ve can with ease and accuracy recur to its origin: and whether a standard has heen ſirst adjusted according to the cireumſerence of the globe, or to the foot of an individual hero, the facility of comparing other measures with it is the same. It is confessed that the pendulum affords the readiest method of recovering the standurd when lost; and if it was necessary ſor the Committee of the Freneh Academy to determine a unit absolutely new, it would perhaps have been more eligible to ſix on one which was independent of any ulterior comparison, than to seck ſor an ideal perfection in attempting to copy from a more magniſicent original: to s1y nothing of the uncertuinty with regard to the ellipticity of the earth, and the probuble irregulrity of its form in various respects. On the other hand, it must be allowed, that the correct determination of the length of the pendulum has sometimes been fond more difficult than Mr. Laplace's statement would lead us to suppose it, and ve cannot depend on any measurement of it as totally exempt son an error of the ten thousandth part of the whole. The metre, as deſinitively established by the government of France, is equal to 597 English inches, measured, as it has been usual in this country, on a standord scale of brass, at the temperature of 6ẽC of Fahrenheit; while the French, on the contrary, reduce the length of their measures to that which they would acquire at the ſreezing point. Hence ten thousand inches are nearly 254 metres, a thousand feet 305 metres. The length of the pendulum vibrating seconds in London, vas found hy George Graham, from a mean of several experiments, all agreeing very nearly together, to be 595 inches. This is also nearly a mean between the length which may be deduced, with proper corrections, from Borda's experiments at Paris, and Mr. Whitehurst's experiments made in London, with the apparatus invented by Mr. Hatton, where the length ascertained is the difference between the lengths of two pendulums vibrating in different times. Mr. Whitehurst's measures, however, require some corrections, vhich Mr. Nicholson has pointed out. The fall of a heavy body in the first second appears, from this determination of the length of the pendulum to be sixteen feet one inch and a tenth. OF the old French — 15 inches made nearly 16 Engſish and 76, very exactly, 81; the toise was 76 u inches. In Germany the Rhinland ſoot is generally used; I00 of these feet make 103 English. A vine gallon contains 231 cubic inches; an ale gallon ĩs the content of 10 yurds of a eylindrical inch pipe. A variety of instruments are used ſor the immediate compurison of the standard measure, or its parts, with other lengths or distances. Such are scales, simple and diagonal, verniers, micrometer screws, beam compasses, rods, lines, chains, and measuring wheelss The greatest accuracy has generally been supposed to be obtũined, in large distances, by means of rods, made of glass or of platina, in order to be less susceptible of such changes as are produced by variations of temperature; General Roy, however, found that a steel chain vas as little liable to error, as any mode that he could em- ploy; and those who have continued the extensive survey which he began, even prefer it to every other. For the comparison of standards, and for determining small distances with great precision, heam compasses, or scales vith sliding indices, furnished with microscopes and cross wires, have been constructed by the artists of this country: in France, a lever has sometimes been introduced, its longer arm having an ample runge of motion, corresponding to a very minute difſerence in the length of the substance which acts on the shorter arm. But for common purposes the diagonal scale is suſſiciently accurate, and may be applied without the error of the thousandth of an inch: in eases where a very delicate vernier, or a micrometer screv ĩs applied, a magniſier is usually requiredd Mr. Coventry has, however, succecded in making simple scales, which are accurate enough to measure the ten thousandth of an inch. Ie draws parallel lines on glass, at this distance, which are in some parts suſſiciently regular, although they can only he seen by the help of a powerful microscope: but those which are at the distance of the ſive thousandth of an inch are much more correct and distinct. For dividing rectilinear scales oſ all kinds, Mr. Ramsden constructed a machine which acts by the turns of a screw: others have employed an apparatus resembling Marquois's parallel rulers. (Plate VII. Fig. 95.. 97.) The motion of a ship at sea is measured by a log line, or a rope divided by knots into equal parts, and attached to a log, which is retained nearly at rest by the resistance of the water. Attempts have also been made to cause a little waterwheel to turn by the motion of the shiꝑ, and to measure hoth the rate and the distance run; and an instrument has been invented for doing the same upon hydraulical principles; raising the water of a gage to different heights, by means of the pressure occasioned by the relative motion of the ship and the water, and discharging at the same time a small stream into a Ieservoir, with a velocity proportional to that of the ship. LECTURE XI. ON MODELLING, PERSPECTIVE, ENGRAVING, AND PRINTING. WE have examined the principal instruments and materials employed for drawing and for measuring; we are now to consider, first, the methods of copying solids, and of projecting their images on a plane surface; and secondly, the arts of perpetuating the works of the pen and of the pencil by engraving and printing. When it is required to make a copy of a solid of an irregular form, as, for example, of a statue, we must determine the situation of a sufficient number of points to guide us in our work with accuracy, by means of an instrument capable of being fixed in any required situation, so that the extremity of a sliding bar, or pin, may he in contact with each point in the original, and then removed to a similar part of another frame, on which the copy is placed, a perforation being made, by degrees, in the hlock, so as to suffer the pin to arrive at ĩts proper place, at which it stops. (Plate VII. Fig. 98.) The model of a statue is generally ſirst made of clay, and a cast of this taken immediately in plaster of Paris, since the clay would crack and change its form in drying. This mode of copying, by means of plaster, is exceedingly useful in various departments of the mechanical arts: the original is vell oiled and placed in a proper vessel; a mixture of prepared plaster and water, of the consistence of cream, is then poured on it; this in a short time hardens, and is divided into several parts, in such a manner as not to injure the original ſigure in its removal. These pieces, being again united, form a mould for the ultimate cast. Sometimes a small figure is ſirst modelled in a mixture of vax, turpentine, and oil; and a mould being formed on this, voL. I. o the ultimate cast is made either of plaster, or of a composition of wax with vhite lead and a little oll, which serves as an imitation oſf marble. We have, however, much less ſrequent occasion to make an cxact copy of a solid of any kind, than to represent its appearance by means of perspective delineation. Supposing ourselves provided with proper materials for draving, we may easily imitate, with the assistance of a correct eye, and a hand vell exereised, the ſigures and relative positions of objects actually before us, by delineating them in the same ſorm as they would appear to be projected on a transparent surface placed hefore the eye.. Considering the simplicity of this process, it is almost surprising that the doctrine of perspective should have been supposed to require a very serious study, and that material errors should have been committed with respeet to it, by men whose general merits in other departments of painting is by no means contemptible But it must be confessed, that when, instead of imitating objects immediately before us, the pencil is employed in embodying imaginary forms, calculated either for heauty or for utility, a great degree of care and attention may be necessary, in order to produce a true representation of objects, which are either absent, or have no existence: and here memory and fancy only will scarcely ever be suſſicient, without a recurrence to mathematical principles. To architects therefore, and to mechanics in general, a knowledge of perspective is almost indispensable, whenever they wish to convey, by a drawing, an accurate idea of their projected works. If any assistance be required ſor the delineation of an ohject actually before us, it may easily be obtained in a mechanical manner, by means of a frame with cross threads or wires, interposed hetween the eye and the ohjeet. The eye is applied to an aperture, which must be fixed, in order to preserve the proportions of the picture; and which must be small, in order that the threads and the more distant objects may be viewed at the same time, with suſficient distinctness. The paper being furnished with corresponding lines, we may observe in what division of the frame any conspicuous point of the objeet appears, and may then represent its image by a point similarly situated among the lines drawn on our paper; and having obtained, in this manner, a suſſicient number of points, we may complete the ſigures by the addition of proper outlines. Sometimes, for the delineation of large ohjects requiring close inspection, it has been found useſul to employ two similar frames, the one a little smaller than the other, and placed at a certain distance from it, so that every part oſ the object, when seen through the corresponding divisions of both frames, appears in the same manner as iſ the eye were situated at a very remote point. It vas in this manner that the elegant anatomical figures of Albinus were executed. (Plate VII. Fig. 99.) But if it be required to lay down, in the plane of a pieture, the projection of an object, of which the actual dimensions and situation are given, ve may obtain the requisite measures from the properties oſ similar triangles, and the consideration of the rectilincar motion of light. We may consider our picture as a reduced copy of a projection formed on an imaginary plane, which, as vell as the picture, is generally supposed to he in a vertical situation, and which stands on the horizontal plane, at the point where the objects to be represented begin. In order to find the position of the image of a given right line, we must determine the point in which a line parallel to it, passing through the place of the eye, cuts the plane of the picture; this is called the vanishing point of the given line, and of all other lines parallel to it, since the image of any such line, continued without limit, will be a right line directed to this point, but never passing it. When the lines to he represented are parallel to the picture, the distance oſ their vanishing point becomes inſinite, and their images are also parallel to the lines and to each other. The centre of the picture, or that point which is nearest to the eye, is the vanishing point of all lines perpendicular to the picture; through this point it is usual to drav a horizontal and a vertical line: we may then lay oſf downvards on the vertical line the distance of the eye from the picture, in order to find the point of distance, which serves to determine the position of any oblique lines on a horizontal plane: for i? we draw a ground plan of any objecet, considering the picture as a horizontal surſace, we muy ſind the vanishing point of each of its lines, by drawing a line parallel to it through the point of distance, until it meets the horizontal vanishing line. (Plate VII. Fig. 100, Iol.) In order to ſind the position of the image oſ a given point of a line, we must divide the whole image in such a manner, that ĩts parts may be to cach other, in the same proportion as the distance of the given point, and of the eye, from the plane of projection. This may be readily done, when a ground plan has been first made, by drawing a line from any point in the plan, to the point of distance, which vill cut the whole image of the line in the point required. (Plate VII. Fig. 1029.) When it is required to determine a point in a line parallel to the picture, we may suppose a line to be drawn through it perpendicular to the picture, and, by finding the image of this line, we may intersect the former image in the point required. It is thus that the height oſ any number of columns, or figures, at different distances, may be readily determined. (Plate VIII. Fig. 103.) The projection of curvilinear figures is most conveniently effected, by drawing across them parallel lines, which form small squares or rectangles, throwing these divisions into perspective, and tracing a curve through the corresponding points. There are also methods of determining mathematically, or of draving mechanically the ellipsis, vhich results from the projection of a cirele, in a given position, but they are considerably intricate, and a steady hand is seldom in want of them. (Plate VIII. Fig. 104.) This system of perspective must necessarily be employed when we wish to represent objects, which appear to us under angles of considerable magnitude, and to give them as much as possible the appearance of an imitation of nature. But for almost all purposes of science, and of mechanical practice, the most convenient representation ĩs the orthographical projection, where the distance of the eye, from the plane, is supposed to be increased without limit, and the rays of light passing to the eye to be parallel to each other. In order to represent any object in this manner, we must assume one line for the direction of the centre of the picture, to which the images of all lines perpendicular to the plane oſ projection must be parallel, and another ſor that of the point of distance, by means of which we may measure the first lines, as if that point ere actually within reach; and in this manner we may determine the place of any number of points of the object to be delineated. (Plate VIII. Fig. 105.) IF we wish to apply the mechanical method of drawing by the assistance of a frame to this mode of representation, instead of a fixed aperture for a sight, or a second frame of smaller dimensions, ve must employ a second frame of the same magnitude vith the ſirst, in the manner which has already been describedc Professor Camper has censured Albinus for not adopting this method in his figures: but subjects so large as those which he has represented would have had less of the appearance of nature, if they had been projected orthographically, nor vould such projections have been material ly more instructive. It frequently happens, that in geographical and astronomical drawings, ve have occasion to represent, on a plane, the whole, or a part of a spherical surſace. Here, if we employ the orthographical projection, the distortion will be such, that the parts near the apparent circumference will be so much contracted, as to render it impossible to exhibit them with distinctness. It is, therefore, more convenient, in this case, to employ the stereographical projection, where the eye is supposed to be at a moderate distance from the object. The place of the eye may he assumed either within or without the sphere, at pleasure, and according to the magnitude of the portion which we wish to represent, the point, from which the sphere may be viewed with the least distortion, may be determined by calculation. But in these cases all circles obliquely situated on the sphere must be represented by ellipses: there is, however, one point in which the eye may be placed, which has the peculiar and important advantage, that the image of every circle, greater or lesser, still remains a cirelee This point is in the surface itself, at the extremity of the diameter perpendicular to the plane of projection; and this is the point usæally employed in the stereogra phical projection of the sphere, which serves for the geometrical construction of problems in spherical trigonometry. The projection of the whole surface of the sphere would occupy an infinite space, but vithin the limits of the hemisphere, the utmost distortion of the linear measure is only in the proportion of 2 to I, each degree at the circumference of the figure occupying a space twice as great as at the centre. The angles, which the circles form in crossing each other, are also correctly represented. (Plte VIII. Fig. 106.) For projeeting figures on curved or irregular surfaces, the readiest method is to trace cross lines on them, with the assistance of such a frame as has been described for draving in perspective, representing the appearance of uniform squares or rectangles, and to delineate in each of these the corresponding parts of the object, or of the drawing which serves as a copy. The arts of writing and drawing, in all their varieties, are extended in their performance, and perpetuated in their duration, by means of engraving and printing. If there is any one circumstance to which we can peculiarly attribute the more rapid progress of general civilisation in modern than in ancient times, it is the facility of multiplying copies of literary productions of all Kinds, by the assistance of these artss. The distinguishing character of printing consists in the employment of moveable types: the art oſ engraving is more simple, and in some of its forms, more ancient. The Romans vere in the habit of using seals and stamps, for marking letters and words on wax and on pottery; it vas usual in the middle ages to employ perforated plates of metal as patterns for guiding a brush, by means of which the capital letters vere inserted in some manuseripts, and the Chinese are said to have been long in possession of the art of printing books from wooden blocks. It was in this form that printing vas ſirst introduced into Europe, in the beginning of the fifteenth century. There seems to have been formerly a method of engraving on vood vith greater ease and accuracy than is now practised; the hatches may be observed in old wooden cuts to cross each other more frequently, and vith greater freedom, than in modern works, although some have conjectured, vith considerable appearance of probability, that these olil engravings vere in reality etched in relief on metal. The art of engraving on wood is, however, at present in a high degree of perfection in this country, and blocks are still frequently used for mathematical diigrams and other simple ſigures; for although they are somewhat more expensive than copper plates, they wear much longer, aid they have the advantage of being printed ofſ at the same time vith the letter press, and of heing included in the same page with the text to which they belong, since the ink is applied to the projeeting parts only, both of these cuts and of the common printing types. The method of engraving on plates of pewter or of eopper, and of taking impressions, by means of the portion of ink retained in the furrows cut by the graver, was also introduced in the ſifteenth century. For dry engravin g, drawing, if it is not executed in black lead, is generally prepared by passing a pencil over its principal features, and the outline is transferred to the plate, which has a thin coat of white wax laid on it, by placing the draving on it, and rubbing it with a burnisher; sometimes a drawing in Indian ink, especially it freed from a part of its gum, may be transſerred in this manner ithout the application of a penci. When written characters are to be engraved, the plate is laid on a cushion, so as to be readily turned under the graver, which is a great convenience in forming curved lines. In laying on equable shades of considerable extent, much labour is saved by the use of a ruling machine, which enables us to drav lines, at any required distance, very accurately parallel, and either straight, or following each other's gentle undulations, in oſder to avoid the appearance of stifſness. This machine, like the dividing engine, is sometimes adjusted by the revolutions of a serew, and sometimes by the oblique motion of a triangular slider. Besides the cutting graver, which is of a prismatic form, terminated by an oblique surface, other instruments are occasionally employed; the dry needle makes a very fine line, and leaves the metal that it has displaced, to be rubbed off hy another tool. Sometimes a number of detached excavations are formed by a pointed instrument, and the projections are aſterwards removed; this is called stippling. A burnisher and some charcoal are required for erasing the strokes of the graver, when it is necessary, and for polishing the surface. It is seldom, however, that a plate is begun and completed by diry engraving only. For engraving in mezzotinto, the plate is roughened, by scraping it in every direction with a tool made for the purpose, so that an impression from it, in this state, would be wholly dark; the lights are then inserted, by removing the inequalities of the surface, in particular parts, by means of a smooth seraper, and a burnisher. As the plate wears in printing, some of these parts are liable to have the grain a little raised again, so that the lights are less clear in the later impressions than in the proofs. It is well known, that in common engravings the prooſs are usually the darkest throughout. The most expeditious and most generally useful mode of vorking on copper, is the process of etehing. The plate, being covered with a proper var- nish, is usually blackened with smoke, and the drawing is placed on it, with the interposition of a paper rubbed over with red chalk, which, when the drawing is traced with a wooden point, adheres to the varnish, in the form of the outline: or iſ it is required that the ultimate impression be turned the same vay as the drawing, an intermediate outline must be procured in the same manner on a separate paper, and then transferred to the plat:. All the outlines thus marked are traced with needles, which make as many furrows in the varmish, and leave the copper bare: the shades are inserted with the assistance oſf the ruling machine, vherever parallel lines can be employed. The plate thus prepared, and furnished with an elevated border of a proper consistence, ĩs suhjected to the action of the diluted nitric acid, until all the parts are suſſiciently corroded, care being taken in the mean time to sweep off the air bubbles as they collect, and to stop out, or cover with a new varnish, the lighter parts, which are soonest completedl. When the varnish is removed, the ſinishing touches are added with the graver: and if the plate requires further corrosion, the varnish may sometimes be replaced, without filling up the lines, by applying it on a ball or cushion, taking care to avoid any oblique motion. It is said that the acid sometimes operates so as to undermine the metal on each side, and to render the furrows wider as they become deeper, and that for this reason in etchings, as well as in mezzotintos, the later impressions are sometimes darker than the proofs; but this is by no means universally true. It is well known to chemists, that glass may he corroded in a similar manner by means of the fluoric acid. An etching may also be expeditiously executed by using a varnish mixed with mutton fat, and drawing upon a paper laid on the plate; the varnish then adheres to the back of the paper, under the lines which are drawn, and is immediately removed when the paper is taken off, without the use of needles. Sometimes the outlines only are etched, and the plate is ſinished in mezzotinto. In the mode of engraving called aqua tinta, the outline having been ſirst etched, the shades are also produced by corrosion, the parts being prepared by various methods, so as to be partially protected from the action of the acid. Someſimes a little resin, very ſinely powdered, is siſted on the plate, vhich is then suficiently varmed to make the particles adhere to it; some- times it is varnished with a spirituous solution of resin, which cracks throughout in drying; and if a strong line be any where required, it may be traced with a mixture of whiting with some adhesive substance, before the varnish is laid on; this will cause it to break up at that part; or the varnish may be partially removed, by rubbing it with spirits, or with an essential oll. The lighter parts may be covered, during the corrosion, with a second varnish, which defends them from the acid. This mode of engraving succeeds very ell in imitating the effect of dravings, but the plates are soon worn out. In order to judge of the state of the vork, an impression of any part of the plate may be taken off, by pouring on it a little plaster of Pusis mixed vith water. Musical characters are usually stamped with punches; in this country, on plates of pewter, but in France generally on copper Mr. Rochon has invented a machine for stamping letters on copper, instead of printing, but : tho method does not appear to have been practically employed. In whatever way the plate may have been engraved, when an impression is to be taken from it, it is covered with printing ink of the ſinest kind, hy means of stuffed balls, and then wiped, chieſly with the hand, so that the ink is wholly removed from the polished surface; it is then placed, with the moistened paper, on a hoard, between ſlannels, and strongly pressed in passing between two wooden rollers. By frequent use the plate loses its sharpness, and sometimes requires to be retouched; hence arises the greater value of first impressions; but hy proper precautions in cleaning the plate, ĩts delicacy may be preserved for a long time. An impression, while it is moist, may be reversed, by pussing it through the press with another paper. And hy writing with a peculiar ink, even common letters may be thus copied on thin paper, and the impression will he legible on the opposite sidee Mr. Montbret proposes to put some sugar candy into the ink, and to take a copy on unsized paper by means of a hot iron. Asimple and elegant method of multiplying drawings has been lately introduced by Mr. André. The drawings are made with an unctuous composition, in the form of a crayon or of an ink, on a soſt stone of a calcarious vOL. I. Rr nature, somewhat like a stone marlee When the drawing is ſinished, the stone is moistened, and imbibes so much water, that the printing ink will not adhere to ĩt, except at the parts where the crayon or the ink has been applied; and in this manner an impression is procured, which has much of the freedom and spirit of an uriginal dravingg. When the ink is used, a little acid is afterwards applied to the stone, in order to corrode its intermediate parts; and the bold stile of the impression much resembles that of the old wouden cuts. The art of printing with separate types vas invented soon after the introduetion of wooden blocks into Europe. The improvement was great and important. The year 1443, or l444, is considered as the date of the oldest printed book; but the precise time and place of the invention remain somewhat doubtful: the art, however, advanced towards perfection by very rapid steps. The letters are ſirst cut, in a reversed form, on steel punches; with these a matrix of copper ĩs stamped, and the matrix forms the lower part of the mould in which the types are cast; the metal is a composition of lead and antimony, vhich is easily fusible Thus the printed sheet is the fourth form of the letter, reckoning from the original engraving on the punch: in the stereotype printing, lately invented, or rather improved and revived, it is the sixth. In this method, when a form for the side of a sheet has been composed, made up, corrected, and locked up by wedges in the chase or iron frame, which conſines it, a mould of the whole is formed in ſine plaster, and as many repetitions oſ it may he cast very thin, in type metual, as will serve to print for the use of a century, without the expense of keeping a large quantity of types made up, or of providing paper for a numerous impression at once. The modes of arranging the types in boxes or cases, of composing the separate lines on the stick, and making them up by degrees into pages and ſorms, oſ correcting the press, of applying the ink, and taking oſſ the impression, are entirely calculated for the simplicity and convenience of the manual operations concerned, and require little or no detailed explanation. LECTURE XII. ON STATICS. THE examination of the magnitude of the various forces, employed in practical mechanics, constitutes the doctrine of statics. The term statios, in a strict sense, implies the determination of weights only; but it may without impropriety be extended to the estimation of forces of all kinds, especially active forces, that can be compared with weights, in the same manner as the term hydrostaties comprehends every thing that relates to the equilibrium of fluidsss. The measurement of the passive strength of the materials employed, the changes produced in them by the forces which they resist, and the laws of the negative force of frietion, are also subjects immediately introduetory to the particular constructions and uses of machinery, and nearly connected vith the department of statics. The art of weighing is peculiarly important, as it furnishes us with the only practical mode of determining the quantity of matter in a given body. We might indeed cause two hodies to meet each other with known velocities, and from the eſſects of their collision, ve might determine their comparative momenta, and the proportion of their masses; but it is ohvious that this process would he exceedingly troublesome, and incapable of great accuracy; we therefore recur to the vell known law of gravitation, that the weight of every body is proportional to the quantity of matter that it contains, and we judge of its mass from its weight. If all bodies were of equal density, we might determine their masses from their external dimensions; but we seldom find even a single body which is of uniform density throughout; and even if we had such a hody, it would in general be much easier to weigh it correctly than to measure it. The weight of a body is commonly ascertained, by comparing it immediately with other weights of known dimensions: but sometimes the ſlexure of a spring is employed for the comparison. Standard weights have generally heen deduced from a certain measure of a known substance, and in particular of vater. According to the most aceurate experiments, when the barometer is at 30 inches, and Fahrenheit's thermometer at 62F, 12 wine gallons of distilled water veigh exactly 100 pounds avoirdupois, each containing 7000 grains troy; and a cubie inch weighs 2595 grains. A hogshead of vater, wine measure, weighs, therefore, 525 pounds, and a tun 2100 pounds, which is nearly equal to a ton weight. Mr. Barlow supposes that the tun measure oſ vuter contained originally 2 cubic feet, and weigheid 2000 pounds, which was also ealled a ton veight, the gallon heing somewhat smaller than it is at present, und the cubie foot weighing exactly 1000 ounces, or G2à pounds. A quarter of wheat weighed about a quarter of a ton, and a bushel as much as u enbie ſoot of water. A chaldron of coals was also considered as equivalent to a ton, although it now veighs nearly half as mueh more. But at the menn temperature oſ this elimate, or 52°, a cubic foot of distilled water wrighs only 998 ounces. The avoirdupois ounce appears to agree very nearly vith the ancient Roman ounce. OF the old French weight, 100 pounds made 108 English pounds avoirdupois. The gramme oſ the new veights is a cubie centimetre of pure vater at ĩts greatest density, that is, about the temperature of 59° oſ Fahrenheĩt; ĩt ĩs equal to 152 English grains: hence the ehiliogramme is 2 pounds, and five myriogrammes are nearly a hundred weight. Tive grammes oſ silver, ineluding one tenth oſ alloy, make a frane, which is one eighticth better than the old ſrane or livre, and is intrinsically vorth nearly ninepence three ſarthings English. ' The instruments usually employed for the comparison of weights are either bulances, orsteelyards. In the common halance, the weights oſ the substances compured are equal; in a compound veighing machine, ve use veights uhich are smaller, in a certain proportion, than those which they represent: in the steelyard, a single weight acquires diſſerent values at difſcrent parts of the arm, and in the bent lever halunce, the position oſf the arms determines the magnitude of the counterpoise. The spring steelyard measures the veight, by the degręe oſ flexure that ĩt produces in a spring. The beam oſ a common halance must have ĩts arms precisely equal. The ll æ[cales, being freely suspended from ſixed points in the beam, act on them always in the direction oſ gravity; and the eſſect is the same as i?f the whole weight were concentrated in those points. The heam supports the scales, and is itself supported, by means of ſine edges oſ hard steel, vorking on steel, agate, or garnet, in order that the motion may be ſree, and the distances of the points precisely deſined. The best beams are made of two hollow cones of brass, unitcd at their bases; they are lifted oſf their supports when the balance is not used, in order to avoid accidental injuries; the scales also are supported, so as not to hang from the beam, until they huve received their weights. According to the position of the fulerum, with respect to the points of suspension of the scales, the equilibrium of the hulance may be either stuble, neutral, or tottering; or if the beam be too ſlexible, it may puss from one of these states to the other by the eſect of the weightss. The stable equilibrium is the most usual and the best, because it gives us an opportunity of determining the degree oſ inequality of the weights, by the position in which the centre of gravity rests, or by the middle point of the vibrations of the beam, vhich are sometimes measured by an index, pointing to a graduated are. If, however, the fulerum be too much elevated above the centre of gravity, the equilibrium may be too stable, and may require too great an inequality, in order to produce a sensible preponderance. If, on the contrary, by the elevation of the points of suspension of the seales, the equilibrium be rendered tottering, the lower scale will not rise, even if ĩt he sumevhat less loaded than the upper; and sieelyards oſ this construetion have sometimes been employed, in order to impose on the purchaser by the appearance of an ample weight. It ĩs necessary, where great aceuracy is desired, to bring the equilibrium very near the state of neutrality, and to make the vibrations of the beam slow and extensive, whether the scales have weights in thiem or not: for this purpose a small weight is sometimes inclosed within the beam, vhich is raised or depressed at pleasure, by a screw, so as to bring the centre of gravity of the whole moveable apparatus, as near to the fulerum as 'may be required for the occasion. Mr. Ramsdens balance, made for the Royal Society, is capable of veighing ten pounds, and turns with one ten millionth part of the veight. (Plate VIIL. Fig. 107.. 109.) The arms of a balance have sometimes been made unequal for fraudulent purposes, the weight being placed nearer to the fulcrum than the sub-tance to be weighed. It is obvious that the fraud may be detected, by changing the places of the contents of the two scales. In such a case, if a counterpoise to the same veight be determined in each situation, the sum of both will be greater than twice the weight; and the purchaser would be sure of having even more than his due, by requesting the seller to weigh half in the one scale and half in the other. For example, if one arm of the beam were only three fourths as long as the other, the counterpoise, to a weight of twelve ounces, would be nine ounces in one scale, and sixteen in the other, making together twenty ſive instead of twenty four ounces. (Plate VIII. Fig. 110.) Supposing the beams of a balance to be accidentally unequal, either in length or in weight, we may still weigh in it vith accuracy, by making a perfect counterpoise of any kind to a weight, and then removing the weight and putting in its place as much of the substance to be weighed, as is suficient to restore the equilibrium. The weights may also be reduced, or increased, in proportion to the length of the arms, if they differ from each other, care being taken to put the weights always into the same scale. This is actually performed in weighing machines, vhere a composition of levers is employed, in order to enable us to determine the veight of large masses by means of weights oſ moderate dimensions. Plate IX. Fig. 111) When the effective lengths of one or both arms of the beam are capable of being varied, by changing the points of suspension according to the divisions ofa scale, the instrument is called a steelyard. Where one weight only is used, it is not necessary that the two arms should exactly balance cach other, since the divisions may be so placed as to make the necessary adjustment; but it is sometimes convenient to have two or three weights, of different magnitudes, and for this purpose the instrument should be in equilibrium without any weight. In such cases, great accuracy may be obtained by applying a small weight at the end, in the form of a micrometer serew. (Plate IX. Fig. 112.) The arms of a balance, though constant in length, may vary in effeet without limit, if they can suſſiciently alter their inclination to the horizon; for no veight, however great, acting on the arm of a bent lever, can make it per- feetly vertical, since, in this position, the weight may be overpowered by the minutest counterpoise acting on the other arm. The centre of gravity being, in the common balance, very nearly in a right line between the weights, in order that it may be immediately below the fulerum, the arm must have a very considerable angular motion for a slight inequality of the weights; but in the bent lever balance, the centre of gravity is at such a distance from the fulcrum, that a moderate motion of the arms may bring it into the vertical line. This motion is measured by an index on a graduated are, which gives the instrument a considerable range; and where expedition ĩs particularly desired, it may often be used with advantage; but if the weights to be determined are large, the scale hecomes very much contracted, and the instrument requires to be levelled with great aceuracy. A counterpoise acting on a spiral or conical barrel, has also been applied to a similar purpose; it is capable of a scale somewhat more extended than a hent lever balance, but ĩt is less simple, and scarcely more accurate. (Plate IX. Fig. 113.) A spring, which is usually of a spiral form, heing made to support a hook by the intervention of a graduated bar, the divisions of this bar, which are drawn out beyond the fixed point, indicate the weight supported by the hook. This instrument is called a spring steelyardc. Mr. Hanin's spring steelyard has a long index, which revolves on a centre, and shows at once the veight according to the standards of different countriess The divisions oſ the scales in moderate ſlexures of the spring are nearly equal: hence it may be inſerred, that the space through which a spring is bent, and consequently its curvature, or change of curvature, is simply proportional to the force which acts on it, and that the vibrations of a weight supported by a spring, must, like those oſ a eycloidal pendulum, be performed in equal times, whatever may be their magnitude. The strength of all springs is somewhat diminished by heat, and for each degree of Falienheit that the temperature is ruised, ve must deduct about one part in ſive thousand from ſhe appurent veight indicuted by the spring steelyard. (Plate IX. Fig. 114.) The spring steelyard aſfords us the most convenient method of measuring the immediate intensity oſ the ſorces exerted by animals of diſſerent kinds, in the labour which they perform. When it is adapted for this purpose, it is sometimes called the dynamomete. We may also estimate the force of an animal, vhich is employed in drawing a distant boat or carriage, by the inclination of the rope or chain to the horizon, compared with the weight of that portion of it which the animal supports, that is, of the part which extends to the point where the curve becomes horizontal. All animal actions, or, at lenst, all the external actions of animals, are ultimately dependent on the contractions and relaxations of the fleshy parts, which are called museles.- The operation of the particular muscles belongs properly to the science oſ physiology; but their mechanism may in general be understood from the properties of the lever and of the centre of gravity. The bones are the levers, the joints the fulerums, and the foree is applied by the muscles, which are usually attached to the hones by the intervention of tendinous cordss. When a muscle contracts in the direction of its fibres, it beoomes at the same time thicker, and its total bulk is little if at all diminished: when it relaxes itself, ĩt is merely passive, for the ſibres, heing extremely ſlexible, can have little or no efſeet in separating the parts to which they are attached; this separation is generally performed hy the action of other muscles, which are called the antagonists of the ſirst, hut sometimes by elastic ligaments, or by other means. The hone forms a lever of the second kind, where the two forces opposing each other are on the same side of ihe fulerum. In general the insertion of a muscle is much nearer to the fulerum than the point of action, and the obliquity of its direction gives it a still greater mechanical disadvantage with regard to rotatory power; but it is more convenient in the animal economy to produce a great contractile force, than a great extent in the original motion. For instance, when the arm is raised by the exertion oſ the deltoid muscle of the shoulder, a very strong contraction tukes place in the muscle, but the action ĩs only continued through a short space; had the contractile pover heen weaker and more extensive, the shoulder must have heen made higher, in order to give it suſficient purchase, and the projection vould have been inconvenient. Borelli has caleulated that the immediate foree of the biceps, or doubleheaded miscle which bends the arm, ĩs equivalent to ahout 300 pounds, and that of the muscles which raise the Iower jaw, above 500 in man, hut in heasts of prey far greater. It is obvious that in muscles of the sume kind, the strength must be as the number of ſibres, or as the extent of the surface which - would be formed by cutting the muscle across; and it is not improhable ihatthe contractile force of the museles oſ a healthy man is equivalent to ahout 500 pounds for ench square inch of their seetion. The weakest man can Iiſr with his hands about 125 pounds, a strong man 400. Topham, àa carpenter, mentioned hy Desaguliers, could lift 800 pounds. Iſe rolled up a strong pewter dish with his fingers; he liſted vith his teeth and knees a table six feet long, with a half hundred weight at the end. Ile bent a poker, three inches in circumference, to a right angle, by striking it upon his left fore arm: another he hent and unbent about his neck: and snapped a hempen rope two inches in circumſerence A few years ago there vas a person at Oxford who could hold his arm extended for half a minute, with half a hundred veight hanging on his little finger. A young gentleman, who has distinguished himselt as a pedestriun hy going 90 miles in 19 hours, has also lifted two hundred veights, one in each hand, and made them meet over his head. Sometimes feats of strength apparently extraordinary have heen exhibited by men who have not really been possessed of any material superiority. Desaguliers relates, that one of them.used to withstand the foree of two horses draving at a girdle passed round his middle, while his feet acted on a ſirm obstaclee. Dy falling suddenly backwards, in an oblique position, he broke a rope which vas ſixed a little before his feet. He supported one or two men by forming his body into an arch; and by a harness ſitted to his hips, he sustained a cannon, veighing two or three thousand pounds. In all these cases the muscles principally employed are the extensors of the legs and thighs, hut the passive strength of the hones is more concerned than the active force of the muscles. In the instance, mentioned by Lahire, of a young man who raised an ass from the ground, by cords tied to the hair of his head, the sensibility of the nerves oſ the skin must have been diminished by hahit, so as to allow the hair to be thus foreibly extended, without immoderate pain. The application of animal foree is usually performed by means of a progressive motion. The muscles employed in this process are in general, if not alvays, the strongest of the body, hoth by nature, and by habit; so that vhen force alone is required, it is most advantageously obtained from their exertions. In walking, the centre of gravity is moved forwards with a velocity nearly uniform IF the legs vere perfectly inflexible, the centre of VOL. I. 5 gravity would describe, in succession, portions of circles, oſ which each leg would alternately be the radius: hut i the velocity were great enough to create a centrifugal force more than equivalent to the force of gravity, the pressure would he removed from each leg aſter the ſirst instant oſ its touching the ground; the path would hecome parabolic instead of circular, and the walking would be converted into running: for the difierence hetween valking and running is this, thut in running, one ſoot is removed from the ground before the other touches it; while in valking, the hindmost foot ĩs only raised after the foremost has touehed the ground. Now supposing the length of the inſlexible leg three feet, the eentrifugul force would hecome equal to the veight, with a velocity whieh would he acquired hy a heavy body in falling through a foot and a half, that is, near 10 feet in a second, or 7 miles an hour; and this is the utmost velocity with which it vould he mechanically possible to walk with inſlexible legs. But the ſlexibility of the legs makes the progressive motion much more uniſorm, by softening the angles oſ the path, which the centre oſf gravity deseribes, and rendering iĩt eſther more or less curved at pleasure; so that it hbecomes mechanically if not physically possible, to walk with a velocity suomewhat greater than 7 miles an hour, and to run or dance with as small a velocĩty as we please, since we may make the path of the centre of gravity somewhat less, or mueh more curved, than a cirele deseribed on the point of the foot as a centre. (Plate IX. Vig. 115, 116.) The fſlexions and extensions oſf the legs are also almost the only means by vhich an impulse is given to the body; if the legs were perſectly inflexible, it would be extremely ditſicult, although not absolutely impossible, to obtain a progressive motion. The centre of gravity is principally impelled forwards in the beginning of the ascending part o the curve which iĩt deseribes, in valking, by the action oſ the leg which is left behind, but in running or hopping, hy that of the only foot which touches the ground at any one time. When we thrust against any obstacle, or drav a rope in a horizontal, or in a descending direction, the body is inclined forwards, and in some cases its action iĩs limited by the effect of the weight of the body reiduced to the direetion of the line of draught: but we much more usually draw or pull in an ascending direetion, so that our whole muscular force may be exerted vithout any limit oſ this kind. It happens, however, very frequently, that we have oeeasion for motions of such a nature as to be more conveniently performed by the hands and arms than by the action of valking or running; and where delicacy is required rather than strength, the form oſ the hand and fingers gives the humun species a great superiority over all other animals, although by no means, as sume authors have supposed, an advantage equivalent to that of the higher perfection oſ the intellectual powers. It ĩs true, as we may ohserve in the manufactories of this country, that machinery has been invented hy which a pover of any kind may be eonverted to purposes seemingly the most intricate and reſined; and after all that has been done by a Watt and an Arkwright, iĩt is diſũicult to determine a positive limit to the ingenuity oſ mechanical invention. It is necessary to consider, in examining the difſerent sources of motion, not only the immediate magnitude oſ the forees which they produce, hut also the velocity with which they are capable of acting, and the time for which that action can be continued. The daily work of a labouring man, of middle age, and in good health, will serve as a convenient unit for the comparison of moving powers of all kinds. It may be most easily remembered in this form: a man can raise a weight of 10 pounds to the height of I0 feet in a seeond, and can continue this labour for 10 hours a day. The actual velocity of the man's motion must vary according to the mode in which his foree ĩs applied; but we suppose that velocity to be such as to give the greatest eſeet under the cireumstances of the machine. This is a moderate estimate of the vork oſ a labourer, without any deduction for frietion. Desaguliers states the perſormunce oſ a man vorking at a winch, vith the assistance of a ſly, us considerably greater, but he does not allege any correct experiments in support of his estimate. Professor Robison, however, mentions a hydraulic machine in which the efſcet was actually more than one tenth greater, without maling any allowance for frietion; so that it is probable, considering the loss hoth ſrom friction and from the momentum with which the vater must have heen disengaged, that the immediate performance vas at least one third more than this unit: the machine was worked by a light mun carrying a weight, and walking hackwards and forvards on a lever. According to Mr. Buchanans experiments, an action like that of ringing bells produced an efſect about one third greater than turning a wineh, and the action of rowing, an eſſeet four ninths greater; but it does not appear that these experiments were continued for a whole day; and the greatest number oſ ohservations make the daily performance o workmen considerably less. It is indecd seldom that the muscles employed in progressive motion are s0 much exerted as in the arrangement desceribed by Proſessor Rohison. A Chinese, in the operation called sculling, is said to beat a European at his oar. For a short time a much greater eſſeet than this may he produced by a great exertion: thus a man veighing above 160 pounds can ascend by means of steps, at the rate of more than three feet in a second, for a quarter, or perhaps half a minute; and this is an eſſort ſive times as great as that which can be continucd for a day. Usually, however, where the hands are chieſly employed, vhether in turning a winch, or in pumping, it is only possible to exert a double, or at most a triple action, for a minute or two: thus, although a machine may only enable a man to raise a hogshead of vater in a minute to the height of ten feet for a whole day, yet it is easy to work it so rapidly for a single minute as to rise double the quantity, or to raise a single hogshead to a height of twenty feet. The whole exertion of force must be a little greater than that which is thus estimated, hecause a certain degree of superſluous momentum must he generated in removing weights from one situation to unother: but this Ioss ĩs usually inconsiderable. The action of carrying a lond horizontally requires anexertion of a different kind, and admits oſ no direet comparison with the application of a constant force to overcome the gravitution of a veight, or any other immediate resistance. The work of a Iubourer thus employed is however confined within moderate limitss. A strong porter can carry 200 pounds at the rate oſf three miles an hour; and, for a short distance, even 300 pounds: a chairman carries 150 pounds, and walks four miles an hour; and in Turkey it is suid that there are porters, vho, by stooping forwards, and placing the weight very low on their hbacks, are enabled to carry from 700 to 900 pounds. The subjects of Mr. Coomb's experiments appear to have been either weaker, or more inactive, than the generality of porters in this country: he caleulates that the most advantageous load for a man of common strength is about a hundred weight; or, iſ he iĩs to return vithout a burden, 135 pounds. The daily work of a horse is equal to that of five or six men: its immediate force is something greater, but it cannot support the labour of more than 8 hours a day, vhen draving vith a force of 200 pounds, or of õ hours when vith a force of 20, walking two miles and a halt an hour. It is generally supposed, that in drawing up a steep ascent a horse is only equivalent to 3 or 4 men, and the employment of horses in walking wheels, where the action is similar to that of ascending a hill, has for this renson been condemned. For men, on the contrary, an ascent of any ind appears to aſſord a favourable mode of exertion. But, perhaps, the weight of the carriage, and of the horse itself, has not always been suſficiently considered in the comparison. The strength oſ. a mule is equal to that of three or four men. The expense of keeping a horse ĩs in general about twice or three times as great as the hire of a day lubourer; so that the force of horses may be reckoned about half as expensive as that of men. The horse Childers is said, although, perhaps, without suſſicient authority, to have run an English mile in a single minute; his veloeĩty must in this case have heen 88 feet in a second, which would have heen sufficient to carry him on an inclined plane without friction, or in a very long sling, to the perpendicular height of 120 feet. l A large windmill, on which Mr. Coulomb made many experiments, was cupable, on an average, of working cight hours a day; its whole performance was equivalent to our estimate oſ the daily labour oſ 34 men; 25 square feet of the sails doing the vork of one labourer. The expense oſ the machinery, vith its repairs, would probably amount to less than half the expense of a number oſ horses capable of exerting the same forcee Where a stream of water can he procured, iĩts foree is generally more convenient, hecause more regular, than that oſ the wind. A steam engine of the hest construetion, with a thirty inch eylinder has the force of 40 horses; and, since ĩᷓ acts without intermission, will perform the work of 120 horses, or of GOO men, each square inch of the piston heing nearly equivalent to a labourer. Aceording to Mr. Boulton, the consumption of a bushel, or 82 pounds of coals, ill raise 48000 cubic fect oſ vater 10 feet high, which is equivalent to the duily labour of 8 men, or perhap; more: the value of this quantity of coals is seldom more than that of the work of a single labourer for a duy; but the expense of the machinery generally renders a steam engine somewhat more than half as expensive as the number of horses for which it ĩs substitutedl. According to other accounts, a 24 inch eylinder, being equivalent to about 72 horses, requires only a chaldron of coals in a day, each bushel doing the work of ten men. The force of gunpowder is employed with advantage vhere a very powerſul action is required for a short space, as in dividing rocks, or in generating a great velocity in a projectilee As a source of momentum or energy only, this pover is by no means economical, the daily labour of a man being equivalent to the effeet of about 40 pounds of powder; hut the advantage oſ artillery consists in having the foree communicated hy means oſ an elastic fluil extremely rare, which is capuble oſ generating a very great velocity in the ball only, without any waste of power in producing a useless momentum in any other substance. The comparative force of different kinds of gunpowder is determined by an eprouvette, or powder proof: the eſſeet is measured by the angular motion of a little wheel, a projecting part of which is impelled by the explosion of a small quantity oſ the powder, while the frietion of a spring or a weight creates a resistance which may be varied i it be required The absolute force of a given quantity oſ powder may be ascertained either hy suspending a cannon as a pendulum, and measuring its angular recoil; or hy shooting into a large block, and finding the velocity which is imparted tò ĩt by the ball. For measuring very small attractive or repulsive forces, with great accuracy, the most convenient test is furnished by the eſſects 6F twisting. An arm or heam is suspended horizontally by a long wire, and the force required to cause the beam to make one or more revolutiuns heing ascertained, ve may divide the cirele deseribed hy ĩts extremities into as many purts as ve think proper, and the force required to bring the beam into any position vill always be proportional, without a sensible error, to the magnituie of the part of the cirele intereepted between the given position, and that in hich the arm vould naturally rest. When the force is of such a nature as to he capable of producing a vibration, the hody on which it acts being suspended by the thread of a silkworm, or oſ a spider, ve may compare its magnitude with that of gravitation, by observing the time required for each vibration, and determining the operation of the force according to the laws of pendulums. It is in this manner that the ſorces concerned in the effects of electricity and of magnetism have heen measured by Mr. Coulomb. LECTURE XIII. ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION.. Tur passive strength of the materials employed in the mechanical arts depends on the cohesive and repulsive forees of their particles, and on the rigidity of their structuree. The consideration of the intimate nature of these forces belongs to the discussion of the physical properties oſ matter; but the estimation of their magnitude, and of their relative value in various circumstances, is of undeniable importance to practical mechanics, and requires to be examined as a continuation of the subjeet of staties. The retarding foree of frietion is very nearly allied to some kinds of passive strength, and may he in great measure explained from similar considerations. The principal effects of any foree, acting on a solid body, may be reduced to seven denominations; extension, compression, detrusion, ſlexure, torsion, alteration, and ſracturee When a veight is suspended below a ſixed point, the suspending substance is extended, or stretehed, and retains its form by its cohesion, assisted by its rigidity: when the weight is supported by a block, or pillar, placed below it, the block is compressed, and resists primarily by a repulsive foree, but secondurily also by its rigidity. The effeet here called detrusion, is produced when a transverse force ĩs applied elose to a ſixed point, in the sume manner as the blades oſ a puir of scissors act on the pin, and the force which resists this operation is principally the rigidity, or luteral adhesion of the strata oſ he substance, but it could seareely be effectual without some degree of eohesive and repulsive forcee When three or more forces are upplied to different parts of any substance, they produce ſlexure, that is, they bend ĩit, some of its parts being extended, and others compressedl. In torsion, or twisting, the central particles remain in their natural state, while those vhich are in opposite parts of the circumſerence are detruded, or displaced, in opposite directionss The operation of forces applied in any of these ways may produce a permanent alteration, or change of ſigure, in substances suſliciently soft, and perhaps, in a certain degree, in all substances: this change is sometimes called by workmen settling, or taking a set. But the limit oſ all these effects is fracture, which is the consequence of the application of any force capable of overcoming the strength ofthe substance, and to which the generality of writers on mechanies have hitherto conſined their attention. r The forces, by which the form of any substance is changed, may also be divided into tvo Kinds, simple pressure, and impulse; but it is only with regard to fracture that it will be necessary to take the force of impulse into consideration. Extension and compression follow so nearly the same laws, that they may be best understood by comparison with each other. The colesive and repulsive forces, which resist these effeets, depend almost as mich on the solidity, or rigidity of the substances, as on the attractions and repulsions vhich are their immediate causes: for a substance perſectly liquid, although its particles ure in full possession of their attractive and repulsive povers. may be extended or compressed hy the smallest force that ean he applied to it. It is not indeed certain that the actual distances of the particles of all hodies are increased vhen they are extended, or diminished when they are compressed: for these changes ure gencrally accompanied hy contrary changes in other parts of the same substance, although probably in a smaller degree. We may easily observe, that if we compress a piece of elastic gum in any direction, it extends itsel? in other directions; and if we extend it in lengtl, its breadth and thickness are diminished. If the rigidity of a hody vere infinite, and all lateral motions oſ its particles were prevented, the direct cohesion alone would be the measure of the foree required to produce extension, and the direet repulsion oſ the force required to produce compression; in this respeet indeed, the actuul rigidity of some substances may be considered as infinite, wherever the extension or compression is moderate, and no permanent alteration of form is produced; and vithin these limits these substances may be called perfectly elastiec. IF æ B the cohesion and repulsion were infinite, and the rigidity limited, the only effect of force would he to produce alteration of form: and such bodies would be perfectly inelastic, but they would be harder or soſter according to the degree of rigidity. It is found by experiment, that the measure of the extension and compression of uniform elastic bodies is simply proportional to the force which occasions it; at least when the ſorces are comparatively small. Thus if a weight of 100 pounds lengthened a rod of. steel one hundredth of an inch, a weight of 200 vould lengthen it very nearly two hundredths, and a weight of 300 pounds three hundredths. The same weights acting in a contrary direction would also shorten it one, two, or three hundredths respectively. The former part of this law was discovered by Dr. Hooke, and the effects appear to be perfectly analogous to those which are more easily observable in elastic fluids. According to this analogy, we may express the elasticity of any substance by the weight of a certain column of the same substance, which may be denominated the modulus of its elasticity, and of which the weight is sucli, that any addition to it would inerease it in the same proportion, as the veight added vould shorten, by its pressure, a portion of the substance of equal diameter. Thus if a rod of any kind, 100 inches long, vere compressed I inch by a weight of 1000 pounds, the weight of the modulus of its elasticity would be 100 thousand pounds, or more accurately 99000, which is to 100000 in the same proportion as 99 to 100. In the same munner, ve must suppose that the subtraction of any weight from that of the modulus vill also diminish it, in the same ratio that the equivalent force vould extend any portion of the substance. The height of the modulus is the same, for the same substance, whatever its breadth and thickness may be: for atmospherie air, it is about 5 miles, and for steel nearly I00. This supposition is suſſiciently conſirmed by experiments, to be considered at least aus a good approximation: it follows that the weight of the modulus must always exceed the utmost cohesive strength of the substance, and that the compression produced by such a weight must reduce its dimensions to one half: and I have found that a foree capable of compressing a piece of elastic gum to half its length will usually extend it to many times that length, and then break or tear it; and voL. I. , l also that a force eapable of extending it to twice ita length will only compress it to two thirds. In this substance, and others of a similar nature, the resistanee appears to be much diminished hy the facility by which a contrary change is produced in a difſcrent direction; so that the cohesion and repulsion thus estimated appears o be very weak, unless when the rigidity is increased by a great degree of cold. It would be easy to ascertain the speciſic gravity oſ such a substance in different states of tension and compression, and some light might be thrown, by the comparison, on the nature and operation of the forces which are concerned. It is diſicult to compare the lateral adhesion, or the force which resists the detrusion of the parts oſ a solid, with any form of direct cohesion. This force constitutes the rigidity or hardness of a solid body, and is wholly absent from liquids, although their immediate cohesion appears to be nearly equal to that of solidss Some experiments have been made on the fracture of bodies hy means of detrusion, but it does not appear that the force necessary to produce a temporary derangement of this kind has ever been examined: it may be inferred, however, ſrom the properties of twisted substances, that the force varies in the simple ratio oſ the distance of the particles from their natural position, and it must also be simply proportional to the magnitude oſ the surface to which it is applied. The most usual, as well as the most important effeet, produced by the application of force, is flexuree. When a force acts on a straight column in the direction of its axis, it can only compress or extend it equally through its whole substance; but if the direction of the force be only parallel to the axis, and applicd to some point more or less remote from it, the compression or extension will obviously be partial: it may be shown that in a rectangular column, when the compressing force is applied to a point more distant from the axis than one sixth of the depth, the remoter surface ill no longer be compressed but extended, and it may be demonstrated that the distance of the neutral point from the axis is inversely as that oſ the point to which the foree is applied. Trom the efect of this partial compression, the column must necessarily become curved; and the curvature oſ the axis at any point vill always be proportional to its distance from the line of Jireetion of the force, not only while the column remains nearly straight, but also when it is bent in any degree that the nature of the substance will allow. IF the column was originally bent, any force, however small, applied to the extremities of the axis, will increase the curvature according to the same law, but if the column was originally straight, it cannot be kept in a state oſ flexure by any longitudinal force acting precisely on the axis, unless it be greater than a certain determinate force, which varies according to the dimensions of the column. It is not however true, as some authors have asserted, that every column pressed by such a force must necessarily be bent; ĩts state when it is straight, and submitted to the operation of such a force, will resemble a tottering equilibrium, in vhich a body may remain at rest untſt some external cause disturbs it, The figure of a column naturally straight, but bent a little by a longitudinal foree, will coincide with that of the harmonic eurve, in which the curvature is as the distance from the basis. ſPlate IX. Fig. 117... 121.) Considerable irregularities may be observed in all the experiments which have been made on the flexure of columns and rafters exposed to longitudinal forces; and there is no doubt but that some of them were occasioned by the difficulty of applying the force precisely at the extremities of the axis, and others by the accidental inequalities of the substances, of which the fibres must often have been in such directions as to constitute originally rather bent than straight columns.When a rod, not very flexible, ĩs fixed at one end in a horizontal position, the curvature produced by its own weight is every where as the square of the distance from the other end: and if a rod be simply supported at each end, its curvature at any point will be proportional to the product of the two parts into which that point divides it. But when the weights are supposed to be applied to any given points of the rod only, the curvature always decreases uniformly between these points and the points of support (Plate IX. Fig. 122, 123.) The stiffness of any substance is measured by the force required to cause it to recede through a given small space in the direction of the forcee It is only necessary to consider this property with regard to forces applied transversely. In such cases the stifſness is directly as the breadth and the cube of the depth of the beam, and inversely as the cube oſ its length. Thus iſ we have a beam which is twice as long as another, wve must make it, in order to obtain an equal stiſfness, either twice as deep, or eight times as hroadc The property of stifſness is fully as useful in many vorks of art as the ultimate strength with which a body resists fracture: thus for a shelf, a lintel, or a chimney piece, a great degree oſ ſlexure would be almost as inconvenient as a rupture of the substance. When a beam is supported at both ends, its stiffness is twice as great as that of a beam of half the length ſirmly fixed at one end; and if both ends are ſirmly ſixed, the stiffness is again quadrupled. For if the whole beam were inverted and supported by a fulcrum in the middle, each half would resemble a separate beam ſixed at one end, and the fulerum would bear the sum of two equal weights placed at the extremities, disregarding that of the beam; and consequently the same flexure vill be produced by placing a double weight on the middle of the beam in an inverted position. If both ends vere firmly fixed, the curvature would be every where as tle distance from ſhe middle of each half, the whole being in the same state as four separate heams fixed at their extremities: each oſ these heams would be eight times as stiſf as beams of twice the length, and the whole beam, in this state, would be eight times as stiſ as if the ends were simply supported. It is, hovever, difficult to fix the ends of a beam so firmly as to increase its resistance in this proportion, unless it be continued both ways considerably beyond the supports. It is evident that a tube, or hollow heam, of any kind, must be much stiſſer than the same quantity of matter in a solid form: the stifſness is indeed increased nearly in proportion to the square of the diameter, since the cohesion and repulsion are equally exerted with a smaller curvature, and act also on a longer lever. i Torsion, or twisting, consists in the lateral displacement, or detrusion, of the opposite parts of a solid, in opposite directions, the central particles only remaining in their natural stat. We might consider a wire as composed of a great number of minute threads, extending through its length, and closely connected together; if we twisted such a wire, the external threads would be extended, and, in order to preserve the equilibrium, the internal ones would be contrãcted; and it may be shown that the whole wire would be shortened one fourth as much as the external fibres would be extended if the length remained undiminished; and that the force would vary as the cube of the angle through which the wire is twisted. But the force of torsion, as it is determined by experiment, varies simply as the angle of torsion; it cannot, therefore, be explained by the action of longitudinal fibres only; hut it appears rather to depend principally, if not intirely, on the rigidity, or lateral adhesion, which resists the detrusion of the particles. If a wire be twice as thick as another of the same length, it will require sixteen times as much force to twist it once round; the stiffness varying as the fourth power of the diameter, that is, as the square of its squaree But if the length vary, it is obvious that the resistance to the force of torsion will be inversely as the length. A permanent alteration of form is most perceptible in such substances as are most destitute of rigidity, and approach most to the nature of ſluidss It limits the strength of materials with regard to practical purposes, almost as much as fracture, since in general the foree which is capable of producing this eſfect, is sufſicient, with a small addition, to increase it till fracture takes placee A smaller foree than that which has first produced an alteration of form, is seldom capable either of increasing, or of removing it, a circumstance which gives such materials, as are susceptible of an alteration of this kind, a great advantage for many purposes of convenience and of art. The more capable a body is of a permanent alteration of form, the more ductile it is said to be; pure gold and silver, lead, annealed iron and copper, wax when varm, glass when red hot, and clay when moist, possess considerable duetilit. Wood admits of little permanent change of form, except in a green state, although it sometimes settles a little, when it has been exposed to pressure Even stone will become permanently bent in the course of years, as ve may observe in old marble chimney pieces. But the most duetile of all solid substances appears to be a spider's web. Mr. Bennet tuisted a thread of this kind many thousand times, and shortened it more than a fourth of its length, yet it showed no disposition to untwist. A ductile substance acquires the same cohesive and repulsive powers with regard to its new form, as it possessed in its original state; and when the alteration of form has once commenced, those powers are neither increased nor diminished by continuing the operation: the degree of flexure or torsion, required for producing a further alteration, appears also to be little varied: thus if the spiders web could at first be twisted only one half round, so as to retain the power of returning to its original state, without any permanent alteration of form, it would never acquire the power of returning more than half a revolution, however it might be twisted. From a vant of attention to this consideration, a late respectable author has called in question, without suſſicient reason, the accuracy of Mr. Bennet's experiments. A variation of ductility, in any substance, does not appear to depend on any change in the magnitude oſ the ultimate powers of cohesion and repulsion. Steel, whether perfectly hard, or of the soſtest temper, resists flexure with equal force, when the deviations from the natural state are small: but at a certain point the steel, if soft, begins to undergo an alteration of form; at another point it breaks i? much hardened; but when the hardness is moderate, it is capable of a much greater curvature without either permanent alteration or fracture; and this quality, which is valuable for the purposes of springs, is called toughness, and is opposed to rigidity and brittleness on the one side, and to ductility on the other. There may, however, be an apparent difference in the stifſness oſ some substances in different states, arising from the greater facility with which their dimensions are extended in one direction while they are contracted in another: thus elastic gum appears to possess a much greater degree of stiffness when its hardness is increased by cold than vhen it is at a more elevated temperature; but the change produced in this case by heat is not an inerease of that ductility which facilitates a permanent alteration of form, but rather of the toughness which allows a temporary change of figure, continuing only while the force is applied. The efſeet of forging and of wiredrawing tends to lessen the ductility of metals, and to render them tough, and even rigid: so that in hammering copper and brass, and in draving wire, it is necessary to anneal the metals more than once by fire, in order to restore their ductility, which is lessened by the operation. The corrosion of the surface oſ a metal by an acid is also said to render it brittle; but it is not impossible that this appurent brittleness may be occasioned by some irregularity in the action of the acid. The last eſfect of force on solid materials is their ſracture, vhich, as well as the former changes, may be produced either by impulse, or by pressure alone. The action which resists pressure ĩs called strength, and that which resists impuſse may properly be termed resilivcnce. The strength of every body is in the joint ratio of its immediate cohesion and repulsion, or elasticity, and of jts toughness, or the degree in which it may he extended, compressed, or otherwise deranged, without a separation of its parts. IThe resilience is jointly proportional to its strength and its toughness, and is measured by the product of the mass and the square oſ the velocity of a body capable of breaking it, or of the mass and the height from which it must fall in order to aequire that velocity; while the strength is merely measured by the greatest pressure that it can support in a state of rest. The simplest way in which a body ean be broken, is by tearing it asunder. The cohesive force continues to be increased as long as the tenacity of the substance allows the particles to be separated from each other without a permanent alteration of form; when this has been produced, the same foree, if its action is continued, is generally capable of causing a total solution of continuity; and sometimes a separation takes place without any previous alteration of this kind that can be observed. It follows from the nature of resilience, that a body of a pound weight, falling from the height of a yard, will produce the same eſfect in breaking any substance, as a body of three pounds ſalling from the height oſ a ſoot; s30 that here, as well as in the estimation of mechanical power, ĩt is the energy, and not the momentum, that is to be considered as the measure of the effeet. If we know the strength of any substance, and the degree in which it is capable of extension, we may casily determine its resilience from a consideration oſ the laws of pendulums. For the same veight which would break it by pressure, will acquire a sufficient impulse for breaking ĩt, iſ ĩt fall from a height equal to half the space through which the substance may be extended, supposing the direction of the stroke to be horizontal, so that its effect may not he increased by the force of gravity. Thus if the pressure of a weight of 100 pounds hroke a given substance, after extending it through the space of an inch, the same veight would break ĩt by striking it with the velocity that would be acquired by the fall of a heavy body from the height of half an inch, and a weight of one pound would break it by falling from a height of 50 inches. It is obvious that the cohesive strength, as well as the resilience, of any substance must be simply proportional to the magnitude of its transverse section, that is, of the surſace of fracturee Some experiments appear to show that iĩt increases in a greater proportion than this surface, others that it increases in a smaller proportion; but it is probable that in both cases some accidental irregularities must have interfered, and that a wire two inches in diameter is exacſly four times as strong as a wire one inch in diameten. The length has no effect either in inereasing or in diminishing the cohesive strength; but the resilience is proportional to the length, since a similar extension of a longer fibre produces a greater elongation. There is however a limit beyond which the velocity of a body striking another cannot be increased without overcoming its resilience, and breaking it, however small the bulk of the first body may be, and this limit depends on the inertia oſ the parts of the second body, which must not he disregarded when they are impelled with a considerable velocity. For it is demonstrable that there is a certain velocity, dependent on the nature of a substance, with which the efſect of any impulse or pressure is transmitted through it; a certain portion of time, which is shorter accordingly as the body is more elastic, being required for the propagation of the force through any part of it; and if the actual velocity of any impulse be in a greater proportion to this velocity than the extension or compression, of which the substance is capable, is to its whole length, it is obvious that a separation must be produced, since no parts can be extended or eompressed which are not yet affected by the impulse, and the length of the portion affected at any instant is not sufficient to allow the required extension or compression. Thus if the velocity with which an impression is transmitted by a certain kind of wood be 15000 feet in a second, and it be susceptible of compression to the extent of 4 of its Iength, the greatest velocity that it can resist will be 75 feet in a second, which is equal to that of a body falling from a height of about 90 feet. And by a similar comparison we may determine the velocity which will be sufficient to penetrate or to break off a substance in any other manner; if e calcuIlate the velocity required to convey the impulse from one part of the substance to the other, and ascertain the degree in which it can have its dimensions altered without fracture. It is eusy to understand, from this statement, the diſſerent qualities of natural bodies with respect to hardness, soſtness, toughness, and brittleness. A column of ehalk, capable of supporting only a pound, will perhaps be compressed by it only a thousandth purt oſ its length; a column of elastic gum, capable of suspending a pound, may he extended to more than twice ĩts length, the elastic gum vill therefore resist the energy of an impulse incomparably greater than the chalk. A diamond, so hard as to resist an enormous pressure, may he broken, by a moderate blow, with a small hammer. A weight of 1000 pounds, moving with a velocity of one foot in a second, and acting on a small surface oſ a board, may possess suſficient energy to break or to penetrate it; with a velocity o? 100 feet in a second, a veight of of a pound vill possess the same energy, and produce the same effect, if it act on a similar surface; hut if the wood he so constituted, as to be wholly incapable of resisting a velocity oſ I00 feet in a second, it may he penetrated by a veight of ,4, oſ a pound as vell as by one tenth, and by a moderately soſt body as vell as by a harder one. The whole board, however, if at liberty, would receive a much greater momentum from the impulse of the large weight, than from that of the small one, its action being continued for a much longer time. And it ĩs for this reason that a ball shot by a pistol vill perforate a sheet of paper standing upright on a table, without overturning it. The strength, or rather hardness, of a substance, exposed to the action of æ force that tends to compress it, must not be confounded with its resistance to a force applied longitudinally and tending to produce ſlexure. A slender rod of wood, when it yields to a longitudinal pressure, commonly bends before it breaks, and gives ay at last to the force by a transverse fracture; but a column of stone or brick, and even a thick pillar of wood, is erushed without bending, and generally by a smaller force than that which would produce or continue a ſlexure In this case the parts slide avay laterally, and in a rectangular pillar; if the texture of the substance is uniform, and not ſibrous, the surfaces of fracture will make nearly a right angle with each other, supposing the resistance arising ſrom the lateral adhesion, in the direction of any surface or section, to be simply proportional to that seetion: but if this force, VOL. I. v like that of friction, is increased by a pressure which tends to bring the parts into closer contact, the angle left aſter fracture must be more acute. (Plate X. Fig. 124.) The power of the force of lateral adhesion, in resisting fracture, is considered by Mr. Coulomb as nearly equal to that oſ the direet cohesion of the same substance, or a little greater; while Professor lobison makes it twice as great. If, however, this force be supposed to be simply equal to the direct cohesion, it may be inſerred that the strength oſf a square bar in resisting compression is tice as great as its cohesive strength, allowing that the fracture takes place in the surface oſ least resistance. It is, however, seldom that the strength, with which a body resists compression, ĩs in so great a proportion as this to ĩts cohesive strength; and where the substance is in any degree composed oſ ſibres, they must naturally produce great irregularities by their ſlexuree The strength in resisting compression, must, according to this statement, be simply proportional to the mugnitude of the section of the substance, although some experiments on freestone appear to indicate that when the section is increased, the strength is increased in a greater proportion; and there is no reason to suppose that it can be inſluenced either way by the Iength. A cylindrical or prismatic form is therefore the best that cun he given to materials of a given bulk, in order to enable them to resist a force which tends to crush them, except that the additional pressure of their ovn veight on the lower parts, requires that those parts should be a little stronger than the upper parts. It appears also that something is gained by muking the outline a little convex externally: for it may be demonstrated, that for a column or upright beam, to be cut out of a slab of equable thickness, supposing the strength to be independent of pressure, the strongest form is a circle. (Plate IX. Fig. 196, 127.) : VWVWhen a body is broken by a transverse foree applied very near to a ſixed point, its lateral adhesion is overpowered hy the efſect which we have called detrusion, and its strength in this case is therefore generally somewhat greater than its direct cohesive strength. But vhen the part to which the foree is immediately applied is at a distance from the fixed point greater than about one sixth of the depth, the fracture is no longer the immediate consequence of detrusion, but of flexure. a Flexure is the most usual manner in which fracture is produced; the superſicial parts on the convex side are most extended, and usually give vay ſirst; except in soft fibrous substances, such as moist or green vood, which is more easily crushed than torn; and in this case the concave side fails ſirst, and hecomes crippled, and the piece still remains suspended by the cohesion of the ſibres. After the convex surface has heen eracked, the whole substunce is usually separated, but not always; for example, a triangular beam, with one of the edges uppermost, may be charged with such a weight that the upper edge may be divided and the lower part may remain intire. When a column or rafter is broken by the operation of a longitudinal pressure, the stiffness of the column being once overcome, a small addition of force is usually suſficient to produce fracture, unless the pressure has been applied to a part more or less distant from the axis; for in this case a moderate force may produce a moderate flexure, and a much greater force may be required to break the column. But in general, the stiffness of columns is of more consequence, than their strength in resisting transverse fracture. The strength of beams of the same Kind, and ſixed in the same manner, in resisting a transverse force, is simply as their breadth, as the square of their depth, and inversely as their length. Thus if a beam be twice as brond as another, it will also be twice as strong, but if it he twice as deep, it will be four times as strong: for the increase of depth not only doubles the number of the resisting particles, hut also gives each of them a double pover, by increasing the length of the levers on which they act. The inerease of thelength of a beam must also olviously weaken it, by giving a mechanical advantage to the power which tends to break it: and some experiments appear to shov, that the strength is diminished in a proportion somewhat greater than that in which the length ĩs inereased. The strength of a heam supported at hoth ends, like its stiſſness, ĩs twice as great as that of a single beam of half the length, hich is fixed at one end; and the strength of the whole beam is again doubled if both the ends are firmly fixed. The resilience of a prismatic beam, resisting a transverse impulse, follows a law very diſſerent ſfrom that which determines iĩts strength, for ĩt is simply proportional to the bulk or weight oſ the beam, whether it be shorter or longer, nurrower or vider, shallower or deeper, solid or hollow. Thus a beam ten feet long vill support hut half as great a pressure, without breaking, as a beam of the same breadth and depth, which is only ſive feet in length; but it will bear the impulse oſf a douhle weight striking against it with a given velocity, and will require that a given body should fall ſfrom a double height in order to break it. It is thereſore of great consequence in the determination oſf the form and quantity of the materials to be employed for any mechanical purpose, that ve should consider the nature as vell as the magnitude of the forces which are to he resisted. Stifſness, strength, or resilience, may he sepurately or jointly required in various degrees. For a cieling, stiſſness vould be principally desirable; for a door, strength; for the ſloor oſ a hull room, resilienee; for a coach spring, resilience and ſlexibility, that is, resilience without stiſtness. An observatory should be as stift as possible, a ship as strong us possible, a cable as resilient as possible. It is a common remark that a ſloor which shakes is the strongest; and, improbable as ĩt appears at first sight, it may perhaps be founded in truth: for if the absolute strength oſ a stiſt and a shaking ſloor were equal, the shaking ſloor would bear the efſects oſ motion with the least injury. It is possible that a stiff floor, which vould support a numerous assembly, might give vay at a ball; while a more resilient one, which would be suited for dancing, might be destroyed by a erowded concert. A coach spring, divided into plates, has the same power of resisting, vithout being broken, the momentum of the curriage, arising from sudden elevations and depressions, as it would possess if it formed one entire mass, vhile its greater ſlexibility allows it to regulate these motions in a much more gradual and gentle manner. A single piece of timber may perhaps sometimes have too much of the ſlexibility of a conch spring, its strata sliding in some degree on each other: in such a ease its stifſness and strength may be increased by binding it very firmly with hoops. ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION. 149 The transverse strength of a perfectly elastic substance, fixed at one end, is to its direct cohesive strength as the depth of the substance to six times its Iength. This proportion is equally applicable to such substances as resist compression more strongly than extension: for their immediate repulsive force is probably not greater than their cohesive force, when their dimensions are equally changed, so that the middle of the beam is always in ĩts natural state; and when the curvature is suſiicient to overcome the cohesive force, the whole beam must give vay. When, hovever, the substunce is less capable of resisting compression than extension, the concave surface gives vay ſirst, and the strength depends immediately on the repulsive strength of the substance. This is perhaps the reason, that, in experiments on beams of oak, the transverse strength has seldom been found in a greater ratio to the whole cohesive strength than that of the depth to nine times the length. It may be inferred from the consideration of the nature of the different kinds of resistance vhich have been explained, that i? we have a eylindrical tree a foot in diameter, which is to be formed into a prismatic beam by ſlattening its sides, ve shall gain the greatest stifſness by making the breadth or thickness 6 inches, and the depth 104, the greatest strength by making the brendth 7 inches and the depth 92, and the greatest resilience by making the heam square. The stiffuess and the strength of the heam may be much increased by cutting the tree into four pieces, turning their edges outwards, and uniting them so as to make a hollov beam: but it vill require great strength of union, to make the whole act as one piece, and the resilience of the heam vill be rather diminished than inereased hy the operation. The adoption of the hollow masts and beams vhich an ingenious mechanic has lately introduced, requires, thereſore, some caution. For where an impulse is to be resisted, such a mast is no stronger than a solid nast of the same weight, and much weaker than a solid mast of the same diumeter. The force of the wind is, however, rather to be considered as constituting a pressure than a finite impulse, except vhen a sudden squall carries a loose sail before it with considerable velocity. A similar eaution may also be extended to some other attempts to make improvements in naval architecture: it ĩs a common opinion, and perhaps a well founded one, that ſlexibility is of great advantage to a ship's sailing; if therefore we sacriſice too much resilience to strength, and too much of both to stifimess, ve may perhaps create greater evils than those vhich we wish to avoid. We have hitherto supposed the beams, of which the strength has heen compared, to be prismatic, that is, of equal breadth and thickness throughot, vhich is not only the simplest form in theory, but the most generally useful in practice. If however we have the power oſ giving any form that we please to materials of a certain weight; which may often be done where several smaller pieces are to be cut out of a larger one, or a larger one to he composed of several smaller ones, or where the materiuls are either ducetile or fusible, it is frequently possible to determine a more advantageous form than that of an equable beam or eolumn. For since the extension which the parts oſ the substance admit, without giving way, is the limit oſ their strength, i the depth of a beam be everywhere equal, and the curvature unequal, the fraeture will first take place where the curvature is greatest, and the superſluous strength oſ the other parts will he lost; so that, in order to have the greatest strength that a given quantity of materials is capable of affording in a heam of given length, the form must be such that the strength may be everywhere equal, the tension of the surface being equal throughout; and the depth must be as much smaller as the curvature is greater. It ĩs also necessary to consider whether the substance is likely to be erushed, and vhether it is Iiable to he broken by detrusion, rather than by ſlexure. Sometimes the depth of the heam may be limited, and sometimes its brendth; or it may be required that the breadth and depth may be always equal or proportional to each other, and the force may be either applied at one end of the beam, or it may be equally divided throughout its length; it may also principally depend on the weight of the substance itself; and the strongest form vill be different, according to the diſferent conditions of its application. In the most common cases, the outline must be either triangular, or parabolic, as if the point of the triangle were rounded off; hut the curves required are sometimes of much more diſſicult investigation. (Plate X. Fig. 128.. 147.) The strength of hodies is sometimes employed in resisting torsion, as in the case of the axles of wheels and pinions, rudders of ships, and screws of all Kinds: but there is seldom accasion to determine their absolute strength in resisting a force thus applied: if they are suſticiently stiſſ, their purts are not often separated by any violent efſſorts. In order to investigate the strength oſ the various substances employed for the purposes of the mechanical arts, it is most convenient to use a machine furnished with proper supports, and gripes, or vices, for holding the materials, and vith steelyards for ascertaining the magnitude of the foree applied, hile the extension or compression is produced by a serew or a wine, vith the intervention of a vire, a chain, or a cord: provision ought also to be made for varying the direction of the force, when the ſlexure oſ the materials renders such a change necessary. (Plate XI. Fig. 148.) According to the experiments of various authors, the cohesive strength of a square inch of razor steel is about 150 thousand pounds, of soft steel 190, of wrought iron 80, of cast iron 50, of good rope 20, of oak, beech, and villow wood, in the direction of their ſibres 19, of fir 8, and of lead about 3 thousand pounds: the cohesive strength of a square inch of brick 300, and of freestone 200. Teak vood, the tectona grandis, is said to be still stronger than oak. The veight of the modulus of the elasticity of a square inch of steel, or that weight which would be capuble of compressing it to half its dimensions, is about 3 million pounds; hence it follows, that when a square ineh of steel is torn asunder by a weight of 150000 pounds, its length is ſirst inereased to one tventieth more than its natural dimensions. The strength oſ diſferent materials, in resisting compression, is liable to great variation. In steel, and in willow wood, the cohesive and repulsive strength appear to be nearly equal. Oak will suspend much more than fir; Dut ſir will support twice as much as onk; probably on account of the eurvature of the fibres of oak. Freestone hus heen found to support about 2000 pounds for each square inch, oak in some practical cases more than 4000. The strongest wood of each tree is neither at the centre nor at the eireumſerence, but in the middle between both; and in Europe it is generally thicker and ſirmer on the south east side of the treee Although iron ĩs much stronger than wood, yet it is more liuble to accidental imperfeetions; and vhen it fails, ĩt gives no wurning of iĩts approaching fracturee. The equable quality of stcel may be ascertained by corrosion in an acid; but there is no casy mode oſ detecting internal ſlaws in a har of iron, and ve can only rely on the honesty oſ the workman for its soundnesss. Wood, when it ĩs erippled, complains, or emits a sound, and after this, although it is much veakened, it muay still retain strength enough to be of service. Stone sometimes thiows off small splinters when iĩt ĩs heginning to give way: it is said to he eapable of supporting by much the greatest weight when it ĩs placed in that position, vith respeet to the horizon, in which iĩt has been found in the quarry. It is obvious that when the hulk of the substance employed hecomes very considerable, its weight may hear so great a proportion to its strength as to add materially to the load to be supported. In most cases the weight inereases more rapidly than the strength, and causes a practical limitation of the magnitude of our machines and cdiſices. We see also a similar limit in mature: a tree never grows to the height of 100 yards; an animal ĩs never strong enough to overset a mountain. It has been observed that whales are often larger than any lund animals, because their weight is more supported hy the pressure of the medium in which they swim. The force of friction, which resists the sliding of different bodies on each other, seems to be intimately eonneeted with that lateral adliesion, or rigidity, which is opposed to the internal displacement of the parts of a single body, by the eſffeet which we have denominated detrusion: and when the frietion is considered as resisting pressure rather than motion, it approaches still more nearly to the same force. It ĩs probubly derived in great measure ſrom the strength of the protuberant particles, vhich must be broken, bent, or compressed by the motion of the bodies on each other: but it is not always that the existence of such particles can he asserted, much less can they be made perceptible to the senses, and we can only examine the effects which they may be supposed to produce, by immediate experiments on the forces required to counteract them. Such experiments have heen made on a very extensive scale by Musschenbroek and Coulomb, and many of their results have been conſirmed by Mr. Vince, in a simple and elegant manner. : Vith a few exceptions, the friction of all solid bodies is, either perfectly, or very nearly, a uniformly retarding force, neither inereasing nor diminishing vhen the relative velocity of the bodies concerned is changed. The friction of some rough substances is a little increased with the velocity, but, as they hecome more polished, this variation disappearss When, however, the motion is wholly extinet, and the bodies remain in contact with each other, their adhesion is usually greater than the frietion, and by a continuation of the contact, it may become twice or even thrice as great, especially where the. surfaces are large, and the substances but moderately hard. The truth of the assertion, that friction is a uniformly retarding force, may be shown very conveniently by means of Atwood's muchine for experiments on accelerated motion. Iy suffering the axis of the pulley to rest on the surface of any fixed substance, ve may subject it to a frietion of vhich the magnitude may be varied by different methods; and we shall ſind that the motions of the boxes still indicate the action of a uniſormly accelerating force, the spaces descrihed being always proportional to the squares of the times of descent; it follows, therefore, that since the operation of gravity is uniform, that of friction which is dedueted from it at cach instant, must also be uniform, in order that the remaining acceleration may ſollow the same lav. i The uniformity of the force of frietion may also he shown by the descent of a fſlat substance on an inclined plane: i the body he caused to begin its descent with a certain velocity, it will be retarded, vhen the resistance is greater than the relative force of gravity: in this case the retardation will continue until it is wholly stopped, the resistance not diminishing with the velocity. If, on the contrary, the relative weight overpowers the resistance at first, the motion will be continually accelerated, the resistance not heing increased by the increase of the velocity. But since every experiment of this kind must be performed in the presence of the air, the resistance of this ſluid, which follows another law, vill in the end prevent the acceleration. It may in general be asserted, with some exceptions, that the force of frietion is simply proportional to the veight or pressure that brings the sulstances concerned into contact, independently of the magnitude of their survoL. I. x faces: but Mr. Coulomb has observed that in many cases there is, besides this force, another resistance, amounting to several pounds for each square foot of the surface, which ĩs independent of the pressure; and by caleulating these forces separately, we may probably always uscertain the whole resistance with sufficient accuracy. This constant portion is usually mueh smaller than that which varies with the weight, and in all common cuses it may he safely neglected, and the frietion of stone on stone may be called equal to one half of the pressure, that of wood on wood one third, and that of metal on metal one fourth; and this may serve as an estimate suſficiently accurate for calculating the effects of machines; although, iſ their parts were perfectly adjusted to each other, and all the surfaces well polished, the frietion would not in general exceed one eighth of the pressure, whatever might be the nature of the materialss. The application of unctuous substances lessens the friction in the first instance; but unless they are frequently renewed, they sometimes tend rather to increase it. The simplest mode of ascertaining the magnitude of the frietion of two bodies, is to incline their common surface to the horizon until the one begins to slide on the other: this point determines the magnitude of their adhesion; but in order to ſind that of their friction when they are in motion, they must be ſirst sepurated, and then allowed to move on each other, while the whole apparatus is gently agitated. The frietion will then be to the pressure, as the height of the inclined plane to its horizontal length, when the inclination is barely such as to allow the continuance of any motion vhich is imparted to the substance placed on the plane. It follows from the doctrine of the resolution of foree, that when any body is to be drawn along a horizontal surface, which produces a resistance proportionate to the pressure, a part oſ the force may be advantageously employed in diminishing the pressure produced by the weight of the hody; hence, in order for the most advantageous application of the force, its direction must be inclined to the horizon, and it may be demonstrated, that the inclination must be the same with that of a plane on which the relative weight of the body is precisely equal to the frictionn. Thus i we can determine the incelination of a road which is harely sufficient for a enrriage to descend on it by its own weight, the same inclination will be the best possible for the appli- eation of any force by which the carriage is to be drawn along a horizontal road of the same materials. It is obvious that an inclined plane, on which a weight rests by means oſ an adhesion proportionate to the pressure, can never he forced backwards hy any increase of that pressure, since the resistance increases in the same proportion, and continues alvays suſficient to prevent the relative motion of the weight and the inclined plane. Two such planes, put together, vould constitute a wedge, which would be equally incapahle of giving vay to a pressure applied to its opposite surfaces, each of them possessing similar properties with respect to friction. Thus, if the friction or adhesion were exactly one eighth of the pressure, the height of the inclined plane would he one eighth of its length, and the back of the wedge one fourth. Such a wedge would therefore possess a perfect stability with respect to any forces acting on its inclined surfaces. But the effects of agitation, and the minute tremors produced by percussion, have a great tendency to diminish the force of adhesion, hy interrupting the intimacy of contact; and vhere a pin, a nail, or a screw is required to retain ĩts situation with firmness, the inclination of the surfaces must be smaller than the angle of such a vedge as is harely capuble of affording a sufficient resistance in theory. It appears, therefore, that the force of lateral adhesion, acting between two bodies in contact, is of great importance in all mechanical arts; the ſirmness of architecture and of carpentry depends in great measure on it. This kind of resistance being equally poverful, when the force is applied in the direction of the surface, to whatever part of the surface it may tend, it follows that any body which is subjected to friction on all sides, will retain its situation with the same force, that was used in overcoming the friction, in order to bring it into that situation, or rather with a greater force, sinee the lateral adhesion is generally a little greater than the frietion: so that a eylindrical wire cannot be withidrawn from a perforation in a board, by any direct forcꝶ less than that vwhich was employed in introducing it; and this kind of stability, together with that of a wedge or nail resisting a lateral pressure, constitutes the security of the lighter struetures of carpentry, while those of architecture receive a great part of their firmness from the accumulation of weight, which . li makes the resistance of their lower parts to any lateral motion almost insuperable. When a hard body penetrates another, or when a substance is ground avay by the attrition of another, the force, which opposes the motion, is to be considered, like the force of ſriction, as a uniformly retarding forcee There is no reason for imagining the stifness oſ a bar, whether longer or shorter, to depend on the velocity of the body that bends it, and the space through which it may be bent, without breaking, is also limited only by the toughness of the materials. In the same manner, vhen the internal parts of a solid are broken and displaced hy the penetration of another, or its external parts abraded by its attrition, the resistance is the same, whatever the velocity may be, and the space described hy the body, before its velocity is destroyed, is always proportional to the square of that velocity, or to the energy which results from a combination of the proportions of the velocity and the momentum. LECTURE XIV. ll ON ARCHITECTURE AND CARPENTRY. TuE subjects, which we have lately examined, are to be considered as preliminary to the particular departments of practical mechanics The fſirst division of these is to consist of such as are employed in resisting forces of various Kinds, but they may almost all be referred, without inconvenience, to the general heads of architecture and carpentry, of which the principal business is, to resist the force of gravitationn. Architecture, in its most extensive sense, may be understood as comprehending carpentry, but the term is more usually applied to the employment of those materials, vhich are only required to resist the effects of a force tending principally to produce compression, while the materials used by carpenters are frequently subjected to the operation of a force which tends to extend or to bend them: the works of architects being commonly executed in stone or brick, and those of carpenters in wood, besides the occasional use of iron and other metals, in both cases. The simplest problem in mechanical architecture appears to be, to determine the most eligible form for a column. The length and weight being supposed to be given, it is of importance to investigate the form which affords the greatest possible strength; but it is somewhat diſſicult to ascertain the precise nature and direction of all the forees which are to be resisted. If ve considered the columm as a heam ſixed in the ground, and impelled by a transverse force, it ought to be much tapered, and reduced almost to a point at its extremity; but it is seldom that any force of this kind can be powerful enough to do more than overcome the weight alone of the column, and ĩt is only necessury to regard the load which presses vertically on it; and whether ve consider the force as tending to bend or to crush it, the forms commonly employed vill appear to be sufiiciently eligible Mr. ILa- grange seems to have been misled by some intricacies of mathematical investigation, too remote from physical accuracy, when he calculated that a eylinder was the strongest form for resisting ſlexure; that form approaches in reality much more nearly to an oblong spheroid, of which the outline is elliptical. The consideration of the flexure oſ a column is, however, of little practical importance in architecture, for upon a rough estimate of the properties of the materials usually employed, it may be computed that a column of stone must be about forty times as high as it ĩs thick, in order to he capable of being bent by any weight which vill not crush it; although a bar of vood or of iron may he bent by a longitudinal force, if its length exeeed about twelve times its thicknesss The force may therefore he considered as tending only to crush the column; and since the inferior parts must support the weight of the superior parts, in addition to the load which presses on the whole column, their thickness ought to be somewhat inereased; and it appears from a consideration of the direction in whieh the fracture is most easily effected, that the outline ought to be made a little convex externally, and more curved above than below, which is the usual, although not the universal practice; an elliptic are is perhaps the most eligible outline, or a curve formed hy bending a ruler fixed at the summit of the column; sometimes the form is made to differ little from a cone, but such a ſigure is very inelegant. The diminution of the thickness amounts in general to about one sixth or one seventh of the whole, and sometimes to one fourth. (Plate XI. Fig. 149.) For a light house, where a great force of wind and water was to be resisted, Mr. Smeaton chose a curve vith iĩts concavity turned outwards. If we caleulated what would be the best form for a wooden pillar, intended to remain always immersed in the water to a certain depth, we should ſind that a cone or pyramid vould possess the greatest possible strength for supporting the motion of the water; and a cone more acute than this would he equally capable of resisting the force of the wind, supposing it to be less active than that of the water; the part below the water might, therefore, be widened so as to become a portion of a more obtuse cone, the upper part remaining more slender; and the greatest agitation of the sea being near its surface, the basis of the pillar might be a little contracted, so as to have the outline of the lower part a little convex outwards, if the depth of the water were i , considerable But in the case of a building of stone, the strength oſten depends as much on the veight of the materials as on their cohesive pover: and the lateral adhesion, which is materially inſluenced by the weight, constitutes a very important part of the strength. For resisting a force vhich tends to overset the building, the form in which the veight gives the greatest strength is that of a conoĩd, or a solid of which the outline is a parabola, concave towards the axis: and for procuring, by means of the veight, a lateral adhesion which is every where proportional to the force, the form must be cy lindrical. So that in a building circumstanced as we have supposed the pillar to be, there appears to be no reason for making either portion of the outline taken separately, convex towards the axis, although the angular junction of the two portions of cones might very properly be rounded off; and the upper parts might be a little enlarged iſ it were desirable to reduce the thickness of the wallss But the Eddystone light house is completely above the level of the sea, although in stormy weather every part of it is exposed to the action of the waves, the water heing sometimes thrown up to a much greater height than that of the light house: so that it may be considered as exposed to the force of a fluid more and more powerful as it is nearer to the foundation; and in this point of view its form differs but little from that which the most accurate theory would point out; but jt is probubly a little veaker about the middle of its height, or suomewhat lower, than in any other part. (Plate XI. Fig. 150.) A vall must be reduced in thickness as it rises, for the same reason as a column is diminished; and if the wall is a part of a house, it must be reduced in a still greater degree, since the load, which is to be supported by it at different parts of its height, is usually much varied, by the weight of the ſloors, and of the contents of the apartments. But sometimes the obliquity of the surface of the wall may become inconvenient, hy promoting the growth of moss and weeds. In building a vall, the first precaution that is required, is to dig deep enough to ascertain the nature of the ground; the next, to lay a sufficiently extensive and ſirm foundation; and it has been very properly recommended that where a well is wantel, iĩt should be dug before the foundatiuns of the house are lai, in order to examine the qualities of the different strata which are to support them. The disposition of the stones, or bricks, is not a matter of indifference; the strength is obviously greatest when all the surfaces are either horizontal or vertical; for iſ they are oblique, they must have a tendency to slide away laterally, and the vall must be very liable to crack: hence the reticulated valls, sometimes employed by the ancients, oſ vwhich all the joints were oblique, possessed but little durability. If the materials are thrown together without order, they press on the parts in contact with them; but occasionally, as in the case oſ piers, or quays, this circumstance may be of some advantage in opposing external pressure; or at least the effect of such a pressure may remove the inconvenience which would othervise arise from the irregularity of the structure. In some cases it is necessary to unite the stones of a building mechanically, either by cramps of iron, fixed hy means of melted lead, or by other methods, similar to those which are more usually employed in carpentry. Mr. Smeaton as obliged to ſix the stones of his light house to the rock and to each other, by dovetail joints, and to eonnect each horizontal tier with the tier below it, by pins of wood passing through the stunes, with wedges driven in at each end, to make them expand, and tie the stones fast together. But, in general, it is sufficient to employ mortar, made of lime or terras, and sand, of vhich the utility depends principally on the ſirmness and cohesive strength that it acequires in consequence of its chemical properties. Somelimes the whole structure is composed oſ a mass which is at first soft, but hardens as it dries; in this manner mud valls are built; and the materials called pisc are oſ a similar naturee. (Plate XI. Fig. 1561.) The vall or column, when raised, must in general help to support a single lintel or benm, an arch, a dome, or a roof of carpentry. The strength of the lintel depends more on the nature of the substance, than on any art employed in forming it, excepting the precaution to give ĩit as much depth as is convenient, esperially towards the middle, if the depth be any where unequal; but the construction of an arch affords considerable scope for the exertion of mechanical science. The simplest theory of the areh, supporting itself in equilibrium, is that of Dr. Hooke, the greatest of all philosophical mechaniess. The arch, when it has only its own weight to bear, may he considered as the inversion of a chain suspended àt each end; for the chain hangs in such a form, that the weight of each link is held in equilibrium by the result of the two forces acting at its extremities; and these forces or tensions are produced, the one by the weight of the portion of the chain below the link, the other by the same weight increased by that of the link; both of them acting originally in a vertical direction Now supposing the chain inverted, so as to constitute an arch of the same form and weight, the relative situations of all the lines, indicating the directions of the forces, will remain the same, the forces acting only in contrary directions, 30 that they are compounded in a similar manner, and halance each other on the same conditions, but with this difference, that the equilibrium of the chain is stable, and that of the arch tottering. This property of the equilibrium renders an accurate experimental proof of the proposition somewhat difficult; but it may be shown that a slight degree of friction is suſficient for retaining in equilibrium an arch formed by the inversion of a chain of beads. The figure iscalled a catenaria, vhen the links are supposed to be infinitely small, and the curvature is greatest at the middle of the chain. It is not at all necessary to the experiment that the links of the chain be equal; the same method may be applied to the determination of the form requisite for an equilibrium, whatever may be the length or weight of the constituent parts of the arch; and vhen the arch is to be loaded unequally in different parts, we may introduce this circumstance into the experiment, by suspending proportional weights ſfrom different parts of the chain. Thus ve may employ wires or other chains to represent the pressure, and adjusting them by degrees, till their extremities hang in a given line, we may find the form which will best support the weight of the materials, the upper surface, or extrados, of the arch being represented by the same line in an inverted position, while the original chain shows the form of the intrados, or of the curve required for the arch stones themselvess In common cases, the form thus determined will differ little from a cireular are, of the extent of about one third of a whole cirele, rising from the abutments with an inclination of 30° to the vertical line, and it never acquires a direction much more nearly perpendicular to the horizon. It usually becomes more curved at some distance below the summit, and then again less curved. (Plate XI. Fig. 152.. 154.) But the supposition of an arch resisting a weight, which acts only in a vertical direction, is by no means perfectly applicuble to cases which generally occur in practice. The pressure of loose stones and earth, moistened as they VOL. I. v frequently are by rain, is exerted very nearly in the same manner as the pressure of ſluids, which act equally in all directions: and even ĩf they were united into a mass, they would constitute a kind of vedge, and vould thus produce a pressure of a similar nature, notwithstanding the precaution recommended by some authors, of making the surfuces of the arch stones vertical and horizontal only. This precaution is, however, in all respeets unnecessary, because the effeet which it is intended to obviate, is productive of no inconvenience, except that of exercising the skill of the architecet. The effect of such a pressure only requires a greater curvature near the abutments, reducing the form nearly to that of an ellipsis, and allowing the arch to rise at ſirst in a vertical direction. A bridge must also be so culeulated as to support itself without being in danger of falling by the defect of the lateral adhesion of its parts, and in order that it may in this respect be oſ equal strength throughout, ĩits depth at each point must be proportional to the weight oſ the parts beyond it. This property belongs to the cuve denominated logarithmic, the length corresponding to the logarithm of the depth. IF the strength were afforded by the arch stones only, this condition might be fulfilled by giving them the requisite thickness, independently of the general form of the arch: but the whole of the materials employed in the construction of the bridge, must he considered as adding to the strength, and the magnitude of the adhesion as depending in great measure on the general outline. We must examine in the next place what is the most advantageous form for supporting any veight which may occasionally be placed on the bridge, in particular at its weakest part, vhich is usually the middle. Supposing the depth at the summit of the arch and at the abutments to he given, it may be reduced considerably in the intermediate parts, without impairing the strength, and the outline may be composed of parabolic ares, having their convexity turned towards each other. This remark also would he only applicable to the areh stones, if they aſſorded the whole strength of the bridge, but it must he extended in some measure to the whole of the materials forming it. IF therefore we combine together the curve best calculated for resisting the ? pressure of a fluid, which is nearly elliptical, the logarithmic, and the parabolic curves, allowing to each its due proportion of inſluence, ve may estimate, from the comparison, which is the ſittest form for an arch intended to support a road. And in general, whether the road be horizontal, or a little inclined, ve may infer that an ellipsis, not differing much from a circle, is the best caleulated to comply as much as possible with all the conditions. (Plate XI. Fig. 155.) The tier of bricks cut obliquel, vhich is usually placed over a window or a door, is a real arch, but 50 ſlat as to allov the apparent outline to be horizontal. Mr. Coulomb observes, that the greatest strength is obtained by causing all the joints to tend to a single point: but little dependence cun be placed on so ſlat an arch, since it produces a lateral thrust which may easily overpower the resistance oſ the wall. For the horizontal force, required to support each end of any arch, is equal to the weight oſ a quantity of the materials which are supported by its summit, supposed to be continued, of their actual depth, to the length of a semidiameter of the cirele of which the summit oſ the arch is a portionn. This simple calculation vill enable an architect to avoid such accidents, as have too often happened to bridges for want of suſficient ſirmness in the abutments. The equilibrium of a bridge, so far as it depends only on the form of the arch, is naturally tottering, and the smallest force which is capable of deranging it, may completely destroy the structure; but when the stones or blocks composing it have ſlat surfaces in contact with each other, it is necessary that the line expressing the direetion of the pressure he so much disturbed, as to exceed at some part the limits of these surfaces, before the blocks can be displacedl When this curve, indicating the general pressure which results from the effeet of a disturbing force, combined with the original thrust, becomes more remote from the centre of the blocks than one sixth of their depth, the joints will begin to open on the convex side, but the arch may still stand, vhile the curve remains within the limits of the blocks. : It is desirable that the piers of bridges should be so firm, as to be able not only to support the weight of half of each adjoining areh, but also to sustain, in case oſ the failure of one oſ those arches, the horizontal thrust of the other; and the same condition is obviously necessary for thæ stability of walls of any Kind which support an arched or vaulted roof, wherever there is no opportunity of assisting the strength by ties or chains of any kind. There are two vays in which such a pier or wall may give way: it may either be overset, or caused to slide away horizontally; but since the friction or adhesion which resists the horizontal motion is usually greater than one third of the pressure, it seldom happens that the whole thrust of the arch is so oblique as not to produce a suſficient vertical pressure for securing the stability in this respect; and it is only necessary to make the pier heavy enough to resist the force vhich tends to overset it. It ĩs not, however, the weight of the pier only, but that of the half of the arch which rests on it, that resists any effort to overset it, and in order that the pier may stand, the sum of these weights, acting on the end of a lever equal to half the thickness of the pier, must be more than equivalent to the horizontal thrust, acting on the vhole height of the pier. The pier may also be simply considered as forming a continuation of the areh, and the stability will be preserved as long as the curve, indicating the direction of the pressure, remains within its substance. The arches of Black Friars bridge are of an oval form, composed of cicular arcs, and differing but little from ellipses; the arch stones are so large that the pressure in any direction might be very greatly inereased without causing the general result to exceed the limits of their magnitude, or even to approach very near to their surfaces. (Plate XII. Fig. 156.) The construction of a dome is less difſicult than that of an arch, since the tendency of each part to fall is counteracted, not only by the pressure of the parts above and below, but also by the resistance of those which are situated on each sidee A dome may therefore be erected without any temporary support, like the centre which is required for the construetion of an arch, and it may at lust be left open at the summit, without standing in need of a keystone, since the pressure of the lower parts is suſſiciently resisted, by the collateral parts of the same horizontal tier, to prevent the possibility of their falling in, or of their forcing out the upper parts. The veight of the dome may however force out its lower parts, if it rises in a direction too nearly vertical; and supposing its form spherical, and its thickness equable, it will require to be conſined by a hoop or chain as soon as the span becomes eleven fourteenths of the whole diameter. But if the thickness of the dome be diminished as it rises, it will not require to be hound s0 high: thus, if the inerease of thickness in descending begin at about 30 degrees from the summit, and be continued until, at about 60 degrees, the dome becomes a little more than twice as thick as at ſirst, the equilibrium will be s0 far secure; and at this distance it would be proper to employ either a chain, or some external pressure, to preserve the stability, since the weight itself would require to be increased vithout limit, if it were the only source of pressure on the lower parts. (Plate XII. Fig. 157.) The dome of St. Paul's cathedral is elliptical, and is built of wood, and confined by strong chains, consisting of iron bars; that of the Pantheon at Rome is nearly circular, and ĩts lower parts are 50 much thicker than its upper parts, as to afford sufficient resistance to their pressure: they are supported by walls of great thickness, and furnished with many projections vhich answer the purpose of abutments and buttressess (Plate XII. Fig. 158, 159.) A knovledge of the parts and proportions usually assigned to columns, and to buildings in general, and of their technical names and divisions, belongs rather to the subject of ornamental than to that of useful architecture; and the consideration of symmetry and elegance is in great measure foreign to that of the mechanical properties of bodies, which it is our present business to investigatee The ſive orders oſf ancient architecture are found to differ considerably in their proportions, in the different remains of Greek and Roman edifices; but there always remain some characteristic distinctions: the Tuscan is known by its strength and simplicity, without any peculiar omament; the Doric by its triglyphs, or triangular grooves, above each column, imagined to represent the ends of beams; the Ionic by the large volutes, and the Corinthian by the foliage, respectively enveloping their capitals; and the Composite usually hy the combination of hoth these characters; each order being lighter than the preceding, and being sometimes employed with it in the upper parts of the same building. In general, the Iength of the Tuscan eolumn, with its capital, is equal to about seven diameters of the hase, that of the Doric eight, of the Ionic nine, and of the Corinthian and Composite ten diameters. (Plate XII. Fig. IGO.. 164.) The Gothic architects appear to have been superior to the Greeks in the mechanical arrangement of the parts of their ediſices, 30 as to produce the most advantageous eſſect in preserving the general equilibrium. They made every essential member of their buildings a constituent part of their system of ornament, and even those embellishments, which, by a superſicial observer, might be deemed useless or pręjudicial, are frequently calculatei, either by their strength, or by their weight, to serve some beneſicial purposes. The pointed arch is not in all cases well caleulated for equilibrium, but when it has a pillar resting on its summit, it is excecdingly strong. The most celebrated of modern architects have sometimes been less successſul than those of the midile ages; and for want of paying sufficient attention to mechanical principles, have committed such errors in their attempts to procure an equilibrium, as have heen followed by the most mischievous consequences. Examples of this might be pointed out in the bridges of our own country, and the churches of others; but if we are masters of the true theory of pressure, we shall be able to avoid similar errors, without examining the particular cireumstances which have occasioned these accidents. (Plate XII. Fig. 165.) The principles of equilibrium, which are employed in architecture, are equally applicable to many cases in carpentry; and where the vork is principally calculated to withstand a thrust, there is little difference in the operation of the forees concerned; hut where a tie is introduced, that is, a piece which resists principally by its cohesive strength, the parts often require to he arranged in a different manner. The general principle, that three forces, in order to retain each other in equilibrium, must be proportional to the sides of a triangle corresponding to their directions, is sufficient for determining the distribution of pressure in almost all eases that can occur. The conelusions which have been drawn from this principle, and from other similur considerations, respecting the strength of materials, will also he of great use in directing us how to determine the best forms for beams, raſters, and timhers of all kinds, and hov to arrange and connect them in the best manner with each other. The employment of the cohesive strength oſ materials in carpentry introduces a diſficulty which scarcely exists in architecturee Two blocks, placed on each other, resist the force of a weight compressing them, as effectually as if they formed hut one piece: but they have no sensible cohesion to enable them to withstand a force tending to separate them, and if they are required to cooperate hy their cohesive strength, some mode of uniting them must be found. For this purpose, it is generally necessary to sacrifice a considerable portion of the strength of the materials employed. The most usual mode is to place the ends oſ the pieces side by side, ſirst reducing their dimensions, where a regular outline is required; and to procure a firm adhesion between them by means of external pressure, or to employ the natural adhesion of some parts which are made to project beyond the rest in each piece, and receive in their interstices the corresponding projections of the other piece. Where the adhesion is produced by external pressure only, it is oſ advantage to subdivide the joints into a considerable number of parts, as is usually done in the masts of ships, and to make the junction of any two pieces, folJowing each other in the same line, as distant as possible from any other junction; for in this manner, the loss of strength may be diminished almost vithout limit, provided that the distance between the joints be great enough to afford a firm ãdhesion to each partt. The junction may also be formed hy an oblique line; but the obliquity must be so great that any lateral pressure may increase the stability of the wedge, the length being in a greater proportion to the depth than the pressure to the adhesion that it occasions; and the pieces must be pressed together very foreibly by means of hoops or bolts. (Plate XIII. Fig. 166.. 168.) Where the natural adhesion of some projecting parts in each piece ĩs employed, the projections must he suſficiently long to secure their strength, and they must be as little prominent as possible, partly because the contiguous piece must he excavated for their reception, and partly because their strength is diminished when they project more than one sixth of their length. A heam united to another in this manner is said to be scarfedl. (Plate-XIII. Fig. 169.) l In order to preserve the strength of a compound beam, intended to resist a transverse action in a particular direction, ĩt is necessary to avoid, as much as possible, reducing the depth of the beam in that direction, and to sccure LECTURE XIV. the union with the greatest care on the convex side of the beam, which is stretched by the operation of the forcee Where no inconvenience can result from the projection of a piece on one side, it is easy to preserve the strength unimpaired, by splicing or ſishing it on the convex side; and if the depth of the piece added be only half as great as that of the original beam, the strength will be somewhat increased by the operation, supposing the two ends to meet each other without any connexion. Such pieces require, hoever, to be firmly united, either by pins passing through them, or by blocks or joggles let in to a certain depth, in order to prevent their sliding on each other; and this mode of union is stronger than scarſing them, because it does not diminish the depth. (Plate XIII. Fig. 170, 171.) Where the pieces to be connected together are in different directions, the end of one of them is usually reduced in its size, und becomes a tenon, while a mortise is cut in the other for its reception, and the joint is also oſten secured still more firmly by a strap of ironn. Ifa joist be let into a beam, at its upper edge, and made very tight hy wedges, the strength of the beam will not be materially diminished; but the vicissitudes oſ moisture and dryness may very much impair the firmness of the union, and the end of the joist may fail in dry weather to afford suſficient resistance to the ſlexure of the beam: s0 that in some cases it might be more adviseable to cut the mortise near the middle of the depth of the beam. If two pieces meet obliquely, and one of them exerts a thrust against the other, the simplest mode of opposing this thrust is to bind them together by a strap of iron fixed to the second piece; this strap renders it impossible for the first to advance without having its extremity crushed; it is also common to make a mortise in the second piece, a part of which serves as an abutment for the ſirst: and for this purpose the piece must be continued far enough beyond the abutment to give the projection sufticient force of adhesion, a condition which is the more easily fulfilled when the action of the strap produces a pressure on it. The assistance of a strap is still more indispensable where the pieces are perpendicular to each other, and the force tends to draw one of them avay from the other: in this case the mortise may he made a little wider at the remoter part, and the end of the tenon may be made to fit it by driving in wedges, in the same manner as Mr. Smeaton united his blocks of stone; but a large mortie vould weaken the beam too much, and a strong strap or hoop is usually required for additional security.. Such a strap ought always to be as straight as possible, 30 as to act only in the direction of the force to be resisted: it has been too customary to accommodate the strap to the form of the beams, or to make it deviate in other ways from a right line: but wherever a strap is bent in any direction, to a distance from a right line equal only to its depth in that direction, its strength is so reduced, as not to exceed one seventh of what it would have heen, if it had remained straight. (Plate XIV. Fig. 172.. 174.) It ĩs equally necessary in all other cases which occur in carpentry, to avoid as much as possible a transverse strain, the disadvantage of which is obvious from the great inferiority of the strength of any substance, resisting a transverse force, to ĩts primitive cohesive or repulsive strength.. For similar reasons, it is proper to avoid employing a very open angle at a point where a load is supported, the great obliquity of the two pieces forming the angle requiring them to exert a great force in order to oppose a much smaller one. Allowance must also he made for the contraction oſ the timber, and care must be taken that it do not so alter the arrangement of the parts, as to bring a disproportionate strain on a point not calculated to support it. IF the two pieces forming an obtuse angle consisted, either wholly or partly, of wood cut across the grain, and the piece joining their extremities were cut in the usual manner, the oblique pieces would contract considerably more as they became drier, and the angle would become more obtuse, so that the strain, produced by a given weight, would be greater than in the original state of the triangle. Sometimes the work is liable to he deranged by the operation of a lateral force, which may have appeared too triſling to produce any considerable effect, but which may still destroy the greater part of the strength, by causing the resistances to deviate ſfrom the plane of the forces which they are intended to oppose. The framing of a roof is one of the most common and most important subjects for the employment of the theory of carpentry. I the raſters vere simply to abut on the walls, they would force them outwards; a tie beam is thereſore necessary, to counteract the thrust. In order to enable the tie beam to support a weight, a king post is suspended from the rafiers; and frequently braces are again erected from the bottom of the king post, to supvoL. I. H port the middle oſ the rafters. Sometimes a ſlat or less inclined portion is placed in the middle, forming a kirb or mansard roof, somew hat resembling an arch; this form has the advantage, when it is properly proportioned, of lessening the transverse strain on the raſters, by making them shorter; but this purpose is answered equally vell hy the addition oſ the braces which have been already mentionedl. A kirh rooſ aſſords, however, a greater space vithin, than a plain roof of the same height, and produces also somewhat less strain on the tie beam or on the abutments: the tie heam may be suspended from iĩt by a king post and tvo queen posts, descending perpendicularly from the joints; and the place of the king post may be supplied by a cross beam uniting the heads of the queen posts and keeping them at a proper distance; this beam may also he suspended by a shorter king post from the summit. Sucha roof appears to be more advantageous than it has been commonly supposed. (Plate XIII. Fig. 175.. 177.) The angle of inclination of a roof to the horizon usually varies in different climates: in Italy the height is generally less than one fourth of the breadth; in England it was formerly three fourths, but it now commonly approaches much more to the Italian proportion. In northern climates, a steep rooſ ĩs required on account oſ ſalls of snow, which greatly increase the lateral thrust oſ the raſters; for the horizontal force exerted by a roof is always proportional to the length of a line perpendioular to the raſter, descending ſfrom its extremity till it meets another similar line drawn from the oppusite raſter; and this perpendicular is obviously much inereased when the roof becomes very ſlat. But for bearing the transverse strain, which tends to break the rafters themselves, a low roof is stronger than a high one, supposing the number of braces and queen posts equal on hoth: for if we have to support a given weight by a beam or rafter, whether it be placed in the middle, or equally divided throughout the length, we neither gain nor lose force by lengthening the heam and raising it higher, while the horizontal span continues the same, since the ohliquity lessens the cficet of the weight precisely in the sume ratio that the length oſ the beum diminishes its strength; but by lengthening the beam ve ulso add to the weight vhich is to be supported, and we thus diminish the strength of the roof. It must be observed, in calculating the strength of a taſter, that the slight flexure, produced by the transverse strain, has a materiul effect in diminishing its strength in resisting a longitudinal force; and this diminution must be determined according to the principles that have been laid down respecting the equilibrium of elastic substances. Wooden bridges, and the temporary centres on which arches of stone are supported during their construetion, depend nearly on the same principles as rooſs: the external parts usually support a thrust, and the internal act as ties; but the abutments are generally capable of withstanding a horizontal thrust without inconvenience, so that hy their assistance the strain on the ties is considerably diminished. Great strength may also be obtained, where it is practicable to support each part of the centre by two beams, in the direction of chordss bearing immediately on the abutments. (Plate XIV. Fig. 178, 179.) The various articles of household furniture belong to subordinate branches of carpentry, but their form is in general more accommodated to convenience and elegance than to strength and durability. Yet even in making a chair, there is room for error and for improvement; the same principles that direct us in framing a roof, are capable of application here; but if they were implicitly followed, they would lead us to the employment of bars crossing each other in an inelegant manner. Doors, gates, locks, and hinges, are either parts of the carpenter's employment, or appendages to his works; and it is possible that, by attentive consideration, improvements might be made in all of them. Mr. Parker has devoted much time and labour to the subject of gates, with their hinges and fastenings, and has presented to the Royal Institution a very useful collection of models, which show the result oſ his investigations. LECTURE XV. ON MACHINERY. HAVING taken a general view of those branches of practical mechanies in which forces are to be resisted, we are next to consider the modiſications of forces and of motions; and in the first place the modes of applying forces, of changing their direction and intensity, and of communicating them to different parts of our machines by the intervention of rods, joints, cranks, wheelwork, ropes, or other ſlexible substances; in the second place, the structure of these substances, and the methods by which the union of ſlexible ſibres in general may be effected; and in the third place, the reguloIation and equalisation oſ motion, by means of clocks and watches. The modes of applying mechanical forces are almost as various as the machines that are constructed, and the purposes for which they are employed: but in general, the strength of men is applied by means of levers, or winches, or by walking wheels, which slide beneath them as they attempt to ascend; and that of other animals, by a horizontal arm projecting from a vertical axis, to which they are harnessed, and sumetimes also by causing them to walk on or in a moveable wheel. Many of these arrangements may however be very conveniently considered as helonging to the particular objects for which each machine is constructed, especially to the modes of raising weights by eranes, and of grinding substances by mills. When motion is simply communicated to a substance placed before the moving body, such materials must be employed as are capable of exerting a repulsive force, or a thrust; and these are generally of the same kind as are sometimes concerned in the operations of architecture, but more commonly in those of carpentry, particularly metal and wood. But vhen the body to be moved is behind the moving power, and is pulled along by it, chains or ropes are sometimes more convenient. In the union of wood for moveable machinery, it is generally advisable to avoid employing pins or bolts of metal; for these, by their superior weight and hardness, someti mes injure the wood in contact with them, and hecome loose. When the direction of the motion communicated is also to be changed, levers or cranks may be employed, united by joiuts or hinges of various kinds. Sometimes a long series of connected rods is suspended by other rods or chains, so as to convey the effect of the force to a considerable distance; in this case the motion is generally alternate, vhen, for example, pumps are orked by means of a waterwheel at a distance from the shaft in which the pumps are placed. In this arrangement, there is no necessary loss on account of the alternation of the motion of the rods; for if they are suspended at equal distances from a number of ſixed points, they will move backwards and forwards, in the manner of a single pendulum; but the magnitude of the friction is the principal inconvenience produced by the veight of the seriess Where a lever is employed for changing the direction of a great force, its strength may be increased by the addition of a frame projecting in the direction of its depth; and if the lever is bent, a cross piece uniting its arms is still more requisitee (Plate XIV. Fig. 180.. 182.) For the communication of a rotatory motion, Dr. Hooke's universal joint is sometimes of use, especially when the inclination is not required to be materially changed; but if the obliquity is great, the rotation is not communicated equably to the new axis at all points oſ its revolution. This joint is formed by a cross, making he diameters of tvo semicircles, one oſ vhich is ſixed at the end of each axis. (Plate XIV. Fig. 183.) The best mode of connecting a rotatory motion with an alternate one, ĩs, in all common cases, to employ a erank, acting on one end of a long rod, vhich has a joint at the other. If the rotatory motion of the erank be tquable, the progressive motion of the rod will be gradually accelera ted and retarded, and for a considerable part of the revolution the force exerted vill be nearly uniform: but if we attempted to communicate at once to the rod its whole velocity in each direction, as has sometimes been done by inclined planes, or by wheelvork, the motion vould become extremely i irregular, and the machinery would be destroyed by the strain. (Plate XIV. Fig. 181.) On the other hand it must he observed, that the force applied to a machine may, in general, be divided into two portions; the one employed in opposing another force, so as to produce equilibrium only, the other in generating momentum With respect to the ſirst portion, a single crank has the inconvenience of changing continually the mechanical advantage of the machine; with respect to the second, its motion in the second quarter oſ its revolution is accelerated, instead of heing retarded, by the inertia which this portion of the foree is intended to overcome: and ſrom a combination of both these causes, the motion must necessarily be rendered very irregular. They may, however, be completely removed hy employing always cranks in pairs, one of them being fixerd s0 as to make a right angle with the other, which is also the best position for two winches to be turned by two labourers; since the point of the eirele, in which a man can exert his greatest strength, is nearly at the distance oſ a right angle, or a little more, from the point at which his foree is smallest. An alternate motion may be comunicated to a rod, so that the force may be either uniformly exerted, or varied according to any given law, by means of an inclined surface, formed into a proper curve, and acting on a friction wheel fixed to the rod; and a single plane surface, placed obliquely, would answer suſficiently well for this purpose But in such cases, as well as when a crank is used, it is necessary to employ other means for supporting the rod in its proper situation; this may either be done by additional frietion vheels, or in a more elegant manner, by such an arrangement of jointed rods, as vill cause the extremity of one oſf them to move in a curve which does not sensibly differ from a right line. If we fix two pins in a beam, so as to connect to it two equal rods, of which the extremities are joined by a third, and the end of this third rod which is nearest to the centre of the beam be eonnceted to a second beam of a proper length, the opposite end of the rod will initially deseribe a right line; and for this purpose the length of the second beam must be to the distance of the nearest pin from the centre as that distance is to the distance of the pins from each other. The same effect may also be produced hy means, of a frame, made of two pieces, each a 2 yard long, united by joints to each other, and to two other pieces of a foot each; one of the ſirst pieces being ſixed, if the shorter piece. opposite to it be produeed to the length oſ four feet, its extremity will move at first in a right linee. The proportions of the rods may also be made more convenient than these, and others may be added to them, if it be required, which may make a line move so as to remain alays in parallel directions. (Plate XIV. Fig. 185.. I88.) But of all the modes of communicating motion, the most extensively useful is the employment of wheelwork, which is capable of varying its direction and its velocity without any limit. Wheels are sometimes turned by simple contact with each other; sometimes by the intervention of cords, straps, or chains, passing over them; and in these cases the minute protuberances of the surfaces, or whatever else may be the cause of friction, prevents their sliding on each other. Where a broad strap runs on a wheel, it is usually confined to ĩts situation, not by causing the margin of the wheel to projeet, hut, on the contrary, by making the middle prominent: the reason of this may be understood by examining the manner in which a tight strap running on a cone would tend to run tovards its thickest part. Sometimes also pins are ſixed in the wheels, and admitted into perforations in the straps; a mode only practicable where the motion is slow and steady. A smooth motion may also be obtained, vith considerable force, by forming the surfaces of the wheels into brushes of hair. (Ilate XV. Fig. 189.) More commonly, however, the circumferences of the contiguous vheels are formed into teeth, impelling each other, as with the extremities of so many levers, eſther exactly or nearly in the common direetion of the circumferences; and sometimes an endless serew is substituted for one of the vheelss. In forming the teeth of wheels, ĩt is of consequence to determine the eurvature which vill procure an equable communication of motion, vith the least possible frietion. For the equable communication of motion, two methods huve been recommended; one, that the lower part of the face of cach tooth should be a straight line in the direction of the radius, and the upper a portion of an epicycloid, that is, of a curve deseribed by a point of a circle rolling on the wheel, of which the diameter must be half that of the opposite wheel; and in this case it is demonstrable that the plane surface of each tooth vill act on the curved surface of the opposite tooth so as to produce an equable angular motion in both wheels: the other method is, to form all the surfaces into portions of the involutes of circles, or the curves described by a point of a thread which has been wound round the wheel, hile it is uncoiled; and this method appears to answer the purpose in an easier and simpler manner than the former. It may be experimentally demonstrated, that an equable motion is produced by the action of these curves on each other: if we cut two hoards into forms terminated by them, divide the surfaces by lines into equal or proportional angular portions, and fix them on any two centres, we shall find that as they revolve, whatever parts of the surfaces may be in contact, the corresponding lines will always meet each other. (Plate XV. Fig. 190.. I92.) Both of these methods may be derived from the general principle, that the teeth of the one wheel must be of such a form, that their outline may be described by the revolution of a curve upon a given cirele, while the outline oſ the teeth of the other wheel is deseribed by the same curve revolving within the circle It has been supposed hy some of the best authors that the epicycloidal tooth has also the advantage of completely avoiding frietion; this, is however by no means true, and it is even impracticable to invent any form for the teeth of a wheel, which will enable them to act on other teeth without friction. In order to diminish it as much as possible, the teeth must be as small and as numerous as is consistent with strength and durability; for the effeet of friction always increases with the distance of the point of contact from the line joining the centres oſ the wheels. In calenlating the quantity of the ſriction, the velocity with which the parts slide over each other has generally been taken for its measure: this is a slight inaccuracy of conception, for, as we have already seen, the actual resistance is not at all inereased by inereasing the relative velocity; but the effect of that resistance, in retarding the motion of the wheels, may he shown, from the general laws of mechanies, to be proportional to the relative velocity thus ascertained. When it is possible to make one wheel act on teeth fixed in the concave surface of another, the friction may be thus diminished in the proportion of the difference of the diameters to their sum If the face of the teeth, where they are in contact, is too much inelined to the radius, their mutual frietion is not much aſſected, but a great pressure on their axes is produced; and this occasions a strain on the machinery, as vell as an increase of the friction on the axes. I? it is desired to produce a great angular velocity with the smallest possible quantity of wheelvork, the diameter of each wheel must be between three and four times as great as that oſ the pinion on which it actss Where the pinion impels the wheel, iĩt is sometimes made with three or four teeth only; but it is much better in general to have at least six or eight; and considering the additional labour of increasing the number of wheels, it may be advisable to allot more teeth to each of them than the number resulting from the calculation; so that we may allow 30 or 40 teeth to a wheel acting on a pinion of õ or 8 In works which do not require a great degree of strength, the wheels have sometimesa much greater number of teeth than this; and on the other hand, an endless sere or a spiral acts as a pinion of one tooth, since it propels the wheel through the breadth of one tooth only in each revolution. For a pinion of six teeth, it would be better to have a wheel of 35 or 37 than 36; for each tooth of the wheel would thus act in turn upon each tooth of the pinion, and the work would he more equally vorn than if the same teeth continued to meet in ench revolution. The teeth of the pinion should also be somevhat stronger than those of the wheel, in order to support the more frequent recurrence of friction. It has been proposed, for the coarser kinds of wheelwork, to divide the distance between the middle points of two adjoining teeth into 30 parts, and to allot 16 to the tooth of the pinion, and 18 to that of the vheel, allowing I for frecdom of motion. The wheel and pinion may either be situated in the same plane, both being commonly of the kind denominated spur vheels, or their planes may form an angle: in this case one of them may be a crown or contrate wheel, or both of them may be bevilled, the teeth being cut obliquely. According to the relative magnitude of the wheels, the angle of the bevil must be different, so that the velocities of the wheels may be in the same proportion at hoth ends of their oblique faces: for this purpose, the faces of all the teeth must be directed to the point where the axes would meet. (Plate XV. Fig. 198, 194.) voL. I. ] aa In cases where a motion not quite equable is required, as it sometimes happens in the construction of clocks, but more frequently in orreries, the wheels may either be divided a little unequally, or the axis may be placed a little out of the centre; and these eccentric wheels may either act on other eccentric vheels, or, i they are made as contrate wheels, upon a lengthened pinion. (Plate XV. Fig. 195, 196.) An arrangement is sometimes made for separating wheels which are intended to turn each other, and for replacing them at pleasure; the wheels are suid to be thrown by these operations out of gear and into gear again. When a wheel revolves round another, and is so fixed as to remain nearly in parallel direction, and to cause the central wheel to turn round its axis, the apparatus is called a sun and planet wheel. In this case, the circumference of the central wheel moves as fast as thut of the revolving wheel, each point of which describes a cirele equal in diameter to the distance oſ the centires of the two vheels: consequently, when the wheels are equal, the central wheel makes two revolutions, every time that the exterior wheel travels round it. If the central wheel be fſixed, and the exterior wheel be caused to tum on its own centre during its revolution, by the eſfect of the contact of the teeth, it vill make in every revolution one turn more vith respect to the surrounding ohjects, than it would muke, iſ its centre were at rest, during one turm of the wheel which is ſixed: and this circumstance must be recollected when such vheels are employed in planetariums. Wheels are usually made of woodl, of iron, either cast or wrought, of steel, or oſ hrass. The teeth of wheels of metal are generally eut by means of a machine; the wheel ĩs ſixed on an axis, which also carries a plate furnished with a voriety of cſreles, divided into diſferent numbers of equal parts, marked by small excavations; these are brought in succession under the point of a spring, which holds the axis firm, while the intervals hetween the teeth are expeditiously cut out by a revolving saw of steel. The teeth are aſtervards finished by u ſle; and a machine has also been invented for holding and working the ſile (Plate XV. Fig. 197.) i It ĩs ſrequently necessary in machinery to protract the time of application of a given force, or to reserve a part of it for future use. This is generally effected by suſfering a weight to descend, which has been previously raised, or a spring to unbend itself from a state of forcible ſlexure, as is exempliſied in the weights and springs of clocks and watehes. The common kitchen jack is also employed for protracting and equalising the operation oſ a veight: in the patent jack the same eſfect is produced by an alternate motion, the axis being impelled backwards and forwards, as in clocks and watches, by means of an escapement, and the place of a balance spring being supplied by the twisting and untwisting of a cord. In these machines, as well as in many others of greater magnitude, the fly vheel is a very important part, its velocity being increased by the operation of any part of the force vhich happens to be superſluous, and its rotatory pover serving to continue the motion when the force is diminished or withdravn. Thus, when a man turns a winch, he can exert twice as much force in some positions as in others, and a ſly enables him in some cases to do nearly one third more vork. In the pile engine, also, without the help of the ſly, the horses would fall for want of a counterpoise, as soon as the eight is disengaged. Such a fly ought to be heavy, and its motion must not be too rapid, otherwise the resistance of the air will destroy too much of the motion; but in the kitchen jack, as well as in the striking part of a clock, vhere the superſluous force is purposely destroyed, the ſly is made light, and strikes the air with a broad surfacee An effect similar to that of a ſly and a spring is sometimes produced in hydraulic machines by the introduction of an air vessel, the air contained in which is compressed more or less according to the intensity of the force, and exerts a more uniform pressure in expelling the ſluid which is foreed irregularly into it. LECTURE XVI. ON THE UNION OF FLEXIBLE FIBRES. TuE strength of cordage, and of other substances which are employed in the communication of motion, where flexibility is required, as vell as the utility oſ other flexible materials whieh serve for furniture or for clothing, depends principally upon the lateral adhesion produced by twisting, or by the intermixture of fibres. The union of ſlexible fibres, therefore, being frequently subservient to the communication of motion, and the machinery, usually employed for producing it, belonging immediately to the subject of the modification of motion, ve may vith propriety consider at present, as far as our plan will allow us, those important branches of the mechanical arts, of which the object is to effeet a union of this kind. When a chain is made of wire, each link is separately bent, and remains united with the neighbouring links in virtue of its rigidity: but the ſibres of vegetable and of animal substances must be united by other means. For this purpose we have recourse to the foree of friction, or rather of lateral adhesion, and the ſibres are so disposed, that besides the mutual pressure vhich their own elasticity causes them to exert, any additional foree applied in the direction of the length of the aggregate, tends to bring the parts into closer contact, and to augment the adhesion, in the sume manner as we have already seen that a wedge and a serew may be retained in ther situations. The simple art of tying a knot, and the more complicated processes of spinning, ropemaking, wenving, and felting, derive their utility from this principle. When a line is coiled round a eylinder, for instance, in letting down a weight, by means of a rope vhich slidles on a post, or on such a grooved cylinder as is sometimes employed to enable a person to lower himself from a window in cases of ſire, the pressure on the whole eircumſerence l ' is to the weight, as twice the circumſference to the diameter; supposing, for example, that the friction of rope on metal were one tenth of the pressure, then a single coil of rope rond a cylinder of metal would support about two thirds of the weight; or if the weights acting on the different ends are different, the adhesion may be a little greater or less than in this proportion, according to the manner in which the rope is appliedl. If such a rope made two or three coils, it would he impossible to apply a force suſiicient to cause it to slide in the grooves. From considering the effect of a force which is counteracted by other forces acting obliquely, we may understand both the effect of twisting, in binding the parts of a rope together, and its inconvenience, in causing the strength of the fibres to act with a mechanical disadvantage The greater the obliquity of the ſibres, the greater will be their adhesion, but the greater also vill hbe their immediate tension, in consequence of the action of a given force in the direction of the rope: so that after employing as much obliquity and as much tension, as is suſſicient to conneet the fſibres ſirmly, in all cases of relaxation and of ſlexure, and to prevent in some measure the penetration of moisture, all that is superſluously added tends to overpover the primitive cohesion of the fibres in the direction of their length. The mechanism of simple spinning is easily understood; care is taken, where the hand is employed, to intermix the ſibres suſſiciently, and to engage their extremities as much as possible in the centre; for it is obvious that if any ſibre were wholly external to the rest, it could not be retained in the yarn; in general, however, the materials are previously in such a state of mtermixture as to render this precaution unnecessary Where we have a number of single continuous fibres, as in reeled silk, they are suſiiciently connected by twisting, and we liave no need of spinning In both cases such machinery has been invented for performing the necessary operations, as is both honourable and lucrative to the British nation. Asingle thread or yarn, consisting of fibres twisted together, has a tenlency to untwist itself; the external pirts are the most strained in the operation, and at first shorten the thread, until the internal parts have no longer room for spreading out laterally, as they must necessarily do when their Iength is diminished; the elasticity of all the parts, therefore, resists, and tends to restore the thread to its natural state. But if two such threads are retained in contact at a given point of the cireumference of each, this point is rendered stationary hy the opposition of the equal forees acting in contrary directions, and becomes the centre, round which both threads are carried by the remaining forces, so that they continue to twist round each other till the new combination causes a tension, capable oſ counterbalancing the remaining tension oſ the original threads. Three, four, or more threads may be united nearly in the same manner: a strand consists of a considerable number of yurns thus twisted together, generally from sixteen to twenty ſive, a hawser of three strands, a shrond of four, and a cable of three hawsers or Shrouds. Shroud luid cordage has the disadvantage of being hollow in the centre, or of requiring a greater change oſ form in the strands to ſill up the vacuity, and in undergoing this change, the cordage stretches, and is unequally strained. The relative position and the comparative tension of all the ſibres in these complicated combinations are not very easily determined by calculation; but it is found by experience to he most advantageous to the strength of the ropes to twist the strands, when they are to be compounded, in such a direction as to untwist the yarns of which they are formed; that is, to inerease the twist of the strands themselves: and probably the greatest strength is obtained when the ultimate obliquity of the constituent fibres is the least, and the most equable. This advantage is obtained in a considerable degree by Mr. Huddurt's method of adjusting the length of the strand to its position in the rope, and his registered cordage appears to derive a decided superiority from this arrangement of the strandss. A very strong rope may also he made by twisting ſive or six strands round a seventh as an axis: the central strand, or heart, is found after much use to be chafed to oakum; it should he more twisted than the rest, in order to allow it to extend a little; such ropes are, hovever, unſit for running rigging, or for any use in which they are liable to be ſrequently bent. Ropes are most commonly made of hemp, but various other vegetables are oceasionally employed; the Chinese even use woody ſibres, and the barks of trees furnish cordage to other nations; we have indeed in this country an exaumple of the use of the hark of the lime tree, which is employed for garden matting. The finest hemp is imported from Riga and St. Petersburg. The 2 : male and female flowers of hemp are on different plants; the male plants are soonest ripe, and require to be ſirst pulledc. They are prepared for dressing by being expused to the air, and the fibrous part is separated from the dry pulp by beating and hackling. In spinning the yarn, the hemp is fastened round the vaist; the wheel is turned by an assistant, and the spinmer, walking backvards, draws out the ſibres with his handss. When one length of the walk has been spun, it is immediately reeled, to prevent its untwisting. The machines employed in continuing the process oſ ropemaking are of simple construction, but hoth skill and attention are required in applying them so as to produce an equable texture in every part of the rope. The tendency of two strands to twist, in consequence of the tension arising from the original twist of the yarns, is not sufficient to procure an equilibrium, because of the frietion and rigidity to be overcome; hence it is necessary to employ foree in order to assist this tendency, and the strands or ropes afterwards retain spontaneously the form vhich has thus heen given them: the largest opes even require external force in order to make them twist at all The constituent ropes of a common cable, vhen separate, are stronger than the cable, in the proportion of about 4 1o 3; and a rope vorked up from yarns I80 yards in length to 185 yards, hus been found to he stronger than vhen reduced to 120 yards, in the ratio of 6 to 5. The diſference is owing partly 1o the obliquity of the ſibres, and partly to the unequal tension produced by tvisting. Mr. Huddart's ropes of 100 yams lose but about one cighth of the vhole strength of the yarns; and his experiments appear to show that similar ropes made in the common manner retain only one halſ of their original strength. The tarring of ropes, although sometimes necessary for their preservation from ſecay, is found to lessen their strength, probably because it produces partial adhesions between some of the fibres, which cause them to be disproportionally strained. A rope ĩs also said to he weaker when wet than when dry, perhaps hecause the water enables the fibres to slide more readily on each other, or because the presence of water ĩs in general favourable to separation of any kind. A good hempen rope will support, vithout danger, one ſifth as many tons as the square of its circumſerence contains inches. Flax is weaker than hemp, but not less extensively useful. Tts growth considerably exhausts the strength of the soil which produces it; ĩts cultiva- tion is encouraged in this country by a bounty from government, and a large quantity is also imported from the north of Europe. The plant, while green, is laid in water for ten days, and undergoes a chemical ehange, which soſtens the pulpy part, without injuring the strength of the ſibres, and renders it more easy, vhen it has been dried and exposed to the air for a fortnight, to separate the two substances in the process of dressing it. This is performed by beating it with the edge of a ſlat piece of wood, the stroke being oblique, and nearly in the direction of the ſibres, and afterwards comhing it, in order to reduce the fibres into regular order, and to prepare them for spinning. The refuse, consisting of the shorter fibres, is tow. Cotton is a fine ſibròus substancę, that envelopes the seeds of a plant. The best is brought from the isle of Bourbon; but by far the greatest quantity from the West Indies, although the Turkish dominions as well as the East Indies furnish us with a considerable supply. It is usually white, but there is a yellow kind, which is used for nankeens. It is separated from the seeds by means of rollers, between which it passes, and leaves the seeds behind. It is then beaten, on a ſlake, or a stool covered with a texture of cord. Next, it is carded, eĩther by hand, the ſibres being drawn into regular order hy cards, that is, by brushes of fine pointed wire; or, more commonly, by machinery, the cards being disposed in cylinders which revolve nearly in contact with each other. The drawing or roving machine then draws it into long ſlakes, a state preparatory to its being spun by Sir Richard Arkwright's machines or jennies, which form at once forty threads by the labour of one person. The silkworm is hred in the greatest abundance in Italy and in Asia; it has Iately been introduced very successſully into the British possessions in the East Indies. The principal food oſ the eaterpillar is the white mulberry tree, whiceh is too delicate to thrive well in northern climates: in Italy the trees are planted in beds, like willows, and the foliage is cut as it is wanted. The room in vhich the worms are fed, ĩs kept at the temperature of 80 degrees of Fahrenheitt. The eggs of a former year are hatehed either by animal heat, or by that of the sun; at the age oſ six veeks, the eaterpillars begin to spin, ſust a light externaul texture, which ĩs carded and spun for eourse silk, and afterwards a compaet oval pod or eocoon, of one continued thread. The threads of several cocoons are recled off at the same time: for this purpose they are generally put into warm water, which Eills the chrysalis; but when ĩt is preserved, it soon turns to a moth, which lives but a few days, taking no food, and dies after producing eggs for the next season. The silk is either yellow or white, but the white is an accidental variety only. By repeated washings, the yellow silk is bleached, and that which ĩs originally white, acquires a more perfect Vhiteness. Soap is also used for removing a gummy substance that accompanies the silk of the cocoons. Wool is distinguished into two principal varieties, long and short wool. The longest is from Lincolnshire; it is combed, by means of instruments furnished with a double row of long and sharp teeth of iron or steel; it is repeatedly drawn from one comb to the other, heat being used in the process, and also a little oil. The fleeces of long wool are generally heavier than those of short wool, hut less valuable, on account of their coarseness; they are used for worsteds, and for cloths in which the separate threads remain visible, as stufſs, shalloons, serges, and tammies. Short wool, on the contrary, is carded, and is used for cloths in which the individual threads are concealed by the projecting ſibres. The principal use of thread and yarn, when spun, is for the purpose of veaving. The same force of lateral adhesion that retains the twisted ſibres of each thread in their situations, is here also employed in giving firmness to the cloth; and this adhesion is generally inereased hy the action oſ any external ſorce, tending to strain the whole texture. The first step in weaving is to form a warp, which consists of threads placed side by side, continued through the length of the piece, and suſſicient in number to constitute its breadth. This being wound on a beam or roller, in the loom, the threads are drawn through a harness, consisting of loops formed by twine fixed to bars or frames, which elevates and depresses the threads in succession by means of treadles, moved by the feet, in an order which is diſferent, according to the different nature of the intended work; the cross thread or woof, being thrown between them at each alternation, by means of a shuttle, and forced into its place by a batten or comh, made of VOL. I. B b wire or reeds, while the piece, in proportion as it is completed, is rolled upon a second beam, opposite to the first. Crape is composed of threads which are so strongly twisted, as to have a disposition to curl, and in weaving it; moisture is sometimes employed, in order to obviate this tendency during the processs Woollen cloth, when woven, is rendered stronger and more compact by means of the fulling mill, in which it is beaten by heavy hammers of wood, at the same time that fullers' earth, or alcaline substances of animal origin, are applied in order to cleanse it. In this operation, hoth its length and breadth are diminished, and it is reduced to a texture approaching to that of fel. The reason of the contraction is probably this, that all the fibres are bent by the operation of the hammer, but not all equally, and those vhich have been the most bent are prevented by their adhesion to the neighbouring fibres from returning to their original length. After fulling, the cloth is roughened by means of teasels, vhich are cultivated for the purpose; and the most projecting fibres are cut away by the operation of sheuring. The lateral adhesion of ſibres of various kinds gives strength also to felted substances, assisted, as some assert, by minute barbs, with which the fibres of furs are said to be furnished. The whole strength is, however, much inferior to that of eloth; partly because the fihres are in general much shorter, and partly because their arrangement is less accurately adjusted. The materials commonly used for felting, are the furs of rabhits and heavers, mixed with each other, and with sheeps wool, in various proportions, according to the quality required A very ſine fur has lately been discovered on the skin of a species of seal, mixed with its hair, and it has been employed not only for felting, but also for spinning and veaving into a cloth resembling the shawls of the East Indiess. The fur of the rabbit ĩs also mixed with a conrser haii;, which is separated from it, by being ſirst pulled oſf from the skins, with a sharper knife. The materials to be felted are intimately mixed by the operation of bowing, which depends on the vibrations of an elastic string; the rapid alternations of its motion being peculiarly well adapted to remove all nregular knots and adhesions among the ſibres, and to dispose them in a very light and uniform arrangement. This texture, when pressed under eloths and leather, readily unites into a mass of some firmness; this mass is dipped into a liquor containing a little sulfurie acid, and vhen intended for a hat, is moulded into a large conical figure, which is reduced in its dimensions by working it with the hands, and is formed into a flat surface, with several concentrie folds, which are still more compacted in order to make the brim, and the cireular part of the crown, and forced on a block, which serves as a mould for the cylindrical part. The black dye is composed of logwood, sulfate of iron, and a little acetite of copper, or verdigris; and the stifſening is a thin glueThe texture of paper is scarcely different from that of felt, except that its fibres are less visible to the naked eye. To muke vhite paper, linen rags are ground vith warm water in a mill, into a paste of the consistence of cream: a portion of the paste is taken up in a wire sieve, which is passed obliquely through it, and this, being a little shaken, subsides into a sheet, which is turned out on a piece of ſlannel; a number of sheets being thus formed, they are then pressed, first with the interposition of flannel, and afterwards alone, vhile they are still moist. For thick paper, two or more sheets are laid on each other before ſhe ſirst pressing. To ſill up the pores of the paper, and to increase its strength, a size is employed, vhich is generally made by hoiling shreds of parchment or untunned leather. Sometimes the size is added after printing on the paper, but this is only done in works of inferior elegance, and in this country not at all. Such are the principal cases of the union of ſlexible fibres, for the different purposes of strength or of convenience:. Their importance is such that they might be esteemed worthy of a more detailed consideration; but ve are not likely to make any material improvements in these departments of mechanical ut by the application of theoretical reſinements. LECTURE XVII ON TIMEKEEPERS. THE measurement of time by clocks and watches is a very important and interesting department of practical mechanies. The subject is intimately connected with the consideration of astronomical instruments, but it is not essentially dependent on astronomical principles. Time is measured by motion; but in order that motion may be a true measure of time, it must be equablee Now a motion perfectly free and undisturbed, and consequently uniform, is rendered unattainable by the resistances inseparable from the actual constitution of material substances. It becomes therefore necessary to inquire for some mode of approximating to such a motion. Astronomical determinations of time, which are the most accurate, can only be made under particular circumstances, and even then they assist us but little in dividing time into small portions. The first timekeepers somewhat resemhled the hour glasses which are still uceasionally employed; they measured the escape of a certain quantity, not of sand, but of water, through a small aperture In these clepsydrae, it appears from Vitruvius's account that wheelwork was employed, and the hour vas shown on a graduated scale; the graduations vere also probably so adjusted as to correct the error arising from the inequality of the velocity occasioned by the variation of the height of the water in the reservoir. This inconvenience was however sometimes wholly avoided, by means of a constant steam, which kept the vessel full, or still more elegantly, by the siphon of Hero, which was a bent tube supported by a fluat, so that its lower orifice, at which the water was discharged, was always at a certain distance below the surfacee Dr. Hooke proposed to keep the reservoir full, by means of a a emicylindrical counterpoise, so that the time might be determined either from the measure or weight of the quantity of water dischargel, or from the position of the counterpoise. Various other modes might also be devised for making cheap and simple timekeepers on similar principles, dependent on the motion of various liquids or elastic ſluids; but great accuracy could scarcely be expected from them. A candle sometimes serves as a coarse measure of time; and by burning a thread which pusses through it, it may easily be made to anuswer the purpose of an alarm. Clocks and watches are machines in which wheelwork is employed for the measurement of time, being driven by a weight or by a spring, and regulated by a pendulum or a balance:. Watches differ from elocks, in being portable, and this condition excludes the pendulum and the veight from their construction. It is conjectured that the Saracens had clocks which were moved by weights, as early as the eleventh century. Trithemius mentions an orrery, moved by a weight, and keeping time, vhich was sent, in 1259, by the Sultan of Egypt, as a present to the Emperor Frederie I. Wallingford, in 1396, had made a clock which vas regulated by a fl. The use of such a ſly in equalising motion depends on the resistance of the air, vhich increases rapidly when the velocity is increased, and therefore prevents any great inequality in the motion, as long as the moving power varies but little; and if the action of the veight were transmitted with perfeet regularity by the wheels, and the specific gravity of the air remained unaltered by pressure or by temperature, a fly clock might be a perfect machine, the weight being always exactly counterbalanced by the resistance of the air, attending a certain velocity of the fly; and it might even be possible to regulate the inequalities of the action of the weight, by causing the fly to open and shut, or to turn on an axis, by means oſ a spring, according to the magnitude of the resistance. The unequal density oſ the air would however still remain uncompensated; and in this respect a liquid would be a better medium than an elustic fluid. For experiments which are but of short duration, and which require great precision, a chronometer reguluted by a simple fly is still a useful instrument. Mr. Whitehurst's apparatus for measuring the time occupied in the descent of heavy bodies, is governed by a ſly; the index is stopped by the machinery, and points out the time elapsed without an error of the hundredth part of a second. The alternate motion of a halance, thrown backwards and forwards by the successive actions of a wheel impelling its pullets, is also capable of produeing a degree of uniformity in the motion of the wheel; for the force operating on the pallet is consumed in destroying a velocity in one direction, and in generating a velocity in the contrary uirection; and the space in which it acts being nearly the same in all cases, the velocity generated will also he neꝶrly the same at all times, as long as the force remains the same. Ihe addition of a balance to a clock was made soon after the year 1400, for Arnault, who died in 1465, describes a planisphere, constructed by his master De Fondeur, vhich had a balance vith a scapement like that of a common vateh, but without a spring. Such a halance vibrates much more slowly than a halance provided vith a spring; if the balance spring of a common wateh be removed, the hands will pass over the space of about twenty eight minutes in an hour. It is suid that before the pendulum was used, a balance wheel was sometimes suspended in a horizontal position by a thread passing through its axis, which eoiled round it, and caused it to rise and fall as iĩt oscillated backwards and forwardss. This mode of regulation differed but little in principle from the modern pendulums, but it vas more complicatcd and less accurate. Huygens, in somewhat later times, constructed a elock with a revolving veight, which rose higher, and inereased the resistance, whenever an augmentation of the force increased the velocity; and he caused the thread, which supported the weight, to bend round a curve of such a form as to preserve the equality of the revolutions. l A chronometer may be constructed on this principle for measuring small portions of time, which appears to be capable of greater accuracy than Mr. Whitehurst's apparatus, and by means oſ which an interval oſ a thousandth part of a second may possibly he rendered sensible. If two revolving pendulums be connected with a vertical axis, in such a manner, as to move two weights backwards and forwards accordingly as they fly off to a greater or smaller distance, the weights sliding, during their revolution, ona ſixed sur- face, a small increase of velocity will considerably increase the distance of the weights from the axis, and consequently the effect of their friction, so that the machine will be immediately retarded, and its motion may thus be made extremely regular. It may be turned by a string coiled round the upper part, and this string may serve as a support to a barrel, sliding on a square part of the axis, vhich will consequently descend as it revolves. Its surface, being smooth, may be covered either with paper or with vax, and a pencil or a point of metal may be pressed against it by a fine spring, so as to deseribe alvays a spiral line on the barrel, except when the spring is forced a little on one side by touching it slightly, either with the hand, or by means of any body of which the motion is to be examined, whether it be a falling weight, a vibrating chord or rod, or any other moving substance. In this manner, supposing a barrel a foot in circumference to revolve in two seconds, ecach hundredth of an inch would correspond to the six hundredth part of a second; and the scale might be still further enlarged if it were necessary. (Plate XV. Fig. 198.) By means of this instrument we may measure, without difficulty, the frequency of the vibrations of sounding hodies, by connecting them with a point, vhich will deseribe an undulated path on the rolle. These vibrations may also serve in a very simple manner for the measurement of the minutest intervals of time; for if a body, of which the vibrations are of a certain degree of frequency, be caused to vibrate during the revolution of an axis, and to mark its vibrations on a roller, the traces will serve as a correet index of the time occupied by any part of a revolution, and the motion of any other body may be very accurately compared with the number of alternations marked, in the same time, by the vibrating body. For many purposes, the machine, i heavy enough, might be turned by a handle only, care being taken to keep the balls in a proper position, and it would be convenient to have the descent of the harrel regulated hy the action of a screw, and capable of being suspended at pleasure. But for the general purposes of timekeepers, all other inventions have been almost universally superseded by the pendulum and the balance spring, or pendulum spring. About the year 1000, Ibn Junis, and the other Arabian astronomers were in the habit of measuring time, during their observations, by the vibrations of pendulums; but they never connected them with machinery. The equality of the times occupied by these vibrations, whether larger or smaller, was known to Galileo in 1600, and some time before 1633, he proposed that they should be applied to the regulation of clockss But Sanctorius, in his commentary on Avieenna, describes an instrument to which he had himself applied the pendulum in 16I2. Huygens made the same application only in 1658, which is the date of his work on the subjeet. In the same year, Hooke applied a spring to the balance of a wateh; and soon after, he conceived the idea of improving timekeepers suſficiently for ascertaining the longitude at sea, but he was interrupted in the pursuit of his plan. Hooke was also prohably the ſirst that employed for a clock a heavy weight vibrating in a small are; an arrangement from hich the peculiar advantages of a pendulum are principally derived. The objects which require the greatest attention in the construetion of timekeepers, are these; to preserve the moving power, or sustaining force, as equable as possible, to apply this force to the pendulum or halance in the most eligible manner, and to employ a pendulum or balance of vhich the vibrations are in their nature as nearly isochronous as possible In clocks, the sustaining force, being generally derived from a weight, is already sufficiently equable, provided that care be taken that the line by which it is suspended may be of equal thickness throughout, and may act on a perfect cylinder. But in some clocks, and in all watches, the moving power is a spring. One of the first elock springs is said to have been an old svord blade; a clock with such a spring was lately preserved at Brussels: the spring which is at present used, is a thin elastic plate of steel, coiled into a spiral form. Every spring exerts the more force as it is more hent; in order to correct this inequality, the chain or cord by which it acts on the work is wound on a spiral fusee; so that, in proportion as the force is lessened, it is applied to a larger cylinder, or a longer lever. The general outline of the fusee must be nearly such, that its thickness at any part may diminish in the same proportion as it becomes more distant from the point at which the force would cease altogether, the curve being that which is denominated a hyperbola; but the workmen have in general no other rule than a habitual estimation. (Plate xXV. Fig. 199.) Notwithstanding all possible precautions in the immediate application of the weight or spring, the irregular action of the teeth of the wheels, the increasing tenacity of the oil usually employed, and other accidental disturbances, make it still desirable to procure a further equalisation of the force, which is sometimes obtained in clocks, by raising the loaded arm of a lever to a given height, vhence it may descend; and in watches, by bending a spring into a given position, from hich it may return, so as to limit with great precision the propelling force employed in each vibration. The necessity of applying oil is sometimes in great measure removed by jevelling the holes in which the axes or verges run; a perforation heing made in a plate of ruby, and a diamond applied upon this, in contact with the end of the axis; the hardness and high polish of these stones tending very considerably to diminish the friction. There are also different methods of continuing the action of the force, vhile the clock or watch is wound up: a spring is interposed between the fusee and the vheel impelled by it, a little inferior in force to the original veight or spring, s0 as to remain always bent, until, when the pressure of the main spring is removed, it begins to act upon a fixed point on one side, and upon the wheel of the fusee on the other, so that it propels the work for a short time vith a force nearly equal to that of the main spring. Sometimes also the spring is vound up by causing a small vheel to revolve round the centre of the fusee, having its teeth engaged on one side in those ofa wheel which makes a part of the fusee, and on the other side with the internal teeth of a hoop conneceted with the work, so that the same pressure which winds up the spring tends also to turn the hoop round, and to continue the motion. (Plate XVI. Fig. 200.) The scapement, by which the sustaining force is communicated to the pendulum or balance, demands a greater exertion of skill and accuracy than any other part oſ a timekeeper. Sometimes the alternate motion of the pendulum has been produced by the action of a erank, but this construetion subjects it too much to the irregularities of the wheelwork, and is liable to several other objectionss A erank cannot properly be called a scapement, for according to the etymology of the term, the pendulum must eseape for a time from the action of the wheelwork, and in general, the more indepenvoL. I. cc dent its motion is rendered, the better is the eſſfect of the machine. The simplest forms in common use are the eruteh scapement for a clock; and the pallets with a vertical wheel, for a wateh; the dead beat scapement, and the eylinder vith a horizontal wheel, are improvements on these; and the detached scapement is a still further refinement. The cruteh scapement, called by the French the anchor scapement, is an arch in the plane of the scape wheel, and parallel to that in which the pendulum vibrates, supporting at each extremity a pallet, of which the face is a plane, and which is impelled in its turn by the teeth of the seape wheel The faces are so inclined, that the pallets are alternately forced, by the action of the teeth, to retire from the centre of the wheel: and great care is taken in making the teeth exuetly at equal distances, 0 that they may fall regularly on the pallet, immediately aſter the disengagement of the teeth on the other side from the opposite pallett. (Plate XVI. Fig. 201.) In the common wateh, the axis of the halance is parallel to the plane of the scape wheel, which is a contrate or erown wheel, and the ſlat pallets are fixed on the axis of the balance, at the oppusite parts of the circumference of the scape wheel. (Plate XVI. Fig. 202.) In both these cases, the impulse given to one pallet carries the opposite pallet with some force against the approaching tooth, and drives the wheel a little backwards, with a visible recoil. Here the sustaining power, being applied principally at the extremities of the vibrations, disturbs their isochronism, or the equality of the times in which they are performed, by partially increasing the forcee We may recolleet that, in order that all vibrations, of vhatever magnitude, may be performed in equal times, the force must be exactly proportional to the distance from a given point, consequently, iſ an additional foree be applied near the extremities of the vibration only, the longer vibrations will ocoupy less time than the shorter; and we may observe that, by adding to the force oſ the spring of a common watch with the key, we may accelerate its motion, at the same time that the angular magnitude of the vibration is increased. The motion of the balance also, being slowest at the extremities of its vibration, where the sustaining force is applied, is more affected by the inequalities oſ this force thun if it were subjected to its a action through an equal space in the middle of the vibrationn. Yet a good clock on this construction may keep time without an error of the ten thousundth part of the whole, and a watch within a two thousandth. In the common watch scapement, there is little friction, for the force acts almost perpendicularly on the pallet; it appears to have heen the oldest scapement, and was employed hefore the application of springs to balances: it requires a considerable extent of motion in the bulance, and cannot therefore well be applied to elocks with such pendulums as vibrate in small aress The crutch scapement, on the contrary, cannot be applied immediately to a vibration in a very large are; but by the interposition of a lever with a roller, or of a part of a vheel with a pinion, it may be adapted to the balance of a watch; and some watches thus constructed by Emery, Letherland, and others, appear to have succeeded very vell. To avoid the inconveniences of the recoiling scapements, Mr. Graham invented or introduced the dead beat for the clock, and the cylinder for the watch. In both of these, the tooth of the scape wheel rests, during the greater part of the vibration, on a cylindrical surface, and acts on the inclined plune for a short time only, in the middle of each vibration; so that a change oſ the sustaining power scarcely produces a sensible derangement of the isochronism; for which ever way ve turn the key of a horizontal wateh, as long as it continues to go, the frequency of its vibrations is scarcely afſecteddc A good horizontal wateh will keep time within about a ten thousandth part, especially if a little oil be ſrequently applied to it, or if the cylinder be made of a ruby: and the timekeeper in the observatory at Greenvich, with a dead beat scapement, made by Graham, varies from true time only two parts in a million. (Plate XVI. Fig. 203, 204.) Still, however, the ſriction of the teeth bf the scape wheel on the cylinder or pallet, and the tenacity of the oil, where it is employed, may interſere in a slight degree with the time of vibration, especially by the irregularities to vhich they are liable IF the friction were perfectly uniform, it would scarcely disturb the isochronism, but friction is always increased by an increase of pressure; hence, therefore, the eſiect of any addition to the sustaining foree must tend in some degree to retard the vibrations; and to obviate this, the surfaces, on which the teeth rest, have sometimes been so formed as to create a slight recoil; but this construction does not appear to have been very successſul in practice. The ſrietion may, however, be considerably diminished by the duplex scapement, apparently so called from the double series of teeth employed. The teeth oſ the more prominent series are detained on a cylinder so small as to be unſit for receiving an impulse from them, the balance is therefore impelled hy the other series oſ teeth, actiug on a pallet at a greater distance from its axis. The French have sometimes employed a construetion somewhat similar, vhich they call the comma scapement, the teeth ſirst resting on a small arch of repose, and then impelling the curved surface of a pallet extending to a considerable distance beyond it. In both these cases the single allet, which is impelled hy a tooth of a simple form, requires less labour in the execution than a number of a larger teeth, each of which is to be finished with great accuracy: but watches on these constructions, especially those with the comma scapement, are too liable to be stopped by any sudden motion, although the duplex scapement begins to be frequently employed for pocket timekeeperss. (Plate XVI. Fig. 205.) Mr. Harrison avoided all friction on the pallet, by connecting it with the pendulum by means of a slender spring, so flexible as to follow the motion of the scape vheel to a suſſicient extent without sliding on its teeth. But the construction which is most usually employed where the greatest aceuracy is required, is the detached scapement; in which the teeth oſ the scape wheel alvays rest on a detent, excepting a short interval, vhen it is unlocked in order to impel the pallets Mr. Mudge employed a detached scapement, actuated by a subsidiary spring, of which the force ĩs scarcely liable to any variation; the detent being unlocked by the motion of the balance. Mr. Haley has reſined still further on this construetion, by causing the subsidiury spring to unlock the wheel in its return, so that the balance is relieved ſrom this action, which may sometimes produce a slight irregularity. These constructions are, however, much too delicate for common pocket watehes. In a clook, Mr. Cumming has employed a detached scapement, in which a lever is raised to a certain heĩight by each tooth of the scape wheel, and acts immediately on the pendulum in its descent in the middle of the vibration. The scape wheel is unlocked by the pendulum during its ascent, and a variation of the pressure may, therefore, produce a very slight inequality in the motion of the pendulum. Mr. Nicholson has attempted to remove this cuusg of error, by a construetion in which the scape wheel only assists the pendulum in nising the lever; but it depends on the degree of force applied, to determine vhat part of the weight the scape wheel shall sustain; this scapement cannot, thereſore, by any means be considered as detached. It is, hoever, easy to remove the defect of Mr. Cummings scapement, if it can be called a defect, by a method similar to that which Mr. Haley has applied to watehes; each tooth of the wheel being unlocked by the descent of the lever on the opposite side, at the moment that it ccases to act on the pendulum, and remaining inactive until the pendulum meets it. (Plate XVI. Fig. 206, 207.) The detents of the scapements of Mudge and Cumming are parts of the pallet, but in the timekeepers now commonly made by Arnold, Earnsha, and others, the tooth is detained by a pallet or pin projecting from a lever, the point of vhich is forced back by the halance, at the moment that the pallet presents itself to another of the teeth. Mr. Arnold employs an epicycloldal tooth, acting on a single point of the pallet; Mr. Earnshaw mukes a flat surface of the tooth first act on the point of the pallet, and then the point of the tooth on a ſlat surface oſ the pallet. In other respects there is little difference in these scapements; and both the artists have been judged vorthy of a publie reward for their success. (Plate XVI. Fig. 208, 209.) The last of the three principal objects which require the attention of the watchmaker, is to employ a pendulum or balunce of which the vibrations are in their nature perfectly isochronouss For this purpose the weight of the pendulum ought to move in a eycloidal are, but the difficulty of producing such a motion in practice is much greater than the advantage derived from it, and a circular vibration, confined to a small are, is suſficiently isochronous for all practical gurposes. The error of such a vibration is nearly proportional to the square of the arc described by the pendulum, and amounts to a second and a half, in a day of 24 hours, for a single degree on each side the point of rest; so that a pendulum keeping true time in an are of three degrees, vould gain 137 seconds if the arc were very much contracted or made eycloidal, and would lose 10; seconds hy having the vibration extended to an arc of four degreess In order to avoid the frietion which would be occasioned by the motion of the pendulum on an axis, it is us ually suspended by a ſlexible spring, which is wholly free from frietion, The elasticity oſ this spring adds a minute force to the power of gravitation, which acts on the pendulum, and this force must he considered when the length of a simple pendulum is compared with the frequency of its vibrations. It does not, however, interfere with the equality of the vibrations among each other; for in all springs, Dr. Hooke's general lav, that the force increases as the degree of ſlexure, is found for moderate oscillations to be perfectly accurate; such a force, thereſore, accelerates the larger and the smaller vibrations precisely in the same degree But in halances, it is desirable to have the velocity, and the extent of the vibration, as great as possible, in order that the motion may be the less influenced by the inequalities of the sustaining power; and in large excursions, Dr. Hooke's law is not so precisely true; there must also necessarily be some inaccuracy from the loss of a certain portion of the force in generating the momentum of the spring itself, which, when the form is spiral, introduces great intricacy into the calculution of the properties of the vibrationn. Yet it has been found by experiment that a certain length may he determined for almost every spring, which vill afford vibrations either perfectly or very nearly isochronous. In order that the weight or inertia of the spring may interfere the less with the regularity of its motion, it is sometimes tapered, and made thinner at the extremity: it is now also usual in the best watches to employ a spring coiled into a cylindrical form, like that of the spring of a bell, of which the motion appears to be sumewhat more regular than that of a flat spiral. This was indeed the original construction, but was probably laid aside on account of the space which it required. The balance springs are made oſ the ſinest steel, and the best are manufactured in this country, although the French are said to have the art of making their main springs of a hetter temper than ours. Sometimes the balance spring is made of an alloy of gold and copper; these springs are very elastie, but they are too liable to brenk. Mr. Earnshaw observes, thut the strength of a spring alvays diminishes a little as it wears; and endeavours to derive a compensation for this diminution oſ strength, by employing a spring of such a form, that the vibrations in small arcs may be a little more frequent than in larger ones, in order that when the presence of dust and the tenacity of the oil contract the extent of the vibrations, this contraction may tend to produce an aceeleration which compensates ſor the diminished force of the spring But it is perhaps more eligible to muke every compensation, as ſar as possible, independent of circumstances foreign to the cause of the errorr. The strength of the spring is found to be less impaired by use vhen it is hardened than when the steel is softer. It sometimes happens, that from a sudden motion, or from some other accidental circumstance, the balance of a timekeeper may be thrown beyond the point at which the pallets are impelled hy the scape vheels, and the whole motion may from this cause be interrupted. To prevent this accident, a small bar or pin is usually ſixed on the balance spring, which is carried outwards vhen the vibration begins to be extended too far, and stops the further progress of the balance, by intercepting a pin which projects from. it. This arrange ment is called banking the halance. We have already seen that the squares of the times of vibration of two pendulums are proportional to their lengths; so that if ve add to a pendulum one hundredth part of its length, we inerease the time of its vibration very nearly one two hundredth. But since all bodies are expunded by heat, the variable temperature of the atmosphere must necessarily produce changes of this kind in the motions of pendulums, and it may be observed that a clock goes somewhat more slowly in summer than in vinter. The same expansion has a similar effect in the motion of a balance, and the increase of temperature produces also a diminution of the elastic force of the spring itselfl. There is, however, a great difference in the expansibilities of various substances; dry deal is one of the least expansible, and is therefore often used for the rods of pendulums. Brass expands one part in a hundred thousand for every degree of Fahrenheit, or a little more or less than this, accordingly as it contains more or less z7inc. Glass and platina are less than half as expansible as brass, iron about two thirds, and mercury three times as much. A pendulum of brass would therefore make one vibration in ten thousand less at 70° than at 50°, and vould lose 8 seconds in a day; a balance regulated by a spring would lose much more; for I have observed that vibrations governed by the elasticity of steel have lost in frequency as much as one ten thousandth port for a single degree of Fahrenheit; and Berthoud informs us, that where a elock, probably vith a pendulum of steel, loses 20 seconds by heat, a vatch loses eight minutes. Mr. Graham appears to have been the first that attempted to compensate for the efſects of temperature by the different expansibilities of various sub- stances. He employed, for a pendulum, a tube partly filled with mercury; when the tube expanded by the effect of heat, the mereury expanded much more; so that its surface rose a little more than the end of the pendulum was depressed, and the centre of oscillation remained stationary. This mode of compensation is still sometimes practised with success; but the gridiron pendulum is more commonly used: it was the invention of Harrison, who combined seven bars, of iron or steel, and of brass, in such a manner, that the hars of brass raised the veight as much as the bars of iron depressed it. At present five bars only are usually employed, two of them being of a mixture of zine and silver, and three of stee. Mr. Ellicott suspended a pendulum at the extremity of a lever, vhich was supported by a pillar of brass, much nearer to the fulerum; as the pendulum expanded, the end of the lever was raised in the same degree, and the weight remained at ĩits original distance from the point of suspension, which was determined by a fixed plate, transmitting the slender spring, as usual, between two opposite edges. The same effect is produced more simply by suspending the pendulum from the summit of a har nearly parallel to it, and of the same substance vith itself, resting on a ſixed support, and either of the same length with the pendulum, or a little longer, accordingly as the distance of the ſixed plate from the point of support of the har, is determined by materials which may be considered as nearly of an invariable length, or as Liie to a certain degiee o of expansion. (Plate XVI. Fig. æ10.) All these methods of compensation are peculiar to clocks; for watches, it is usual to unite together two metals which differ in expansibility, so as to form a compound plate; one side of the plate is commonly of steel, the other of brass, and it is obvious that any increase of temperature, by causing the brass to expund more than the steel, must bend the whole platee Sueh a plate is variously applied; the most accurate method;, which is employed by Arnold and other modern artists, is to make it a part of the balance itself, ſixing a veight on its extremity, which is brought nearer to the centre, by the increase of curvature of the plate, whenever the expansion of the arms of the balance tends to remove it further off. The best way of makin g& the plate appears to be to turn a ring of steel, and to immerse it in melted brass, and then to turn away what is superſluous of the brass. The magnitude of the weight, and the length of the plate, may easily be so regulated, as to com- pensate not only for the expansion produced by heat, but also for the diminution of the elasticity of the spring. Sometimes also a plate has been applied in such a way as to shorten the spring when the temperature is inereased, by an operation similar to that which serves to regulate a common wateh, the elip, that determines the efſective length of the spring, being moved backwards and forvards; and a similar effect hus also been produced by dividing this elip into two parts, one of vhich ĩs ſixed to a compound plate, and is made to approach the other so as to confine the spring more narrowly, and thus diminish its length, upon an increase of temperature. (Plate XVI. Fig. 211.) The ſlexure of a compound jlate has also been applied in a simple and elegant manner by Mr. Nicholson to the pendulum of a cloek, by causing it to support the upper extremity of the pendulum. The plate is placed horizontally, the brass being uppermost, and carries the pendulum in the middle, while the ends rest on two ſixed points, of which the distance may be adjusted with great accuracy, so that when the temperature is increased, the curvature of the plate may raise the rod of the pendulum, enough to keep the weight or Lob at a constant distance below the fixed point, which determines its upper extremity. (Plate XVI. Fig. 212.) The resistance, opposed to the motion of a pendulum by the air, aſſects in some degree its velocity, and the variation of the density of the atmosphere must thereſore also produce some irregularities in timekeepers: they are, however, too small to be sensiblee Derham found that the resistance of the air accelerated the motion of a half seeond pendulum about four vibrations in an hour, by diminishing the are in which it vibrated: and when the vibrations were restored to their original magnitude, the resistance of the air produced a retardation of eight vibrations in the same time. But a heavy pendulum, vibrating in a small are, ĩs very little aſected by this resistance. Besides these more essential parts of the watchmuker's art, there are several subordinate considerations which require his attention; the striking part in particular occupies, in clocks, and in repeating vatehes, no inconsiderable portion of the bulk oſ the machine. But the apparatus employed on these occasions requires neither reſinement of invention nor delicacy of execution vVOL. I. D d In old clocks, the number of hours struck is usually determined by the revolution of a certain portion of a wheel, which supports an arm, and allows the hammer to strike, until at a proper time it falls into a notch. In watches, and in more modern clocks, the same effect is produced hy means of a spiral of 12 teeth, revolving once in 12 hourss It is of considerable importance to the accurate performance oſ a good clock, that it should he ſirmly fixed to a solid support. Any unsteadiness in the support causes the point of suspension to follow the motion of the pendulum, and enlarges the diameter of the cirelẽe of which the pendulum deseribes an are; it must, therefore, tend in general to retard the motion of the clock. Sometimes, however, an unsteady support may he of such a nature a: to accelerate the motion; and an observation of this kind, made by Berthoud, has suggested to Bernoulli a theory of compound vibrations, which may perhaps be true in some cases, but is by no means universally applicable to every casee. On account of some circumstances of this Kind, it happens that when two clocks are placed near each other, and rest in some degree on the same support, they have often a remarkable effect on each other's vibrations, so as to continue going for several days, without varying a single second, even when they would have differed considerably if otherwise situated: and it sometimes happens that the clock which goes the more slowly of the two will set the other in motion, and then stop itself; a circumstance which has been explained from the greater frequency of the vibrations of a circular pendulum when confined to a smaller are, the tendency of the pendulums to vibrate in the same time causing the shorter to describe an are continually larger and larger, and the longer to contract its vibrations, until at last its motion entirely ceases. This sympathy has some resemblance to the alternate vibrations of two seales hanging on the same heam, one of which may oſten be observed to stop its vibrations when the other begins to move, and to resume its motion when ĩts companion ĩs at rest; but it is stiſl more analogous to the mutual inſluence of two strings, or even two organ pipes, which, though not separately tuned to a perſect unison, still inſluence cach other's vibrations in such a manner as to produce exactly the same note when they sound together. = & LECTURE XVIII. ON RAISING AND REMOVING WEIGHTS. THE methodical arrangement of our subject leads us, after having considered the modifications of force, to those machines which are intended for counteracting it, or for producing motion in opposition to an existing force. The simplest of the forces to be counteracted, is gravitation, and it is one of the most common employments of mechanical powers to ruise a weight from a lower to a higher situation. This operation is also intimately connected with the modes of overcoming the corpuscular force of friction or adhesion, which constitutes the principal difficulty in removing bodies horizontally from place to place; for if we had only to produce motion in an unresisting mass of matter, a loaded vaggon might in time be drawn along by a silk worm's thread. The raising and removing of weights, therefore, together with the modes of avoiding frietion in general, constitute the first purt of the subject of the counteraction of forces, and the remaining purt relates to the machinery intended for overcoming the other corpuscular powers of bodies, by such operations as are calculated to change their external forms. Machines for raising weights, vhich involve only the mechanics of solid bodies, are principally levers, capstans, wheels, pullies, inclined planes, screws, and their various combinations, in the form of cranes. A lever is a very simple instrument, but of most extensive utility in raising weights to a small heightt. We may recollect that levers are distinguished into two principal kinds, accordingly as the power and weight are on diſferent sides, or on the same side of the fulcerum; the forces counteracting each other being in the one case in the same direction, in the other, in opposite directions. Thus, when a man lifts a stone by means of a lever of the first kind, resting on a fulerum between himself and the stone, he presses down the end oſ the lever, and the utmost ſorce that he can apply is equal to the vhole weight of his hody: but when he thrusts the lever under the stone, so that its extremity bears on the ground, it becomes a lever of the seeond kind, and in order to raise the stone, he must now drav the end of the lever upvards. In this direction, a strong man can exert a foree equivalent to tice his weight; consequently the second kind oſ lever possesses here a temporary advantage over the ſirst; although, if the operation were continued, the vorkman vould be more fatigued hy raising even the same veight by this method, than if he could conveniently apply his weight to a lever oſ the ſirst Eind; and for this purpose, cross hars have sometimes been addcd to levers, in order to enuble several workmen to stand on them with advantage at once. A bent Iever operates precisely with the sume power as a straight one, provided that the forces be applied in a similar munner with respect to ĩts arms: and in all cases, the forces capable of balancing each other are inversely as the distances of the points of action from the fulerum. Some adiition of foree is neeessary for overcoming the equilibrium, and producing motion, but the velocity of the motion being seldom of much consequence, a smull preponderance is usually suſficient. The principal ineonvenience of the lever is the short extent of ĩts action: this may, hovever, be obviated by means oſ the invention of Perrault, in which two pins are fixed in the lever, at a short distance from each other, sliding in tvo rairs of vertical grooves, provided vith ratehets, so that when the long arm of the lever is pulled hy means oſ a rope, the nearer pin serves as a fulerum, and the more distant one is elevated at the same time vith the weight, and is detained in its place by the elick; but when the rope is slackened, the veight sinks a little, and ruises the pin, which ſirst served as a ſulerum, to a higher pluce in its groove. The sume eſſfeets muy also be produced by catehes or elicks resting upon ratchets on the opposite sides of a single upright hur, which passes through a perſoration in the lever. There nmust, however, he a considerable loss oſ foree, ſrom the continual intermission of the motionn. (lute XVII. Fig. 218) An axis with a winch, that ĩs, a lever bent at the end, ĩs known from the common muchine for raising a bueket out oſ a wel. A vertieal or upright axis, with two or more levers inserted into it, becomes a capstan. In these cases, if we wish to estimate the foree with accuracy, we must add to the radius oſ the axis half the thickness of the rope, when we compare it with the arm of the lever. Sometimes the weight of a reservoir or bucket of vater is employed for raising another bucket, ſilled with coals or other materials, by means of a rope or chain, eoiled round a eylinder or drum, or two drums of difſerent sizes. This machine is called a vater vhimsey: vhen the bucket of water hus reached the bottom, a valve is opened by striking against a pin, and lets out the water. In a machine of this kind, employed in the Duke of Bridgvaters coul works, the vater descends thirty yards, and raises a smaller quantity of couls from a depth of sixty. In such cases, supposing the action to be single, and the stream of water to be unemployed during the descent of the reservoir, a considerable preponderance may be advantageously employed in giving velocity to the eights, provided that the machinery be not liable to injury from their impulse. An erect axis or drum, turned by the force of horses walking in a cirele, is used for raising coals and other weights, and is called a gin, probably by corruption from engine: the buckets being attached to the opposite ends oſf a rope which passes round the drum, and which is drawn by means of its adhesion to the drum. One of the huckets descends empty, while the other is drawn up full, and when the motions of the buckets are to be changed, the horses are turned, or the wheels are made to impel the axis in a contrary direction, vhen any other moving pover is employed. When a ship's anchor is weighed, the cable itselſ would be too large to be bent round the eapstan; it is thereſore conneeted with it by means of an endless rope, called the messenger. As the messenger is eoĩled round the lower part of the capstan, iĩt quits the upper part; so that its place hecomes lower and lower, till at last it has no lIonger room on the capstan; it ĩs therefore necessary to force it up ſrom time to time: this is called surging the messenger; it ĩs commonly done hy beating it, and to facilitute the operation, the capstan is made somewhat conical. It has heen proposed to employ liſters in different parts of the circumſerence, vhich are raised once in each revolution, Ly passing over an inelined plane, with the interposition of frietion wheels; a patent has been taken out for the invention, and ĩt has already been intro- duced in the navy. Some experienced judges, however, are of opinion, that it would be better and more simple to employ a capstan so0 much tapered, that the tension of the rope itself, guided only by a pulley, might always be sufiicient to bring the messenger into its place. The capstan, vhich consists of two cylinders of diſſerent sizes on the same axis, with a rope passing from the smaller one over a pulley, which is connected with the weight, and returning to be wound up by the larger one, is very powerful in its operation; hut it requires a great length of rope for a small extent of motion. (Plate IV. Tig. 51.) Wheelwork is employed in a variety of ways for raising weights: its powers are in all cases derived from the same principles as the actions of levers, each wheel and pinion being considered as composed of a series of bent levers, of vwhich the axis is the common fulerum, and which act in succession on the teeth of the next wheęl. The simplest combination of wheelvork used for this purpose constitutes a jack; a bar which is furnished with teeth on one side, heing raised by the last pinion. Such instruments were not unknown even to the ancients; the barulcus deseribed by Hero was a machine of this nature. A series oſ buckets connected by ropes, and passing over a wheel, is oſten employed for raising water to a small height; and sometimes even for solid suhstances in the state of powder, in particular for raising flour, in a corn mill; and in this case the flour must be brought within reach of the buckets by means of a revolving spiral, which pushes it gradually forwardss When a weight of any kind is raised in buckets distributed through the circumference of a wheel, the foree, required for retaining the weight in equilibrium, is as much les: than the weight, as the diameter of a circle is less than half the circumference, the remainder of the weight being supported by the axis of the wheel. Pullies, and their combinations in blocks, are universally employed on hoard of ships. They are very convenient where only a moderate increase of power is required; but in order to procure a very great advantage, the number of separate pullies or sheaves must be very much multiplied; a great length of rope must also be employed; and it is said that in a pair of blocks with five pullies in each, two thirds of the ſorce are lost by the friction and the rigidity of the ropess. The inconvenience resulting from a large number of pullies, may, however, as we have already seen, be considerably lessened vhen they are arranged in Mr. Smeatons manner, the acting rope heing introduced in the middle, so as to cause no obliquity in the block. Tackles, or combinations of pullies for raising weights, are most conveniently supported on shore by means of shears, which consist of three rods, or poles, resting on the ground, and meeting each other in the point of suspension. For raising stones in building, two poles are employed, with a rope fixed to their summit, which keeps them in a proper position; their lower ends are usually connected by a third pole, which serves as an axis. (Plate IV. Fig. 56. Plate XVII. Fig. 214.) Sometimes a pulley is drawn horizontally along a frame, setting out from the point where the rope is fixed, so that while the bucket is raised, it is also transferred diagonally to the opposite end of the scaffolding. This apparatus is used in some of the Cornish stream vorks, in which the earth of a whole valley is raised, in order to be washed for the separation of tin ore. (Plate XVII. Fig. 215.) A fixed inclined plane is oſten of use in assisting the elevation of great weights, by means of other machinery. It is supposed that in all the ediſices of remote antiquity, where great masses of stone were employed, as in the pyramids of Egypt, and the druidical temples of this country, these vast blocks were elevated on inelined planes of earth, or of scaffolding, with the assistance also of levers and rollers. Inclined planes are frequently used for draving boats out of one canal into another; and sometimes the local circumstances are such that this may be done with great convenience, merely by allowing a loaded boat to descend, and to turn the axis which raises an empty one. An example of this may be seen, on a large scale, in the Duke of DBridgvaters canal. This canal is extended, above ground, for forty miles on one level; an underground navigation twelve miles long joins it at Wors ley, leading to the coal mines under Walkden moor. At a height of 355  ards above this, is another subterraneous portion, nearly six miles in length. The connection between these levels is formed by an inclined plane: the boats are let down loaded, and proceed three miles along the tunnel into the open cana. The inclined plane is ſixed in a stratum of stone, which fortunately has the most eligible inelination of I in 4, and is 35 yards ĩn thickness, aſſording the most advantageous means of ſixing every part oſ the machinery with perfeet security. The whole length of the planc is 151 yards, hesides a lock of 18 yards at the upper end. (Plate XVII. Fig. 216.) Inclined planes are also universally employed for facilitating the ascent oſ heights, by men or by animals; they may eſther be uniſorm, as ronds, or the general inelination of the surſace may he superseded by the formation of separate steps or stairs. The inclination of the surface may be governed by the proportion of the strength of the animal to its weight, the force required 10 support any weight on a plane being to the whole weight as the height of the plane to its length; and if the plane be a little less inclined than the exacet equilibrium vould require, the animal vill be able to acquire a suſſicient velocity at ſirst to carry it easily up the ascent with a motion nearly equable. The strength of a labourer may be advantageously employed in ascending a given heĩight hy a ſlight of steps, and placing himself on a stage vhich may raise a veight by its descent; but it appears that the force of other animals is less calculated for exertions oſ this kind. The serew is not often immediately applied to the elevation of weights; although sometimes a numher of serews has been used for raising by slow degrees a large and unmanageable weight, for instance, that of an obelise: and a perpetual serew ĩs ſrequently employed in giving motion to vheelwork. Such machines possess a considerable mechanical advantage, but they are subject to much frietion, and are deſicient in durability. Mr. Hunters double serew might be applied with advantage, if the extent of the motion required were extremely small; but this limitation conſines its utility vithin very nurrow hounds. A crane is a machine for ruising veights by means of a rope or chain, descending from an arm, vhich is capuble of horizontal motion, and passing over a pulley to he vound up on an axis. The axis is turned, either immediately, or with the interposition of wheelvork, by a wineh, by the horizontal bars of a windlass, or by a walking wheel, and sometimes by the force of wind, of vater, or of steam A valking vheel is an advantageous mode of employing the strength of a labourer, but the bulk of the machine is sometimes inconvenient and detrimental: when, however, the man walks upon the wheel, and not within it, this ohjection is in great measure obviated. A valking wheel requires to be provided with sume method of preventing the dangerous consequences of the rapid descent of the weight, in case of an accidental fall of the lubourer: for this purpose, a catch is usually employed, to prevent any retrograde motion; a bar has also sometimes been suspended from the axis of the wheel, on whieh the man may support himself with his hands, and other similar precautions have been adopted. Sometimes the plane of a walking wheel is but little inelined to the horizon, and the man walks on its flat surfacee In either case the labour of horses, asses, or oxen, may be substituted for that of men: but for cranes this substitution would be very disadvantageous, since much force would be lost in stopping frequently so bulky a machine as would he required. The employment of a turnspit dog is an humble example of the same operation, and even goots appear to have heen sometimes made to climb in a similar manner. In a walking vheel used for raising water at Carisbrook Castle, in the Isle of Wight, the work was perfurmed by the same individual ass for the whole of forty five years preceding 1771. Walking wheels have also been invented, on which horses were to act externally with their fore feet or hind feet only; but they have seldom, if ever, been applied to practical purposes. In general it is advisable that walking wheels for quadrupeds should present to them a path as little elevated as possible; and it might probably be of advantage to harness them either to a fixed point, or to a spring or weight, which vould enable them to exert a considerable force even in a horizontal direction; but probably aſter all they might be more advantageously employed in a circular mill valk. (Plate XVII. Fig. 217.) Mr. Whites crane affords a gnod specimen of an oblique walking wheel; the force may he varied aceordingly as the labourer stands at a point more or less distant from the centre; and in order to avoid accidents, a break is always acting on the axis of the wheel by its friction, except when it is removecd by the pressure of the man's hand on a lever, upon which he leans as he vallks. The force is also varied in some cranes by changing the pinion, which acts on the principal wheel, and an expanding drum has been contrived for the same purpose, consisting of a number of bars moveable in spiral grooves VOL. I E e 50 as to form a greater or smaller cylinder at pleasuree. In order to place the weight in any situation that may be required, the pulley may be made to slide horizontally on the gib or arm. (Plate XVII. Tig. 218.) A model of a erane was exhibited some years ago to the Royal Society, in vhich a large wheel fixed to a short axis was made to roll round on a plane, while the lower end of its axis was connected hy a joint with another axis in a vertical position: then the wheel, having to describe a circumference somevhat larger than its own, was turned slowly, and thereſore powerfully, round its axis, and the motion was communicated to the ſixed axiss. The machine, however, appears to be more curious than useſul Sometimes a steelyard has been combined with a crane, for weighing goods at the same time that they are raised by it. A amall crane, ſixed in a carriage, is convenient for loading and unloading goodss. In France, the carts used on the wharſs are generally so long as to reach the ground behind when depressed, and to furnish an inclined plane, along which the goods are raised hy a lever and axis, or a kind of capstan, ſixed in front. For taking hold of stones which are to be raised hy means of a rope, a hole is sometimes formed in them, wider within than at its opening, and in this a lewis is inserted, consisting of tvo inverted wedges, separated by a plug, to which they are fastened by a pinn (Plate XVII Fig. 219.) When a rope or chain, which is to raise a weight, is so long as to require a counterpoise, the effeet oſ this may be varied according to the length of the rope, which is unbent, by hanging it on a second rope or chain, which acts on a spiral fusee, slowly turned by a wheel and pinion. The use oſ eranes is so extensive and so indispensable, that their forms have heen often multiplied on account of local eircumstances, or even from caprice; but the construetions which have heen deseribed appear to be oſ the most general utility, and from them it will be easy to judge of others. When veights of any kind are simply to be removed from one situation n another, hè most natural and obvious method, i they arè portable, ĩs tò carry them. There is, however, some scope for theory even in this common operation, and we have seen that calculutions huve heen made in order to determine the most advantageous burden for a porter to earry, hut the experienee of a few trials would in gener” he a better gnide. Some earry weights on their heads, others on their shonlders, others low down on their backs: andaceording to the situation of the burden, they hend forwards or backwards, so that the common eentre of gràvity oſ the weight und the hoiy eomes immediately or very nearly over some part of the ground hetween theĩr ſeetb. The difficulty of carrying a veight at the extrenity of a long rod is easily understood from the properties of the lever, and the same priueiples vill enable us to determine the distribution of a lonſ between two porters, in whatever vay they may carry itt. Supposing the weight to be placed on àa porters horse, or haænd burrow; and at equal distances from both extremities, ench of the men will support an equal portion of it; but if it be nearer to the one than to the other, the load will be distributed in the same proportion us the poles are divided by the centre of the burdei. Tor instance, if the weight were 300 ponnds, and it were one foot distant from the one, and tvo ſrom the other, the first would have to carry 200 pounds, and the second 100. If the porters ascend a hill, or a ſlight oſ steps, the distribution of the load will remain the sume, provided that the eentre of the weight lie in the plane of the poles. But if the weight consists of a large body placed on that plane, the centre of gravity being above it, the effect of an inclination to the horizon may materially change the distribution of the load, since the pressure will always be determined by the distance of the ends of the poles from the line passing perpendicularly through the centre of gravity; so that, if the elevation were suſſicient, the whole burden might rest on the lover porter. And in the same manner, if the weight vere suspended helow the poles, the inclination vould eause a greater proportion of the load to he borne hy the upper porter. The force is, however, only thus distributed as long as the æarms of the porters continue parallel to each other; but the inequality voulel naturally be lessened by a change of the directions in whichi they would act; ĩt would only he necessary that those directions should meet in some part of the vertical line passing through the centre of gravity; the magnitude of each ſorce ould then be determined by the length of the side of a triangle corres ponding to its direction, and the load might be either equally or un- equally divided, according to the positions of the arms. (Plate XVII. Fig220, 2201.) A man can carry in general a weight four or five times as great as that which he can raise continually in a vertical direction with the same velocity: 30 that we may consider the resistance to he overcome as a kind of frietion which amounts to about a fourth or a ſifth of the weight. IF we attempted to drav a weight along a horizontal surface, the resistance of the surface would often not only impede the motion, but also injure the texture of the substance to be moved. This injury may, however, be avoided by the interposition of a simple frame or dray, and the dray may be armed with a substance subject to little friction, as with iron: the friction may also be somewhat further diminished by making the outline of the dray a little convex helow so that a slight agitation may be continually produced during its motion. Sometimes the simple expedient of placing a load on two poles of elastic wood, the thickest ends of which are supported by the horse, and the thinner drag on the ground, is of use both in diminishing the friction, by confining iĩt to a smaller and smoother surface, and in equalising the motion, by the flexibility of the poles. It often happens that agitation of any kind enables us to lessen considerably the friction between two bodies, especially when they are elastic. If we vish, for instance, to draw a ring along an iron rod, by a thread which is nearly perpendicular to it, we may exert all our strength in vain if we apply it by slow degrees, since the increase of force continues to increase the adhesion. But i we pull the ring suddenly, and then slacken the thread, it rebounds from the rod by its elasticity, and in this manner ĩt slides readily along, by a continuance of alternations. In such a case, however, it would be more natural, if the thread vere suſiiciently heavy, to give it a serpentine motion, vhich would draw the ring in a more oblique direction. It is said that when a serew ĩs ſixed very firmly in a piece of iron, it may be extricated much more casily while the iron is ſiled in some neighbouring part. The agitation thus produced probably operates in a manner somewhat similar to that of the rod. Friction may in general be considerably diminished by the interposition of oſly substances, where the surfaces are of such a nature as to admit of their application. Thus common oil, tallow, or tar, are usually interposed hetween metals which work on each other. It is necessary to attend to the chemical properties of the oil, and to take care that it be not of such a natureas to corrode the metals employed, especially where the work requires great accuracy. Tallow is liable to lose its lubricating quality, unless it be frequently reneved. Between surfaces o wood, soap is sometimes applied, but more commonly black lead, vhich becomes highly polished. The advantages of canals, and of navigation in general, are principally derived from the facility with which the particles of fluids make way for the motion of bodies ſloating on them. The interposition of rollers or oſ balls bears some resemblance to the application of fluids. Supposing the surfaces to be ſlat and parallel, a roller moves hetween them without any friction: but it has still to overcome the resistance occasioned by the depression which it produces in the substance on which it moves, and which is greater or less aceording to the softness and want of elasticity of the substance. IF the substance were perfectly elastic, the temporary depression would produce no resistance, because the tendency to rise hehind the roller would be exactly equivalent to the force opposing its progress before; and the actual resistance only arises from a greater or smaller vant of elasticity in the materials concerned. The continued change of place of the rollers is often a material objection to their employment; their action may in some cases be prolonged hy fixing wheels on their extremities, as vell as hy some other arrangements; but these methods are too complicated to afford much practical utility. Rollers may also be placed between two cylinders, the one convex and the other concave, and the friction may in this manner be wholly removed, whatever may be the magnitude of the rollers (Plate XVII. Pig. 2229, 293.) The effect of friction in any machine being always diminished, in proportion as the velocity of the parts sliding on each other is diminished, it is obvVious that by reducing the dimensions of the axis of a wheel as much as possible, ve also reduce the frictionn. When the pressure on the axis is derived Primciplly from the weight of the wheel itself, the friction may be lessened by placing the wheel in a horizontal position, and making the axis vertical: in this manner the weight may be supported on an axis ending in a very small surface, and the eſſeet oſ the frietion on this surfuce will he about one third less than if ĩt acted at the circumferenee. The velocity oſ the parts sliding un each other may be still more reduced, by placing each extremity of the axis on another wheel, or hetween two wheels, on which the axis rolls as they turn round, so that the frietion is transferred to the axis oſ these vheels, of which the motion is very slow. But when a great weight is to be supported, it is necessary that the frietion wheels be very strong, and very accurately formed; for it their surface were irregular, they might stand still, and their use would be destroyed. (Ilate XVIII. Fig. 204) Perrault attempted to avoid all friction by supporting the axis of a wheel in the coil of a rope, which allowed it to turn while the whole wheel ascended and descended; but the stiffuess of a rope oceasions in general even a greater resistance than the frietion for which iĩt is substituted. The wheels of carriages owe a great part of their utility to the diminution of frietion, hich is as much less in a carriage than in a dray, as the diameter of the axle is less than that of the wheel, even supposing the dray to slide on a greased surface of iron. The wheels also assist us in drawing the carriage over an obstacle, for the path which the axis of the wheel describes, is alvays smoother and less abrupt than the surſace of a rough road on which the wheel molls. It is obvious that both these advantages are more completely attained by large wheels than by smaller ones; the dimensions of the axis not being increased in the same proportion with those of the wheel, and the path oſ the axis, to which that of the centre of gravity is similar, consisting of portions oſ larger cireles, and conseruently being less curved; and if the wheels ure elastie, and rebound from an obstacle, the difference ĩs still increased. It is, however, burely possible, that the curvature of the obstacle to be overeome may be intermediate between those of a larger and of a smaller wheel; and in this case the higher wheel will touch a remoter part of the obstacle, so that the path of the axis vill form an abrupt angle, while the smaller wheel follows the curve, and produces a more equable motion; this, however, is a case of rare oceurrence, and an advantago of little importance. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 295, 2060 The greater part of the resistance to the motion of a carriage very frequently arises from the continual displacement of a portion of the materials of the road, which do not react on the wheels with perſect elasticity, but undergo a permanent change of form proportional to the loss of forcee Hence, in a soſt and, although the axles of the wheels may move in a direction perfectly horizontal, the draught hecomes extremely heavy. The more the wheel sinks, the greater is the resistance, and if we suppose the degree oſ elasticity of the materials, and their immediate resistance at different depths to be known, we may calculate the effect of their reaction in retarding the motion of the carriage. Thus, if the materials were perfectly inelastic, acting only on the preceding half oſ the immersed portion of the wheel, and their immediate pressure or resistance were simply proportional to the depth, like that of fluids, or of elastic substances, the horizontal resistance would be to the weight nearly as the depth of the part immersed to two thirds of its length; but if the pressure increased as the square of the depth, which is a more prohable supposition, the resistance would be to the weight as the depth to about four fifths of the length; the pressure may even vary still more rapidly, and we may consider the proportion of the resistance to the weight as no greater than that of the depth of the part immensed to its length, or of half this length to the diameter of the wheel; and if the materials are in any degree elastic, the resistance vill be lessened accordingly. But on any of these suppositions, it may be shown that the resistance may be reduced to one half, either by making a wheel a little less than three times as high, or about eight times as broad as the given wheel. This consideration is of particular consequence in soft and boggy soils, as well as in sandy countries; thus, in moving timber in a moist situation, it becomes ex tremely advantageous to employ very high wheels, and they have the additional convenience that the timber may be suspended from the axles by chains, without the labour of rising it so high as would be necessary for placing it upon a carriage of any kind. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 97.) But the magnitude of wheels is practically limited, by the strength or the veight of the materials of which they are made, by the danger of overturning when the centre of gravity is raised too high, and in the case of the first pair of wheels oſ a four wheeled carriage, by the inconvenience that would arise, in turning a corner, with a vheel which might interfere with the hody of the carriage. It is also of advantage that the draught of a horse should he in a direction somewhat ascending, partly on account of the shape oſ the horsæ's shoulder, and partly because the principal force that he exerts is in the direetion of a line passing through the point of contact of his hind feet with the ground. But a reason equally strong, for having the draught in this direetion, is, that a part of the force may alvays be advantageously employed in lessening the pressure on the ground; and to answer this purpose the most efſeetually, the inclination of the traces or shafts ought to be the same with that of u rond on which the carriage would hegin or continue to descend by its own weight only. In order to apply the force in this manner to hoth pairs of wheels, vhere there are four, the line oſ draught ought 10 be directed to a point half vay between them, or rather to a point immediately under the centre of gravity oſ the carriage; and such a line would always pass above the axis of the fore wheels. Iſ the line of draught puss immediately through this axis, the pressure on the hind wheels will remain unaltered; and if the traces or shaſts be fixed still lower, the pressure on the hind vheels will even he somewhat increased by the draught. It is evident, therefore, that this advantage cannot be obtained if the fore vheels are very high; we may also understand that in some cases the common opinion of the eligibility oſ placing a load over the fore wheels, rather than the hind wheels, may have some foundation in truth. When several horses are employed, the draught of all but the last must be nearly horizontal; in this case the flexure of the chain brings it into a position some what more favourable for the action of the horses; but the same cause makes the direction of its attachment to the waggon unfavourable; further than this there is no absolute loss of force, but ĩit appears to be advisable to cause the shaft horse to draw in a direction as much elevated as possible; and on the whole it is probable that horses draving singly have a material advantage, when they do not require additional attendance from the drivers. The practice of making broad wheels conical has obviously the disadvantageous effeet of producing a friction at each edge of the wheel, when the carriage is moving in a straight line; for such a wheel, if it moved alone, would always describe a eircle round the vertex of the cone to vhich it belongs. When the wheels are narrow, a slight inclination of the spokes appears to be of use in keeping them more steady on the axles than if they were exactly vertical; and when, by an in clination of the body of the carriage, a greater proportion of the load is thrown on the lower wheel, its spokes, being then in a vertical position, are able to exert all their strength with advantage. The axles being a little conical, in order that they may not become loose, or may easily be tightened as they wear, it is necessary that they should be bent down, so that their lower surfaces may be horizontal, otherwise the wheels would press too much on the lineh pin. For this reason, the distance between the wheels should be a little greater above than below, and their pusfrs of course slightly conicat. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 228.) Et has been proposed to fix the wheels to their respeetive axles, to continue the axles as far as the middle oſ the earriage only, and tocause them to turn on friction wheels or rollers; a plan which may succeed if the appuratus is not too complicated for use; but in fact the immediate friction on the axles is not great enough to render this refinement necessary. If both opposite wheels were fixed to a smgle axis, one of them would be dragged backwards and the other forwards, whenever the motion deviated from a straight line; and a similar effect actually takes place in those carriages which are supported on a single roller. The effect of the suspension oſ a carriage on springs is to equalise its motion, by causing every change to be more gradually communicated to it, by means of the ſlexibility of the springs, and hy consuming a certain portion of every sudden impulse in generating a degree of rotatory motion. This rotatory motion depends on the oblique position of the straps suspending the carriage, which prevents its swinging in a parallel direction; such a vibration as would take place if the straps were parallel, would be too extensive, unless they were very short, and then the motion would be somewhat rougher. The obIiquity of the straps tends also in some measure to retain the carriage in a horizontal position: for if they were parallel, both being vertical, the lower one vould have to support the greater portion of the weight, at Ieast according to the common mode oſ fixing them to the bottom of the carriage, the spring, therefore, being ſlexible, it would be still further depressed But when the straps are oblique, the upper one assumes alvays the more vertical POSsĩtion andconsequently bears more of the load; for when a body of any kind is supported by two oblique forces, their horizontal thrusts must be equal, otherwise the body would move laterally; and in order that the horiVOL. I. rf zontal portions of the forces may be equal, the more inclined to the horizon must be the greater: the upper spring ill, therefore, be a little depressed, and the carriage vill remain more nearly horizontal than if the springs were paralle. The reason for dividing the springs into separate plates has already been explained: the beam of the carriage, that unites the whee ls, supplies the strength necessary for forming the communication between the axles: if the body of the carriage itself were to perform this office, the springs would require to be so strong that they could have little or no effect in equalising the motion, and we should have a waggon instead of a coach. The ease with vhich a carriage moves, depends not only on the elasticity of the springs, but also on the small degree of stability of the equilibrium, oſ vhich ve may judge in some measure, by tracing the path which the centre of gravity must describe, when the carriage swings. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 2209.) The modes of attaching horses and oxen to carriages are different in diſſerent countries, nor is it easy to determine the most eligible method. When horses are harnessed to drav side by side, they are usually attached to the opposite ends of a bar or lever; and if their strength is very unequal, the bar is sometimes unequally divided by the fulerum, the weaker horse heing made to act on the longer bar, and being thus enabled to counteract the greater force of his companionn. But even vithout this inequality, a compensation takes place, for the centre on which the bar moves is always considerably behind the points of attachment of the horses; and when one of them falls back a little, the effective arm of the lever becomes more perpendicular to the direction of his force, and gives him a greater power, while the opposite arm hecomes more oblique, and causes the other horse to act at a disadvantage: so that there is a kind oſ stability in the equilibrium. IF the ſulerum were further forvards than the extremity of the bar, the two horses could never draw together vith convenience. (Plate XVIII. Tig. 2350.) In mining countries, and in collieries, ĩt is usual, for facilitating the motion of the carriages employed in moving the ore or the coals, to lay wheelvays of wood or iron along the rond on which they are to pass; and this practice has of late been extended in some cases as a substitute for the construction of navigable canals. Where there is a turning, the carriages are nsually received on a frame, supported by a pivot, which allows them to be l turned with great easee. In particular situations, these waggons are loaded by little carts, rolling without direction down inelined planes, and emptying themselves; they are also provided vith similar contrivances for being readily unloaded, when they arrive at the place of their destination. The carriages used for drawing loaded boats over inclined planes, vhere they have to ascend and again to descend, are made to preserve their level by having at one end four wheels instead oſf two, on the same transverse line; the outer ones as much higher than the pair at the other end, as the inner ones are lower; and the wheelway being so laid, that either the largest or the smallest act on it, accordingly as the corresponding part of the plane is lover or higher than the opposite end. It is possible that ronds paved with iron may hereafter be employed for the purpose of expeditious travelling, since there is scarcely any resistance to be overcome, except that of the air, and such roads would allow the velocity to be inereased almost vithout limit. For removing earth from one situation to another, a series of baskets has sometimes been hung on two endless ropes, moving on pullies of such a form, as to suffer the bars supporting the baskets to pass ſreely over them; the baskets being moved by means of a winch, acting on the rope hy a wheel like one of the pulliess. Sometimes also a series of little carts has been conneeted by ropes, and drawn in a cirele or oval up and down an inelined plane. These methods may be adopted in making roads, where a hill is to be levelled, and the materials are to be employed in ſilling up the valley below: but in such cases two carts, connected by a cylinder or windlass, are generally suſſicient; and they inay be arranged in the same manner as the carriages for removing boats on an inclined plane. LECTURE XIX. ON MODES. OF CHANGING THE FOREMS OF BODIES. THE corpuscular forces by which bodies retain their peculiar forms of aggregation, require in many cases to be counteracted or modiſied by mechanical processes: thus we have frequent occasion to compress. bodies into a smaller space, to augment their dimensions in a particular direction, to divide their substance, either partially or totally, in given lines or surfaces, or to destroy their general form, by reducing them into more minute portions; and we may consider these subjects as principally referable to the effects of compression, extension, penetration, division, attrition, digging, boring, agitation, trituration and demolition. The two ſirst of these articles depend on such a change as we have examined, in considering the strength of materials, under the name of alteration, the remainder on fracture. The instruments peculiarly intended for compression are in general oſf the description of presses; and the most common act by means of a serev. The friction on the serew interferes considerably with the power of the machine; but it is of use in keeping the press fixed in a situation into which it has heen brought hy foreee The screw is always turned by a lever; for without this assistance, however powerſul it might he, the friction voulq́ render it almost useless. When great force is required, the serew is made as close as is consistent with the strength of its spiress. Mr. Hunter's double screw may also be used with advantage, vhere only a small extent of motion is required. The screw of a printing press, or of a stamping press, is, on the contrary, open, and iĩt is eaused to descend with considerable momentum, the handle being loaded with a weight. Wherever a force is so employed as to produce an impulse which acts on any hody, the momentum, which is the result of the action of the force for a certain time, ĩs usually much more powerful than the simple pressure; the degree oſ its efficacy depends, however, on the degree oſ compressbility of the substance. Thus, if a heavy body fall from a certain height, s0 as to acquire a momentum, in consequence of the force of gravity, it will ultimately exert on the substance upon which it falls, a force about as much greater than its weight, as the space, through which thè surſace of the substance struck is depressed, by means of the impulse, is less than twice the height from which the body has fallen; and unless either the substance is very compressible, or the height very small, this force must be incomparably greater than the pressure of the weight only. For a printing press, a single heavy roller is sometimes made to pass over the paper, vhen it has been laid on the types; and since the whole action of such a roller is confined to a small part, at any one time, it is said to exert sufficient force, and to perform its work more equably than a common press; but its operation must be comparatively slovm. A common mangle for linen acts nearly in a similar manner. In calendering mills, the force of a spring is. employed, for exerting a pressure on the block, with which the materials are glazed. The copper plate printing press, and the machine for copying letters, are composed of two rollers, parallel to each other, pressing on the substance which is interposed, and which is brought into its situation partly by the frietion of the surface of the rol.er, and partly by external force. The rollers, by which sugar canes are pressed, are in general situated vertically, the middle one of three being turned by horses, by mules, or by water, and the canes heing made to return round it, so as to pass through both interstices in succession. It appears to be of some advantage in presses of this kind, that all the rollers should be turned independently of their action on the materials interposed, since the frietion of two rollers may tend to dra the materials into the space between them, with more regularity and greater force, than the action of a single roller vould do. For this reason, it may he adVisable to retain the toothed vheels turning the rollers, even when their axes are not firmly fixed, but held together hy an elastic hoop. (Plate XVILI. Eig ę31) In oil mills, a still greater momentum is applied to the purpose of compression than in the printing press: hammers, or long wooden beams, placed vertically, are raised by a water wheel, and suſfered to fall on wedges, vhich act very ſorcibly on the materials contained in bags on each side. Compression is also sometimes performed by the operation of hammering: thus, cast brass is generally hammered hefore ĩt is used, in order to increase its strength; the hammer renders it s0 much stiſfer, that if it is necessary to preserve its ductility, it must be frequently annealed by exposure to heatt. Anvils and vices are necessary appendages to the hammer; their use depends principally on their firmness, which is chieſly derived from weight in the one case, and from strength in the other; and pincers may be considered as portable vices. For the purpose of producing a continued pressure on such substances as have atendency to contract their dimensions, under the operation of a press, a spring has been interposed between the press and the materials, which is capable of pursuing them with a certain degree of force: the utility of such an arrangement must, however, be extremely limitedc. Mr. Bramah has applied a well known lav of hydrostaties to the construetion of a very useful press, which is simple, powerful, and portable. Extension is seldom performed by forces that tend immediately to increase the dimensions of the substance only: it is generally procured by reducing the magnitude of the substance in another direetion, sometimes by means of pressure, but more effectually by percussion. The rollers of the press employed for laminating metals are turned hy machinery, and are capable of being moved hackwards and forwards, in order to repeat the operation on the same substance; their distance is adjusted hy serews, which are tumed at once by pinions ſixed on the same axis, in order that they may be always paralle. In this manner lead, copper, and silver, are rolled into plates, and a thin plate of silver being soldered to a thicker one of copper, the compound plate is sub mitted again to the action of the press, and made so thin as to be afſorded at a moderate expense. The glazier's vice is a machine of the same nature, for ſorming vindow lead: the softness of the lead enables it to assume the re- quired shape, in consequence of the pressure of the rollers or vheels; and the circumference oſ these wheels is indented, in order to drav the lead along by the corresponding elevations. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 232.) In drawing wire, the force is originally applied in the direction of the extension, but it produces a much stronger lateral compression, by means of the conical apertures through which the wire is successively dravn. For holding the large wire, pincers are at first used, which embrace it strongly while they pull, and open when they advance to a new position, the interruption being perhaps of use, by enabling the pincers to acquire a certain momentum hefore they begin to extend the wire; but afterwards, when the vire is ſiner, it is simply drawn through the aperture from one wheel or drum to anothe. During the operation, it requires frequent annealing, which causes a scale to form on ĩts surface; and this must be removed by rolling it in a barrel with proper materials; for the application of an acid is said to injure the temper of the metal. Copper is sometimes drawn into vire s0 large as to serve for the bolts used in shipbuilding, especially for sheathing ships bottoms. Silver wire, thinly covered vith gold, is rendered extremely fine, and then ſlattened, in order to be fit for making gold thread: the thickness of the gold is inconceivably small, much less than the millionth part of an inch, and sometimes only a ten millionth. In order to form the handles of vessels of earthenware, the clay is forced through a hole of a proper shape in an iron box. The operation of the potter's wheel consists iu great measure of compression and extension, performed by the hands; the vessels are finished, when they are partly dry, in a lathe, or Ly other instruments; some kinds of earthenware are formed in a mould only. When a thread or a plate of glass is extended in a semiſluid state, ĩt has a tendency to preserve an equable thickness throughout: this is derived ſrom the eſſect of the air in cooling it, the thinnest parts becoming immediately a little colder than the rest, and consequently harder, so that they retain their thickness, until the neighbouring parts are brought into a similar state. Extension is performed by means of percussion, in forges, and in the com- mon operation of the smith's hammer. In forges, the hamniers are raised by machinery, and thrown forcibly against a spring, so as to recoil with great velocity. With the help oſ this spring, the hammer sometimes makes 500 strokes in a minute, its force being many times greater than the weight of the hammer. Such forges are used in making malleable iron, in forming copper plates, and in manufacturing steel. (Plate XVIIL Fig. 233.) Gold is beaten between the intestines of animals, on a marble anvil; for this purpose it is alloyed with copper or silver. It is reduced to the thickness of little more than the three hundred thousandth of an inch. Silver leaf is about the hundred and sixty thousandth: it is made of silver without alloy. The operation of coining depends also principally on an extension of the metal into the recesses oſ the die; it is performed by a strong pressure, united with a considerable impulse, communicated by a screw like that oſ a printing press; and sometimes the impression is formed by the repeated blows of a hammer only. Thin plates of silvered copper are moulded into any figure that may be required, by being placed between two corresponding stamps, of which the one is fixed, and the other attached to the bottom of a heavy hammer. The hammer is raised and suffered to fall in a right line, by means of pincers, which open when they have acquired a certain height. Sometimes the contact, produced by the forcible impulse of a die, ĩs sufficiently intimate to cause a thin plate of silver to cohere permanently with a surface of iron; and this mode of uniting metals is actually employed in some manufactures. The operations of perfſorating, cutting, turning, horing, digging, saving, grinding, and polishing, resemble each other, in great measure, with respect to the minute actions of the particles of hodies which they have to overcome. Penetration is generally performed in the fſirst instance by the æſſect which we have called detrusion, where the magnitude of the penetrating substance is considerable: but when a ſine point or edge is employed, it probubly first tears the surface where it is most depressed, and then acis like a vedge on the portions of the substance left on each side, with a force so mich the greater as the edge is thinner. The resistance opposed by a solid, or even by a soſt substance, to the motion of a body tending to penetrate it, appears to resemble in some measure the force of friction, which is nearly uniform, whether the motion be slow or rapid, destroying a certain quantity of momentum in a certain time, whatever the whole velocity may be, or whatever may be the space described. Hence arises the advantage of giving a great velocity to a body which is to penetrate another, the distance to which a body penetrates being as the square of its velocity, or as its energy; and a certain degree of energy being required in order to make it even penetrate at all. It is true that when we exchange a slow motion for a more rapid one, by the immediate action of any mechanical power, we can only obtain the same energy from the same pover, for ve must diminish the mass in the same proportion as the square of the velocity is inereased; but a very small part of the force, which is consumed in the operation of a machine of any kind, is employed in generating momentum; by much the greatest part is spent in overcoming resistances which vary but little with the velocity; a small portion only of the resistance increasing in proportion to the square of the velocity; s0 that by applying a triple force, ve may obtain more than a double velocity, and more than a quadruple effect: and besides it has already been observed that when the velocity begins to exceed a certain limit, the effect is increased in a much greater proportion than that of its square. The same work is also performed with less pressure, and less strain on the machinery, where a great velocity is employed. It is on account of the efficacy of velocity, in facilitating penetration, that soft substances, moving very swiftly, will readily perforate much harder ones; and for the same reason a gunshot wound, and even the loss of a limb, takeæ place with so little disturbance of the neighhouring parts, that it is sometimes scarcely felt. The advantage of an impulse, however inconsiderable, above a pressure, however great, may be easily understood from the ease with which a moderate blow of a hammer causes a nail to penetrate a substance, into which the whole foree of the arm could not have thrust it. In the engine for driving the piles, or upright beams, nused for the foundations of buildings in water, or in soft ground, the veight ĩs raised slowly to a considerable height, in order that, in falling, it may acquire suſficient energy to propel the pile with eſficacy. The same foree, if applied by very Powerful machinery immediately to the pile, would perhaps produce an equal vVoL. .. o g ffeet in d riving it, but it would he absolutely impossible in practice to construct machinery strong enough for the purpose, and if it vere possible, there would be an immense loss of foree from the friction. For example, supposing a weight of 500 pounds, ſalling from a height of 50 feet, to drive the pile 2 inches at each stroke; then, if the resistance be considered as nearly uniform, its magnitude must be about 150 thousand pounds, and the same moving power, vith a mechanical advantage of 300 to I, vould perform the work in the same time. But for this purpose some purts of the machinery must be able to support a strain equivalent to the draught of 600 horses. In the pile driving engine, the forceps, or tongs, sometimes called the monkey, or follower, is opened as soon as the veight arrives at its greatest height; and at the same time a lever detaches the drum, employed ſor raising the weight, from the axis or windlass, at which the horses are drawing; the follower then descends after the weight, uncoiling the rope from the drum, and the force of the horses is employed in turning a ſly vheel, until the connexion vith the weight is again restored. (Plate XVIII. Fig 254.) When ve throw a stone, or a missile veapon of any kind, with the hand, the stone can acquire no greater velocity than the hand itself, accompanied by the neighbuuring part oſ the arm: so that the whole velocity must be produced in a mass of matter comparatively very large A sling enables us to throw a stone or a ball much further; for here the stone may be moved with a velocity far greater than the hand that impels it, although the action oſ the force on the stone is indirect, and the resistanee oſ the air considerable An elastic how, furnished with a strong and light string, enables us to apply to an arrow or to a hall the whole foree of our arms, unencumbered with any considerable portion of matter, that requires to be moved with the arrow; henee a very great velocity may be obtained in this manner. An air gun possesses the same advantage in a still greater degree, and the force of fired gunpowder excels perhaps all others, from its concentrating an immense force in the form of an inconceivably light elastic ſluid; of course a ball impelled by this force, becomes a most effectual instrument in penetrating the most refractory substances. We may easily caleulate the velocity of an arrov, by comparing its motion with that of a pendulum, if ve know the proportion of its weight to the foree that bends the bow; including in the veight a small addition for the inertia of the bow and howstring; the height to which the arrow vill rise, being about as much greater than the space through which the bowstring acts on it, as the greatest force applied in draving the bow is greater than twice the weight to be moved. The action of a whip, eĩther on the air, or on a solid hody, depends on the increase of velocity, oceasioned by the successive transmission of the motion from a thicker to a thinner portion of its ſlexible substance, so that at last, the energy of the lash, and of its knots, gives it a suſficient capability of exciting sound, or of inſlicting pain. The instruments generally employed for the division of solid bodies, are vedges, chisels, knives, and scissors; they sometimes act by pressure only, but they are more powerful when impulse is added to it. IIatchets, planes, saws, and files, always act with some rapidity. Cutting instruments are in general very thin wedges, but the edge itself is usually much more obtuse; Mr. Nicholson has estimated the angle, formed ultimately by the surfaces constituting the finest edge, at about 56 degrees. Knives are sometimes fixed on vheels, so as to revolve in #direction oblique to their edges, as in some machines for cutting chaff, where the strav is also drawn forwards, through a space variable at pleasure, during each revolution of the knifee. An instrument of a similar nature has also been invented for the purpose of cutting weeds under vater. l For the edges of all cutting instruments, steel is principally employed. Aſter being hardened, by plunging it when red hot into cold vater, it is tempered, by laying it on a heated iron, or more accurately, by Mr. Stodarts method, of immersing it in a metallic composition in the state oſ ſusion. When its surface has acquired a yellow tinge, it is fit for edge tools, and the degree oſ heat proper for watch springs is indicated by a blue colour. The backs of knives are oſten made of iron, which is less brittle than steel: these substances are generally welded together, by hammering them when red hot; but sometimes, in large instruments, a back of iron is only rivetted on. Phe iron employed for making nails, and other small articles, is first rolled m to ſlat bars, and then cut into narrow rods, by causing it to pass hetween he eylinders of the slitting mill, the surfaces of vhich are formed into rec- angular grooves, and which are placed close to each other, so that the prominent parts of the one are opposed to the depressions of the other, and the bars are divided by the pressure of the opposite forces, acting transversely at the same points, so as to sepurate them by the effect which we have already considered under the name detrusion. The same machinery also generally works a pair of large shears, for cutting bars of any kind. (Plate XVIII. Fig. a95.) The lathe is an elegant instrument, in which a considerable relative velocity is produced between the tool and the substance to be cut, by the revolution of this substance on an axis, while the tool is supported by a rest. Ornamental lathes admit of a great variety of mechanical contrivance, but they are of little practical use, except for amusement. Picture frumes are, however, sometimes turned in oval lathes; and in the manufacture of buttons, machines of a similar nature are occasionally employed. The effect of every lathe of a complicated construction depends on a certain degree of motion of vhich its axis is capable: iſ this motion be governed by a screw, a serew of any diameter may be turned by its assistance; i by a frame producing an elliptic curve, any number of ovals, having the same centre, may be desceribed at once; and if a moveable point conneeted with the work, be pressed by a strong spring against a pattern of any kind, placed at one end of the axis, a copy, of the same form, may be made at the other end of the axis. The process of horing is a combination of penetration and division, and sometimes of attritionn. Awls, gimlets, screws, augers, and centrebits, are various forms of horerss. The drill has the advantage of a rapid motion, communicated by the drill bow, which turns it round by means of a little wheel or pulley. In boring cannon, the tool is at rest, while the cannon revolves, and by this arrangement the bore of the cannon is formed with much more accuracy than according to the old method of putting the horer in motion; perhaps because the inertia of so large a mass of matter, as constitutes the cannon, assists in deſining the axis of revolution with more accuracy. The borer is pressed against the cannon by a weight, hung on the arm oſ a bent spring, and during the operation, the outside is also turned into its intended shape by the application of proper instruments. Cylinders for steam engines are cast hollow, and afterwards bored; but in this case the horer revolves, and the cylinder remains at rest. Ploughs, spades, pickaxes, mattocks, harrows, and other agricultural instruments, resemble in their operation the chisel and the wedge: the numerous diversities in their form and the complications of their structure, are determined more by the various modifications of their action, required for particular purposes, than by any material difference in the mode of applitation of the principles on which they depend. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 256.) The process of mining is a combination of boring and digging. Shafts are sunk, levels are driven, and drains are carried off, by the help of picks or pickaxes, wedges, and hammers, the rocks being also sometimes loosened by blasting with gunpowder. In scarching for coal, ashaft is sunk through the uppermost soft strata, and the rock is then hored, by striking it continually with an iron borer, terminating in an edge of steel, which is in the mean time turned partly round; and at proper intervals a scoop is let down, to draw up the loose fragments. In this manner a perforation is sometimes made for more than a huundred fathoms, the borer being lengthened by pieces serewed on to it; it is then partly supported by a counterpoise, and is worked by machinery; if it happens to break, the piece is raised by a rod furnished vith a hollow cone, like an extinguisher, which is driven down on it. Sometimes the borer is furnished vith knives, which are made to act on any part at pleasure, and to scrape off a portion of the surrounding substance, which is collected in a proper receptacle. For saving wood on a large scale, saving mills are very advantageously employed, being usually driven by water. Several saws are generally fixed in a frame, parallel to each other; they are worked up and down by a crank, and at every alternation a wheel is drawn round a little, by a catch, or click, and moves forvards the frame which supports the timber. When the machine is employed for cutting the fellies vhich form the cireumference of vheels, the frame supporting the timber is made to turn round a centre. A circular saw is used in the construction of blocks and pullies; and in order to make the motion niore secure from the effect of accidental irregularities, the wheels are made to turn each other by contact only, without teeth. The machinery for nak- ing blocks, in the Royal dock yard at Portsmouth, has been lately much improved and enlarged; it is worked by a steam engine, the action of which is applied to a great variety of purposes. The advantage oſ a sav which revolves continually, appears to be very considerable, since a much greater velocity may be given to it than can be obtained when the motion is alternate. Such a saw has also sometimes been applied to cutting off piles under water. In mills for sawing marble into slabs, the saws are dravn backwards and forwards horizontally: they are made of soft iron, without teeth; and sand being applied to them, vith water, during the operation, the sand is partly imhedded in the iron, and grinds avay the marble. Granite is worked by driving a number of thin wedges very gradually into it, at various parts oſ the section desired; and sometimes vedges of vood are employed, which being moistened by water, their expansion separates the parts from each other. It is also said that many stones may be divided by drawing lines on them with oil, and then exposing them to heat. Perhaps some processes of this kind might be performed with advantage under vater; it is well Enown that glass may be cut in a rough manner under vater, without much difficulty, by a common pair of scissors. For reducing the magnitude of a substance in a particular part, instruments of attrition are used; rasps, files, grindstones, and hones; and of all these the immediate actions appear to resemble those of chisels and saws. The hatches oſ files are cut with a hard chisel while the steel is soft, and the files are aſterards hardened. In using the grindstone, water is applied, in order to avoid the inconvenience produced by too much heat; and sometimes tallow is substituted for water with equal advantage: but oil is not found to ansver the same purpose; and it has been conjectured that the cold continually occasioned by the melting of the tallow at the point of friction, serves as a substitute for the cooling effect of the evaporation of the water. For grinding and polishingsteel, the grindstones are mude to revolve, either vertically or horizontally, vith a velocity so great as to describe sometimes as much as 60 feet in a second. The steel ĩs also in some cases drawn backwards and forvards horizontally on a cireular surſace, and in order that the action may be equally di- vided throughout the surface, ĩt is allowed to revolve on an axis hy means oſ the friction; its motion being confined to one direction by the action of a catch. Various substances, chieſly of mineral origin, are also used, on account of their hardness, as intermediate materials, for grinding and polishing others. These are diamond dust, corundum, emery, tripoli, putty, glass, sand, ſlint, red oxid of iron, or crocus martis, and prepared chalk; they are sometimes applied in loose powder, and sometimes fixed on leather, vood, or paper. Cuttle ſish hone, and seal skin, are furnished by the animal kingdom, and Dutch rushes by the vegetable; these are employed chieſly in polishing woor or ivory. Marble is made smooth hy rubbing one piece on another, with the interposition of sand; the polishing blocks are sometimes caused to revolve by machinery in a trough, in which the marble is placed under water, and are drawn at the sume time gradually to and from the centre; or the slab itself, vith the frame on vhich it rests, is drawn slowly hackwards and forwards, while the blocks are working on it. Granite is polished with iron rubbers, by means of sand, emery, and putty; it is necessary to take care during the operation that the water, which trickles down from the rubbers, and carries with it some of the iron, may not collect below the eolumns, and stain them; but this inconvenience may be wholly avoided by employing rubbers of glass. Optical lenses are fixed on blocks by means of a cement, and ground with emery, by a tool of proper convexity or concavity: if they are small, a large number is ſixed on the blocks at the same time. The tool is sometimes ſirst turned round its axis by machinery, and when the lenses are to be finished, a compound motion is given to it by means of a crank; and in order to make it more smooth, the wheels turn each other by brushes instead of cogss. The point of the lens where its two surfaces are parallel, is determined by looking through it at a minute objeet, while it is fixed on a wheel with a tubular axis, and shifting it, until the object no longer appears to move; a circle is then described, as it revolves, in order to mark ita outline. 4 Machines for trituration, by means of which the larger masses of matter are crushed, broken, or ground, into smaller parts, are in general comprehended under the denomination of millss. Aſter the pestle and mortar, the simplest machine of this kind appears to be the stamping mill; the stampers resemble the hammers of the mill employed in the extraction of oils from seeds, and the machine is used for reducing to powder the ores of metals, and sometimes also barks, and linseed; the surſace of the stampers being armed with iron or steel. But barks and seeds are more usually ground by the repeated pressure of two wheels of stone, rolling on an axis which is forced in a horizontal direction round a fixed point. A nobleman of distinguished rank and talents has lately employed for a mortar mill, a wheel of cast iron, formed of two portions of cones, joined at their bases: after thirty revolutions, the mortar being suſſiciently ground, a bell rings, and the horse stops. The materials for making gunpowder are also ground by a wheel revolving in a trough: in order to corn them, they are moistened, and put into boxes with a number of holes in their bottoms, and these boxes being placed side by side, in a circular frame, suspended hy cords, the frame is agitated by a crank revolving horizontally, and the paste shaken throngh the holes: the corns are polished by causing them to revolve rapidly within a barrel A revolving barrel is used for forming and polishing small round bodies of different kinds, and it is oſten employed in agriculture as a churn for making butter. The purpose of agitation is perhaps more effectually answered hy an alternate motion, which has sometimes been produced in a barrel churn, by means of a cord attached to a heavy pendulum. Threshing machines are of two kinds; the one consists of a number of ſlails, beating the corn nearly in the same manner as they are used by labourers; in the other, which is more commonly employed in this country, the corn is drawn along by two revolving rollers, and caused to pass hetween a eylinder, and its concave cover, while a number of blocks, projecting from the surface of the cylinder, beat or rub out the grains very eſfectually from the ears; the corn falls out at the lower part, and is vinnowed by a fan which the machine turns at the same time. In this manner it is said that a horse will thresh about 100 2 bushels of corn in a day It is commonly reckoned the work of a labourer to thresh about six bushels in a day Plate XVIII. Fig. 237.) Some kinds of grain are occasionally ground in mills of iron or steel, hich consist of a solid cylinder or cone turning vithin a hollow one, both the surfaces being cut obliquely into teeth. But the common mill for grinding corn is composed of two circular stones of silicious grit, placed horizontally; the upper one revolves with considerable velocity, and is supported by an axis passing through the lower one, at a distance variable at pleasure: When the diameter is five feet, the stone usually makes about 90 revolutions in a minute; if the velocity were greater, the flour would be too much heated. The corn is shaken out of a funnel, or hopper, by means of projections from the revolving axis, which strike against the orifice; it passes through the middle of the upper millstone, and is readily admitted between the stones; the lower stone is slightly convex, and the upper one somewhat more concave, so that the corn passes over more than half the radius of the stone hefore it begins to be ground: after being reduced to powder, it is discharged at the circumference, its escape heing favoured by the convexity of the lower stone, as well as by the centrifugal forcee The surface of the stones is cut into grooves, in order to make them act more readily and effectually on the corn. The resistance, in grinding wheat, has been estimated at about a thirty fſifth of the weight of the millstone. The stones have sometimes been placed vertically, and the axis supported on friction wheels: but the common position appears to be more eligible for mills on a large scale. It is said that a man and a boy can grind by a hand mill a bushel of wheat in an hour; in a watermill, the griniding and dressing of a bushel of vheat is equivalent to the effect of 20160 pounds of water falling through a height of 10 feet, which is about as much as the work of a labourer for a little more than half an hour. In a windmill, vhen the velocity is inereased by the irregular action of the vind, the corn is sometimes forced rapidly through the mill, without being suſiiciently ground. There is an elegant method of preventing this, by means of the centrifugal force of two halls, which fly out as soon as the velocity is augmented, and as they rise in the are of a cirele, allow the end ofa lever to rise with them, while the opposite end of the lever descends with the upper millstone, and brings it a little nearer to the lower one. The hran or husk is separated from the ſlour, by sifting it in the bolting mill, which consists of a VOL. I. u h cylindrical sieve, placed in an inclined position, and turned by machinery. (Plate XVIII Fig 238.) , When the ſlour is made into bread, the dough requires to be kneaded: for this purpose a machine is sometimes used, in which four or more bars, parallel to the axis of motion, are turned round, by means of a walking wheel. The dough is placed in a circular trough, in which the bars revolve not quite in the middle, so as to approach in each revolution to one of its sides, and thus the dough is perpetually compelled to change its form. A machine of nearly the same construction is employed for levigating flints, aſter they have ſirst been made red hot, and plunged into cold water, in order to render them friable They are mixed, when it is necessary, with other large stones, and the water, in which the process is performed, carries off the powder, and deposits its coarser parts in a short time, while the ſiner remain much longer suspended, and are thus separated from the rest. When a mechanical structure is to be demolished, or a natural substance to be broken into smaller parts, we have often occasion to employ the collected force of men, the powers of machinery, or the expansive foree of chemical agents. Battering rams, or wooden heams, suspended by ropes, and armed with iron, which vere used by the warriors of antiquity in besieging a town, are now generally superseded by the introduction of artillery, although they may perhaps still afford, in some cases, a more cconomical and equally powerful mode of operation. The same momentum, and the same energy, may be given to a hattering ram at a less expense than to a cannon ball; but it is probable that the eſiicacy of a cannon hall is chieſly owing to the augmentation of its velocity beyond that limit, which is the utmost that the substance to be destroyed can sustain without giving way, independently of the mass of the body which strikes it. For demolishing smaller aggregates, pincers, hammers, and crows, are generally sufficient; to these sometimes more complicated instruments are added. Thus, for example, several machines have been invented for drawing out ship's boltss A hook which grapples like the common instrument for drawing teeth, has been applied for holding them ſirmly, and sometime⸗ / a screw, turned by means of wheelwork, has been used for gaining a force sufficient to overcome their adhesion. In all such cases, however, the effect of percussion has a considerable advantage; and even if other means are employed, it is of use to begin with lessening the firmness of the adhesion by the blows of a hammer; and in this manner a screw may be extracted, which is so firmly attached by its rust, as to be immoveable by other means. The expansive force of heat is frequently of great service in dividing rocks, or in destroying old buildings. This is sometimes done simply by the application of fire, as in the mine of Rammelsberg, in the Hartz, where the stratum containing the ore is of such a nature, partly, perhaps, on account of the combustible matter which enters into its composition, that, by the effect of a large quantity of fuel, hich is burnt in the vast excavation, of which it forms the side, it is rendered so friable as to be worked with ease. More commonly, however, the force of gunpowder is employed, and rocks are generally blasted vith great convenience by an explosion of this powerful agent. A hole being bored to the depth of three or four feet, the powder is placed at the bottom, and a vire being introduced, small stones and sand are rammed round it, and the wire is withdrawn, leaving a communication for firing the powder? by means of a train of sufficient length to insure the safety of the workman. It is said that the explosion is more efficacious when the powder does not fill the whole of the cavity; this, however, appears to require confirmationn. The chemical powers, which are the ultimate causes of the operation of gunpowder, belong to a department of philosophy which it is not our business to investigate: but the elasticity of the gases and vapours which are extricated, as modified by the heat which accompanies their production, will be considered and explained in the subsequent divisions of this Course of Leetures. LECTURE XX. ON THE HISTORY OF MECHANICS. THE order which we have pursued, in considering the various departments of mechanical science, has been in great measure synthetical, dictated by the plan of proceeding logically from the most simple principles to their more complicated combinations, s0 as to build at every step on foundations which had been ſirmly laid before: and this method is unquestionably the best adapted for the expeditious progress of a student in sciences with which he is unacquuinted. But having once acquired a certain degree of knowledge, he is anxious to be informed by what steps that knowledge was originally obtained, and to what individuals mankind is indebted for each improvement thas has been successively made. Hence, although we cannot attempt to enter into a complete history o? mechanics, it may still be satisfactory to take a short retrospect of a few of the most remarkable eras in mechanical philosophy, and in those parts of mathematics on which it immediately depends. It is universally allowed that the Greeks derived the elements of mathematical, mechanical, and astronomical learning from Egypt and from the East. Diogenes Laertius, who appears to be very desirous of claiming, for his countrymen, the merit of originality, does not deny that Thales and Pythagoras acquired much of their knowledge in their travels. Thales of Miletus is the first that can be supposed to have introduced these studies into Greece. Moeris, vho was probably a king of Egypt, and Theuth or Thoth a native of the same country, are mentioned as having laid the foundations of geometry; but the science could scarcely have extended, in those ages, further than was barely necessary for the measurement of land: since Thales, or even a later philosopher, ĩs said to have first discovered that two lines drawn from the extremities of the diameter of a circle, and meeting in any other part of its circumference form with each other a right anglee. Thales was one of the seven vhom antiquity distinguished by the appellation of wise men; he flourished about 600 years before the Christian era, and he was the father of the Ionian schuol, the members of which, in subsequent times, devoted themselves more particularly to the study of moral than of natural philosophy. The Italian school, on the contrary, vhich was founded by Pythagoras, appears to have been more inclined to the study of nature and of its lavs; although none of the departments of human knowledge vere excluded from the pursuits of either of these principal divisions of the Grecian sages, until Socrates introduced, into the Ionian school, a taste for metaphysical speculations, which excluded almost all disposition to reason coolly and clearly on natural causes and effectss. To Pythagoras, philosophy is indebted for the name which it bears; his predecessors had been in the habit of calling themselves wise; he chose to be denominated a lover of wisdom only. He had studied under Pherecydes, and Pherecydes under Pittacus: but with respeet to mathematical and mechanical researches, it does not appear that either of his teachers had made any improvementss. On his return from his travels in Egypt and the East, in the time of the last Tarquin, about 500 years before Christ, he found his native country Samos under the dominion of the tyrant Polycrates, and went as a voluntary exile to seek a tranquil retreat in a corner oſ Italy. At Croto, says Ovid, he studied and taught the laws of nature. l  From human view what erst had lain concealed His piercing mind to open light revealed; To patient toil his ardent soul constrained, Of Nature's richest stores possession gained: And thence, vith glowing heart and liberal hand, He dealt her treasures oer the listening land. The wondering crowd the laws of nature hears, -And each great truth in silent awe reveres.” Hoever erroneous the opinion may be, that Pythagoras was acquainted vith the laws of gravitation, ĩt is certain that he made considerable improve- ments both in mathematics and in mechanics, and in particular that he discovered the well known relation hbetween the hypotenuse and the sides of a right angled triangle, and demonstrated that the square of the hypotenuse is always equal to the sum of the squares of the sidess This theorem is more essential to the perfection of geometry than any other proposition that can be named: and if we may judge by the story of his having sacrificed a hecatomb to the Muses, on occasion of the discovery, he seems to have had a foresight of the magnificence of the ediſice, that was in subsequent times to be built on this foundation. Democritus of Abdera lived about a century after Pythagoras, vhose works he studied, and whose principles he adopted. He appears to have been possessed of very extensive knowledge and profound learning; but little remains of his works, excepting their titless. Some have attributed to him the invention of the method of arranging stones so as to form an arch. Seneca thinks that 30 simple an invention must have been practised in earlier ages: but Mr. King has endeavoured to show that its general introduction in building vas of much later date. Architecture, and other mechanical arts had however been considerably advanced some time beſore this period, if it is true that Ctesiphon or Chersiphron, who built the temple of Ephesus, was cotemporary vith Croesus and Thales. It is uncertain at what time bridges of stone were first built; and itis doubtſul whether the art of building bridges of vood was very vell understood in those ages: for according to Herodotus, it was commonly believed, that Thales avoided the necessity of procuring a passage over the Halys for the army of Croesus, by encamping them on its banks, and cutting a channel for the river in their rear, although the historian himself is of opinion, that they passed over bridges which already existed. Curtius speaks ofa bridge of stone over the Euphrates at Babylon, which appears to have heen built long before the time of Alexander, whose expedition he relates; and it is scarcely nrobable that a stone bridge could have withstood the impulse of s0 rapid a river, if it had been supported by columns only, without arches. We are informed by Pliny that Ctesiphon lowered his large blocks of stone by placing them on heaps of sand hags, and letting out the sand by degrees; it does not appear how he raised them, but the inclined plune seems to afford the simplest and most obvious method. 2 Archytasof Tarentum, and Eudoxus of Cnidus were also Pythagoreans. They were the first that attempted to make the mathematical sciences familiar by popular illustrations; and Archytas is said by some to have invented the pulley and the screw. They lived nearly 150 years after Pythagoras, and geometry had made in the mean time very rapid advances, for the properties of the conic sections were well known to these philosopherss The ſirst persons,” says Plutarch, that cultivated the method of organic geometry, were of the school of Eudoxus and Archytas. These philosophers introduced elegance and variety into science, by illustrations derived from sensible objects, and made use of mechanical contrivances for expediting and familiarising the solutions of problems, which, if more mathematically treated, are complicated and difficult: each of them invented a method of determining in this manner the magnitude of two mean proportionals between two given lines, by the assistance of certain curves and sections. Plato by no means approved of their mode of proceeding, and reprehended them severely, as giving up and perverting the most essential advantages of geometry, and causing the science to revert from pure and incorporeal forms to the qualities of sensible bodies, subjected to narrow and servile restraints. It was for this reason that practical mechanics were separated from geometry, and vere long neglected hy philosophers, being considered as a department only of the art of var.” Aristotle, vho was almost the last of the Ionian school, flourished a little less than half a century after Archytas; he was perhaps the author of no original discoveries relating to the principles of mechanics, but we find, in his treatise on this acience, the law of the composition of motion very distinctly laid down; he makes, however, some mistakes respecting the properties of levers. Iis general merit in elegant literature, as well as in natural history and natural philosophy, is too well known to require encomium. The foundation of Alexandria commences a period memorable for science in general, but more particularly for mathematics and astronomy. Dinocrates was the architect vhom Alexander employed in laying out and in building this celebrated city. Among those who studied in this school, the sciences are indebted to none more than to Euclid, who lived about 300 years before our era. It is uncertain how much of his Elements may have been derived from his own investigations; but the masterly manner in which this well known work is arranged, and the precision and accuracy which reign in every part of it, demand almost as great a share of praise as is due to original discovery. Epicurus was a cotemporary of Euclid, and is considered as the last of the Pythagorean or Italian philosopherss. The penetration that he discovered in assigning the true causes to many mechanical phenomena, his explanations of which are copied by Lucretius, is sufficient to induce us to look forwards with impatience to the publication of such oſ his works, as have lately been discovered among the manuseripts of Herculaneum. Apollonius of Perga lived about half a century later; the elegance and extent of his investigations of the must abstruse properties of the conic sections leſt but little to be added to them hy more modern geometricians. The architect Philo appears to have been more ancient than Apollonius: hut he is not the Philo whose essay on arlike engines is published in the collection of the Ancient mathematicians; since this author was a pupil of Ctesihius. For the demonstration of the fundamental properties of the lever and oſ the centre of gravity; for the discovery of the laws of hydrostatics, and of the modes of ietermining the speciſio gravities of hodies; for the construetion of the first cranes, and of the ſirst planetarium; and for those improvements of the methods of mathematical investigation which have heen the hasis of every modern reſinement in analytical calculation; for all these additions to our Enowledge and our povers, we are indebted to Archimedess On a character s0 conspicuous, ve can with pleasure dvell long enough to attend to some particulars of his history, which are related by Plutareh, in his account oſ he siegæ of Syracuse; omitting, however, such details as are evidently fabulouss. Archimedes, says Plutarch, armed with his own inventions only, made light of the splendour oſ the Roman preparations, and of the glory of the nume of Marcelluss. And these vere inventions that he even considered as of subordinate value, as geometrieal playthings, which had been the amusements of his leisure hourss It was king Hiero that first induced him to transfer a portion of his science ſrom intellectual to material objects, and to condescend in some degree to the comprehension of the multitude, by giving a sensible form to those truths, which in their abstract state are discoverable only to the reasoning faculty. Archimedes, who was a friend and a relation of Hiero, had asserted that any weight whatever might be moved by any given power: and depending on the validity of his arguments, had given scope to his imagination, and boasted that if he had another earth to which he could step over, he vould draw the whole of the present globe out of its placee Hiero, surprised at the boldness of his assertion, requested him to give some substantial proof of its truth, by moving a great weight with a small pover: upon this Archimedes procured a ship, which was with great labour drawn up on the shore, and having completely manned and freighted her, he seated himself at a distance, and by lightly touching the first movement of a machine, he drew her along as smoothly and as safely as if she had been sailing in the deepest water. Hiero, full of astonishment, and admiring the powers of mechanical art, prevailed on Archimedes to construct such engines both of defence and of offence, as might be of use to him in case of a siege: for these, however, Hiero, who lived a life of peace and prosperity, was not so unfortunate as to have occasion; but they now hbecame highly valuable to the Syracusans, and they were of the more advantage, as their inventor was present, to direct their use. And in fact the whole people of Syracuse constituted but a part of Archimedes's corporeal machinery, and he was the soul that moved and governed the wholee All other arms were deserted, and they employed his engines alone, both for their own defence, and for the annoyance of the enemy. In short, the Romans soon became so terrified, that if they saw a stick or a rope upon the alls, they cried out thatit was some machine of Archimedes, and immediately ſled; so that Marcellus at last determined to desist from attempting to take the place by assault, and resolved to blockade it only.  Archimedes, however, had such depth of intellect, and such sublimity of mind, that notwithstanding he had obtained, by these inventions, the credit and glory of an intelligence rather divine than human, he thought it unworthy of him to leave any written treatise on the suhject, considering practical mechanics, and every art that is concerned in satisfying the wants of life, as ignoble and sordid; and resting all his hopes of fame on those works, in which the magnificent and the elegant are exhibited, uncontaminated by the imperfections of the material world: works that are comparable to nothing else that the mind of man has produced; in which the subject only contends with the mode of treating it, the magnitude and beauty of the one voL. I. 1i being rivalled by the accuracy and vigour of the other. It ĩs impossible that propositions more diſicult and important should be deduced from simpler and purer elements. Some attribute this excellence to his natural genius, others to his indefatigable application, vhich has given to every thing that he has attlempted the appearance of having been performed with ease. For we might ourselves search in vain for a demonstration of his propositions; but so smooth and direct is the way by which he leads us, that when we have once passed it, ve fancy that we could readily have found it without assistance. We may, therefore, easily give eredit to what is said of him, that being as it were fascinated by this domestic syren, that bore him company, he often neglected his ſood and his clothing; that when sometimes brought hy compulsion to the baths, he used to drav his ſigures in the ashes oſ the ſire pluces, and to make his calculations upon the cosmetics that were employed by the at endants; deriving, like a true votary of the muses, every pleasure from an intellectual origin. Among all his beautiful discoveries, he is said to have chosen that of the proportion of the spnere and eylinder for his sepulehral honours; requesting of his friends that they would place on his tomb a cylinder containing a sphere, and inscribe on iĩt the ratio which he had ſirst determined.  By artifice, and through the thoughtlessness and security of a day of festivity, the Romans at length obtained possession of Syracuse, and in the pilluge, although orders had heen issued that the life of Arehimedes should be spared, he vas Eilled by a private soldier. His death is variously related, but all accounts agree, that Marcellus was deeply concerned for his loss, that he held his assassin in abhorrence, and conſerred distinguished favours on his surviving relations This event is supposed to have happened about 212 years beſore the birth of Christ: and the cultivation of mechanical philosophy, which had been continued for four hundred years with increasing success, was alimost wholly interrupted for eighteen centuries. There lived, however, in the mean time, some mathematicians and mechanies of considerable merit. A work on varlike machines, addressed to Mareellus by Athenaeus, is still extant, and may be found in the splendid collection of writers on military mechanics entitled Mathematici Veteres. Ctesibius of Alexandria was about a century later than Archimedes; he enriched hydraulies with several valuable machines; although he contributed little to the ad- vancement of theoretical investigation. Hero was of the same school, and his pursuits were similar; some of his treatises on hydraulics, pneumaties, and mechanics, are published in the collection of Ancient mathematicians, and some others are still extant in manuseript. We are informed by Pappus, that Hero and Philo had referred the properties of the lever, the wheel and axis, the pulley, the vedge, and the screv, to the same fundamental principle; so that the theory of the mechanical owers hegan at that time to be extremely well understood. The treatises of Ilero on pneumatios and on automatons contain many very ingenivus inventions, but they are rather calculated for amusement than for utility; among them is a cupping instrument, which operates nearly in the manner of an air pump. A work of Bito, on warlike machinery, addressed to king Attalus, is included in the same collection. l Vitruvius was an author of great general knowledge: he lived under one of the earliest of the Caesars, and the greatest part of our information respeeting the mechanies of antiquity has been derived from his vorkss Apollodorus was employed by Trujan, in building a bridge over the Danube, in the year 102; he has left a treatise on besieging a town, which is to be found among the Ancient mathematiciuns. Diophantus, Pappus, and Proclus, vere mathematicians of eminence; Diophantus conſined himself in great measure to arithmetic and pure geometry; but the last book of Pappus's collections is devoted to mechanios, and Proclus wrote a treatise on motion, which is still extant. The rudiments of algebraical notation and calculation may be found in the works of Diophantus; but the Arabians appear to have ſirst practised the method of denoting quantities in general by literal characters; they made, however, no considerable advances, and mathematics in general remained nearly stationary until the time of the revival of letters. During the long interval, in which learning and science were involved in the darkness of the middle ages, the arts subservient to the convenience of life were also in great measure neglected. It is evident from many remains of ant iquity, that various manufactures had attained, in Greece and at Rome, high degree of perfection; but the irruptions of the barbarians were as eſfectual in suꝑpresing the refinements of civilisation, as in checking the pursuit of literary acquirements: our own country was not the earliest in recovering the arts which had been lost, but it has always received with open arms those who have excelled in them; and the improvements which have heen made, within a few centuries, in the British manufactures, have obtained for them a celebrity unrivalled by those of any other nation. The ancient Britons are supposed to have mude, in common with the other Celtic nations, coarse cloths and felts of wool, and perhaps some articles of linen; their chariots of war, which are mentioned by Caesar, could not have been executed without some skill in the arts of the carpenter and the smith. The Romans introduced a certain degree oſ civilisation into England, hut it appears to have heen in great measure forgotten soon aſter they leſt the country. In the seventh century, several architects and workmen were brought from the continent by Wilfrid and Biscop; they restored the practice of building with stone, which had been generally superseded by wood, and laid the foundation for other improvements. In the time of king Alfred, the English goldsmiths began to excel, and beſore the conquest, the woollen manuſactures had acquired a considerable degree oſ perfection. The paper now in use vas introduced about the year 1100; it was probably imported from the continent, since the linen manufacture was little advanced in England till 150 years later; but embroidery was much practised, although in the 12th century silks were principally woven in Sicily The manufactory oſ cloth was considerably improved, in the I4th century, by the establishment of Kempe and other Flemish weavers in England: and many of the arts were beneſited, about the same time, by the invention of the method of drawing wire, which was ſirst introduced at Nuremberg. In the succeeding century, the increasing number of hands employed in various manufactures, suggested to some mind of superior penetration the great principle of the division of labour, by which each individual is enabled to acquire so high a degree of perfection in a very limited branch of each manufacture, that the whole work is performed much more perfectly, as ell as more expeditiously, than if it had been begun and completed hy any one person, even of greater abilities and experience:. The invention of the modern spinning wheel is attributed to Jirgen of Brunswick, and the year 1530 is assigned as its date: England soon profited by the improvement; many manufacturers took refuge in this country from the Duke of Alva's persecutions in Flanders, and before the end of the century a new modiſication of the art of weaving was introduced by Lee of Cambridge, who invented the stocking loom, imitating the texture oſ the knit stockings, which were ſirst manufactured in Spain about the year 1550. Mills for drawing wire and for slitting iron were also ſirst erected in the sixteenth century; Birmingham and Sheſſield were even at that time, according to Camden, celebrated for their manufactures; and the machinery which has been since introduced at different periods in those places, affords a facility and expedition which astonish every unexperienced spectator. The names of Watt and oſ Boulton have acquired a just celebrity from their reſined improvements; but many other mechanics of inferior rank have exhibited a degree of ingenuity which would have done honour to the most distinguished talents. The manufactures of Manchester are also of considerable antiquity; but they are very greatly indebted to the inventions of Arkwright and his followers, which have also been introduced in many other parts of the united kingdom. The importance of these improvements may be estimated from the quantity of cotton which is annually imported into Great Britain; in 1787, it amounted to 23 million pounds, and gave employment to 420 thousand manufacturers; in 1791, it vas increased to 32 millions: about one half is consumed in white goods, one fourth in fustians, and the remainder in hosiery, mixtures, and candle wicks. But the woollen manufactory affords a subsistence to above a million persons, ho receive annually for their work about nine millions sterling, and employ as much wool as is orth about three. In architecture, the Anglonorman stile prevailed in this country from the conquest to the beginning of the thirteenth century; the arch was frequently employed, and its form was semicireula. The Gothic architecture, distinguished by its pointed arches, which is said to have originated from the Saracens, was first introduced into England about the year 1170, and was more and more generally adopted for about three centuries. Of the architects of this school, two of the most celebrated were William of Sens, and Walter of Coventry: the most elegant specimen of its performances is, perhaps, King's College Chapel at Cambridge, which was founded by Henry the Sixth, and beguam in the year 1441. The Cathedral of Lincoln appears to have been one of the earliest Gothic ediſices; Westminster Abbey was finished about 1285, the M inster of York was begun a few years aſtervards; and it is diſficult to dete rm ine which of these three buildings most deserves the attention of the antiq;uary and the architect, or vhether the Cathedral at Canterbury may not bæ æqual to either of them. In the midst of an age oſ darkness, an insulated individual arrests our attention by merits of no ordinary kind. Roger Bacon was hurn at Ilchester, in the year 1214 it is well known that his experiments had led him to a discovery of the properties of gunpowder, although he humanely eoncealed the nature of its composition from the publiec, and deseribed it only in an enigma: the extent of his optical knowledge has been variously estimated, but it was unquestionably much greater than that of the ancient philosophers. He appears, however, to have had some companions in his mechanical pursuits; he declares that he had seen chariots which could move with ineredible rapidity, without the help of animals; he describes a diving bell; and he says that he had been informed, on good authority, that machines had been made, by the assistance of which men might ſly through the air. Cimabue, who first began to revive the long neglected art of painting, was cotemporary with Bacon. The use of oil in painting is commonly supposed to have been introdueed by Van Eyck, but there are traces, in the records oſ this country, oſ its employment as early as the year 1230. The clepsydrae, or water timekeepers of the ancients appear to have been gradually transformed, in the middle ages, into the clocks of the Saracens and of the Arabians; and these were introduced into Europe in the thirteenth century. About the year 1290, turret elocks were erected at Westminster and at Canterbury. The ſirst clock, of which we know the construetion, is that which was made by Wallingford im 1826, and which was regulated by a fly; and the second that of Defondeur, or Fusorius, with a simple balance, made about 1400. But it appears that some portable watches had heen constructed in the beginning of the fourteenth century; and about the year 1460, several clock makers are said to have come to England from Flanders. The art of engraving on metal, and of printing vith the rolling press, is mp posed to have been invented in the year 1493. Some attribute the art of printing with types, to Laurentius Coster of Haerlem, who, as they say, in 1430, employed for the purpose separale hlocks of wood, tied together with thread. Gensſleich, one of his vorkmen, went to Mentz, and was there assisted by Gutenberg, who invented types of metal. But the best authors appear to disbelieve this story; and Gutenberg, in partnership with Fust and Schaeſfer, is the first that is universally alloved to have practised the art. It was introduced into this country by William Caxton. Leonardo da Vinei, the most accomplished man of his age, was born about the year 1443, and excelled not only in painting and poetry, but also in architecture, mathematics, and mechanics. The state of practical mechanies in this and the subsequent centuries may be estimated from Ramellis collection of machines, which contains several curious and useful inventions; some of them long since forgotten, and even lately proposed again as nev. The vorks of Bacon, Lord Verulam, although not immediately tending to the advancement oſ mathematies or of mechanics, are universally allowed to have conduced very materially to the improvement of every branch of science, by the introduction of a correet and conclusive method of philosophical argument and inquiry. Guido Ubaldi published, in 1577, a treatise on mechanics, not wholly exempt from inaccuracies, and in the following year a valuable commentary on the works of Archimedes: some of the properties 'of projectiles were about the same time rather imagined than demonstrated by Tartalea: Benedetti soon after began to reason correctly respecting the principles of mechanies; but it was reserved for Galileo to lay the foundations of the discoveries, vhich have succeeded each other with inereasing rapidity for more than two centuries. Ie investigated, in the year 1589, the laws of accelerating forces, and shoved the nature of the curve which is deseribed by a projeetile: he inferred from observation the isochronism of the vibrations oſ a pendulum, and the principle was soon after applied by Sanctorius to the regulation of timekeepers. Stevinus, a Dutchman, was the ſirst that clearly stated the important law by which the equilibrium of any three forces is determined: and the properties of the centre of gravity vere successively investigated by Lucas Valerius, Laſaille, and Guldinus, who made some additions to the elegant propositions of Archimedes which relate to it. The application of the more intrieate parts of the mathematies, to practical purposes of all kinds, has hecome incomparably easier and more convenient since the invention of logarithms. This important improvement vas made by Baron Napier; his tables were published in 1614: and they were reduced to a still more useful form by the labours of Briggs and of Gunter. Descartes, about the same time, was making considerable additions to the science oſ algebra, and the mathematios were soon after enriched by Cavalleri's invention of the method of indivisibles. This method was founded on the principles introduced by Archimedes, it was further improved by Wallis, and it led to the still more valuable invention oſ the ſluxional analysis. The laws of collision were investigated nearly at the same time in England by Wren and Wallis, and in France by Huygens. After the discoveries of Archimedes and of Galileo, those of Huygens hold the third place, in the order of time, among the greatest beneſits that have heen conferred on science. His theory of cycloidal pendulums, and his doctrine of central forces were the immediate foundations of Newton's improvements. Hooke was as great in mechanical practice, and in ingenious contrivance, as Huygens was in more philosophieal theory; he was the first that applied the balance spring to watches, and he improved the mode of employing pendulums in clocks; the quadrant, the telescope, and the microscope, were materially indebted to him; he had the earliest suspicions of the true nature of the cause that retains the planets in their orbits; and the multitude of his inventions is far too great to be enumerated in a brief history of the progress of science. The composition of motion, and several other mechanical and optical subjects, are elegantly treated in the lectures published hy the learned Dr. Barrow. He was professor of mathematics at Cambridge, and voluntarily resigned his chair to make way for his successor, the pride of his country, and the ornament of mankind. Sir Isaac Newton was born at Woolsthorpe in Lincolnshire, on Christmas day in 1642, the year of Galileo's death: At the age of 12 he was sent to school at Grantham, and at 18 to Cambridge. He made some important improvements in algebraical analysis, and laid the foundation of his admirable method of ſluxions, before he was 24 years old; but his modesty prevented him from immediately publishing any work on these subjects. His first optical experiments were also made in the year 1666, and they were communicated to the Royal Society, then in its infancy, on his admission as a member, in 1672 The theory of gravitation, and the mecha- nics of the universe, are developed in his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, first published in 1687. The following year he was chosen. representative of the university of Cambridge, in parliament, and in 1696, he was placed, upon the recommendation of the Earl of Halifax, in a lucrative situation in the Mint. From 1703 until his death in 1797, he continued president of the Royal Society, and enjoyed, to the age of 80, an uninterrupted state of good health. He vas knighted by Queen Anne, in 1705, and died possessed of a considerable fortune.  le had the singular happiness,” says Mr. Fontenelle, of obtaining, during his life, all the credit and consideration to which his sublime researches and his fortunate discoveries entitled him: All men of science, in a country which produces so many, placed Newton, by a kind of acelamation, at their head; they acknowledged him for their chief and their master; no opponent, nor even a cool admirer, dared to appear. His philosophy vas adopted throughout England, and it is supported in the Royal Society, and imall the excellent productions of the members of that Society, with as much confidence, as iſ it had been consecrated hy the respect of a long course of ages A remarkable instance of the extent and refinement of Newton's mathematical acquirements may be found in a paper of a celebrated modern mathematician, on the subject oſ atmospherical refraction; Mr. Kramp observes, vith a mixture of surprise and doubt, that Newton appears to have been acquainted with those methods of algebraical caleulation which he had himself pumsued; at the same time he says that this is almost incredible, since he must have discovered certain improvements in the higher analysis which were unknown even to Euler, and to every other mathematician hefore Laplace. A Ithough Newton was unquestionably the first inventor of the method of luxions, yet Leibnitz, whether he had received any hints of Newton's ideas, as there is some reason to suspect, or whether his investigations were wholly inde pe ndent of those of Newton, was the first that published any work on the subject; and he extended its application to many important ꝑroblems, tarlier, perhaps, than any English mathematician. James and John Bernoulli àlso & ursued the same studies vith considerable success, and the general laws of me c hanies vere very elegantly investigated, and successſully applied by these three contemporary philosophers on the continent, while Machin, Cotes, Halleyy, and Demoivre, were applying themselves to similar pursuits in this ountryy?. Perrault, Lahire, Amontons, and Parent, members of the Parisian vor.. . 5E academy of sciences, were the authors of many useſul investigations relating to practical mechanics; but ſew of them were made public till aſter the year 1700; some of their inventions made their appearance much later, in the valuable collection of machines approved by the academy, and some of them have been inserted in the useful work published by Leupold, at Leipzig, under the title of a Theatrum Machinarum. Throughout the last century, the transactions of various societies, established for the promotion of science, became every year more numerous, and the publication of the literary journals of Leipzig and of Paris formed a mode of communication, which was extremely serviceable in facilitating the dissemination of all new discoveries. The philosophy of Newton assumed also a more popular and ãttractive form in the writings of Clarke, Pemberton, Maclaurin, and Musschenbroek, and the lectures of S'Gravesande and Desaguliers; at the same time that its more refined investigations were pursued with success in this country by Maclaurin and Simpson, and on the continent by Hermann, Daniel Bernoulli, Leonard Euler, and Clairautt. Maclaurin, Bernoulli, and Euler, had the honour of sharing with each other the prize, proposed by the academy of sciences at Paris, for the hest essay on the intricate subject of the tides; buta premature death prevented Maclaurin from long pursuing the career which he began s0 successfully. Bernoulli and Euler continued for many years to vie vith each other, for the elegance and extent of their researches: Euler appears to have heen the more profound mathematician, and Bernoulli the more accurate philosopher. The latter half of the eighteenth century was in many respects extremely auspicious to the progress of the sciences; the names of Dalembert, Landen, Waring, Frisi, Robison, Lagrange, and Laplace, deserve to be enumerated in the ſirst class of mathematicians and theoretical mechanics; those of Smeaton, Wedgwood, and Watt are no less distinguished for their success in improving the practice of the useful arts and manufactures. The union of all these objects, into one system of know ledge, was effected, on a magnificent scale, in the Encyclopcdie, a work which does as much honour to the labour and genius of some of its authors, as iĩt reſlects disgrace on the principles and polities of otherss The Society for the encouragement of arts, manufactures, and commerce, vas established in London about the same time that the Ency clopbdie began to appear at Paris, and its premiums and publications have, without doubt, excited a degree of attention to the subjects of practical mechanies, and agricultural, as well as commercial improvements, which must have been beneſicial both to individuals and to the public. The academy of Paris began to print, in 1762, a collection of the deseriptions of arts and trades of all kinds, on a still more extended scale than had been attempted in the Encycloptdie; the work was carried to a very considerable length, but it by no means comprehends all the articles which were intended to compose it. The construction of watches has heen 50 much improved, by the artists both of this country and of France, that they have been rendered capable of afford. ing very essential service to navigation, especially since the astronomical methods of determining a ships place have been brought to such a degree of perfection, as greatly to facilitate the frequent correction of the accidental errors of the timekeeper. The ſirst artist that constructed watches, sufficiently accurate for the determination of the longitude, was William Harrison, vho was indebted to himself alone for his education and his inventions; in 1765 he received for his labours, from the Board of Longitude, the promised reward of ten thousand pounds. There has scarcely been a period, in any age of the world, in which the sciences, and literature in general, have been so rapidly promoted, and so universally disseminated, as within the last forty yearss This advancement has Partly been the cause, and partly the effect, of the great multiplication of scientific journals, cyclopaedias, and encyclopaedias, which have been annually intreas ing since the beginning of the Journal de Physique in 1773; supported by the im terest which they have deriveq, in great measure, from the new and amusing diæcoveries and improvements, which have been made in chemistry and natural hãstory: some of the most copious of these works have had a sale, unPreced e nted even for books of more moderate extent. The charter of the Royal Institution is dated in 1799; its foundation ill lot pæe rhaps make an era in the history of the refinements of science; but if it be he reaſter found to have given notoriety to what is useful, and popularity lo vhat is elegant, the purposes of those who established it will not have been frustrate d. After all that has been efſected by the united labours and talents of the philosophers who have been mentioned, and of many more, who, though less fortunate, have yet been highly meritorious, there is still ample opportunity for the employment of genius and industry in following their steps. To suppose that little or nothing remains to he done, betrays a want either of knowledge, or of courage. The experimental researches oſ some of the greatest philosophers have been very imperfectly conducted, and the most interesting results mny be expeeted from repeating and diversifying them. Whatever advances our neighbours may have made beyond us, in intricate calculations and combinations, ve are still able to vie with them, and shall probably long remain s50, in the accuracy of our instsunenis, and in the art of using them with precaution and with success. . : Vien, — e contemplate the astonishing magnitude to which a collection of books in any department of science may even at present be extended, and the miscellaneous nature of the works in which many of the most valuable disquisitions have been communicated to the publie, together with the natural disposition to indolence, which a high degree of civilisation too frequently encourages, there is the greatest reason to apprehend, that from the continual multiplication of new essays, which are merely repetitions of others that have been forgotten, the sciences will shortly be overwhelmed by their own unvieldy bulk, that the pile will begin to totter under its own weight, and that all the additional matter that we heap on it, will only tend to add to the extent of the busis, without increasing the elevation and dignity of the fabric. Having been impressed, from continued experience, with the truth of this observation, I have employed no small portion of time and labour, in order to obtain an effectual remedy for the evil; and I trust that, in future, every one who is desirous oſ enlarging the sphere of our knowledge, with respect to any branch of seience, connected vith the subject of these Lectures, will find it easy, by consulting the authors who vill he quoted in my catalogue of references, to colleet that previous knowledge oſ all that has been already done with the same view, which, in justice to himself, he ought to acquire before he enters on the pursuit, or at any rate, in justice to the public, before he calls on the vorld at large to participate in his improvements and discoveries. - CHRONOLOGY OF MATHEMATICIANS AND MECHANICS. P I TT AC U S. TH A] L E S. PH ERECVD E S. PYTHAGORAS. ſ  B. C. H BIRTũ OF CRETIUS. The points show the time oſ the birth and death oſ each peron, where they have been ascertained. COURSE OF LECTURES ON TURAL PHILOSOPI AND THE MECHANICAL. ARTS. PART II. HYDRODYNAMICS. COURSE OF LECTURES ON NATURAL PHILOSOPHY AND THE MECHANICAL ARTS. LECTURE XXI. ON HYDROSTATICS. THE mechanical properties and aſfections of ſluids, and the laws and phenomena of their motions, are to be the subjects of the second division of this Course of Lectures. Although these properties are in reality derived from the same fundamental principles as the doctrines of pure mechanies, theyare yet in great measure incapable of being referred, in a demonstrative and accurate manner, to the operation of simple and general causes. We are therefore frequently under the necessity of calling in the assistance of experimental determinations; and for this reason, as vell as others, the science of hydrodynamies may vith propriety hold a middle rank, beteen mathematical mechanics and descriptive physics. In treating of the mechanios of solid bodies, we are able to begin with axioms, or self evident truths, almost inseparable from the constitution of the human mind; to deduce from them the general laws of motion, and to apply these laws, with little chance of error, to every combination of circumstances in which we have occasion to examine their consequences; and it requires only a certain degree oſ attention and of mathemavVoL. I. Ll tical knowledge, to be perfectly convinced of the justice of all our conclusions, without any reference to experimental proof. But here our abstract reasonings begin to fail; and whether from the imperfection of our modes of considering the mechanical actions of the particles of fluids on each other, or from the deficiencies of our analytical calculations, or, as there is more reason to suppose, from a combmation of both these causes, all attempts to reduce the aſfections of ſluids to a perfect mechanical theory have been hitherto unsuccessful. At the same time it will appear, that by a proper mixture oſ calculation with experiment, we may obtain suſſicient foundations for all such determinations as are likely to be oſ any practical utility. The whole of the subjects, which vill be classed under the denomination Hydrodynamies, may be divided into three general heads; Hydraulics, Acusties, and Optics; terms which are suſſiciently understood, as relating to the common properties of ſluids, to sound, and to light; but which do not allow of a very strict definition, without a still further divisionn. The first subdivision which we shall consider, will relate to the laws of the equilibrium of ſluids, or of the opposition of forces acting on them, without producing actual motion, comprehending hydrostaties, or the doctrine of the equilibrium of liquids, either within themselves, or with moveable bodies; and pneumatostatics, or the equilibrium of elastic fluids. The actual motions of fluids will be considered in the second subdivision: and the third will relate to the instruments and machines in which the principles of hydrostaties, hydraulics, and pneumatics, are applied to the purposes of the arts or of domestic convenience. The science of hydraulics must be allowed. to be of as great importance to civil life, and especially to a maritime nation, as any department of practical mechanics. Let us only reſlect for a moment to what the metropolis of England would be reduced, if deprived of pipes for the conveyance of vater, of pumps, and of ſire engines; and how much the commeree of the whole kingdom has been facilitated by the formation of navigable canals, and ve shall soon be convinced of the obligations that we owe to the art of modifying the motion of water, and to the principles of hydraulies, on which that art depends. The facts concerned in acustics and harmonics, or the doctrine of sound, and the science of music, are not exclusively dependent on the characteristic pro- perties of ſluids. In these departments, although we can by no means explain with precision the manner in which every appearance is produced, ve shall still find a variety of very beautiful phenomena, which have indeed been too generally neglected, and supposed to be of the most abstruse and unintelligible nature; but which, when carefully examined, will appear to be much more within the reach of calculation, than the simplest doctrines of hydraulics. We may also apply some of these phenomena to a very complete explanation of an extensive class of facts in optics, which, in whatever other way they are considered, are inextricably ohscure Whether this explanation may or may not be admitted as satisfactory, it deserves at least a fair examination; it would, thereſore, be impossible to assign to the science of optics an earlier place in the order of the system, even if we agree with those, who imagine that all the phenomena of light depend on causes wholly deducible from the mechanics of solid bodies. We must commence the subject of hydrostatics, or the doetrine of the equilibrium of liquids, with a deſiuition of the essential characteristios oſ a ſluid substance:. The most eligible deſinition appears to be, that a ſluid is a collection of material particles, which may be considered as infinitely smal, and as moving freely on each other in every direction, without frietion. Some have deſined a ſluid as a substance which communicates pressure equally in all directions; but this appears to be a description of a property derivable from the former assumption, which is certainly more simple; and although it may be somewhat difficult to deduce it mathematically, in a manner strictly demonstrative, yet we may ohtain from mathematical considerations a suſſicient conviction of its truth, without assuming it as a fundamental or axiomatic character. A ſluid which has no immediate tendency to expand when at liberty, is commonly considered as a liquid: thus water, oil, and mercury, are liquids; air and steam are fluids, but not liquids. We shall for the present consider a liquid as without either compressihility or expansibility: and we must neglect some other physical properties essential to liquids, such as cohesion and capillary attraction; although in reality the particles of liquids are found, by very nice experiments, to be subject to the same laws of elusticity which we have already examined with regard to sulids, and are possessed also of cohesive powers, which essentially distingnish them ſrom elastie fluids, and which resist any force tending directly to separate the particles from each other, while they admit any lateral motion with perfect facility. In treating of hydrostaties, therefore, we suppose the fluids concerned to be of uniform density throughout; and as far as elastic ſluids agree vith this deseription, they are subject to the same laws with liquids; on the other hand, all fluids, as far as they are compressible, possess properties similar to those which will hereafter be examined, vhen ve investigate the subjeot of pneumatic equilibrium. j The first law of hydrostatics which arrests our attention, is this, that the surface of every homogeneous gravitating ſluid, when at rest, is horizontal. If any part of the surface vere inelined to the horizon, the superficial particles would necessarily tend tovards its lowest part, in the same manner as if they moved vithout friction on the inclined surface of a solid. And if any two portions of the surface of the fluid are sepurated, as in two branches of a tube or pipe, however they may be situated, the fluid cannot remain at rest, unless the surfaces be in the samo level plane: for if we imagine such a tube, containing water, to be made of ice, and to be immersed in a large reservoir of water, and then thawed, the water will make a part of the general contents of the reservoir, and consequently will remain at rest, if its surfaces are level with that of the reservoir: and it is obvious that the tube has acquired no new pover of supporting it from being thawed: consequently, the water would have remained in equilibrium at the same height in the original state of the solid tube. The experimental proof of this proposition is easy and obvious, and the property aſſords one of the most usual modes of determining a horizontal surface. But vhen ve compare the heights of ſluids occupying tubes of different magnitudes, it is necessary, if the tubes are small, to apply a slight correction on account of the actions of the tubes on the ſluids which they contain, which are more apparent, as their diameters are smaller. The same cause produces also a curvature in each separate surface, which is alvays visible at the point of contact with the tube or vessel (Plate XIX. Eig 239.) If several separate ſluids of difſerent inds be contained in the same vessel, they vill uever remain at rest unless all the surfaces intervening between them be horizontal; and this is in fact the state of the surface oſf common liquids, which is exposed to the pressure of the atmosphere. The pover of gravitation, strietly speaking, does not act precisely in paralIel limes, so that the surface of lakes, instead of being perfectly plane, becomes, like that of the earth, a little convex. It is obvious that the surface of a fluid must always be perpendicular to ſhe direction of the joint resulis of all the forces which act on it; and since the earth turns round on its axis, the centrifugal force resulting from its motion is combined ith that of gravity, in determining the position of the general surface of the ocean. A similar combination of a centrifugal force vith gravitation may be observed when a bucket is suspended by a rope, and caused to turn round on its axis by twisting the rope: the direction of the joint forces is such that the surface, in order to be perpendicular to it, must assume a parabolic form When also any number of different ſluids are made to revolve in the same manner, or when they are inclosed in a glass globe and turned by means of the whirling table, the surfaces which separate them acquire always the forms of parabolic conoids, when the axis remains in a vertical position: but if the axis be in any other position, the situation of the surface will be of more diſſicult determination. (Plate XX. Fig. 240.) In all these cases the equilibrium is stable; ſor if any part of the fluid be raised above the surface, it will immediately tend to return to its level But if a heavier ſluid vere contained in a bent tube or siphon, with its legs or branches opening downwards, and immered in a lighter ſluid, the equilibrium would be tottering, since, if it were once disturbed, it vould never be restored. (Plate XIX. Iig 241.) From these principles, ve may infer, that the pressure of a fluid on every particle of the vessel containing it, or of any other surface, real or imaginary, in contact with it, is equal to the weight of a eolumn of the ſluid, of which the base is equal to that particle, and the height to ĩts depth helow the surface of the fluidl.. Thus, if we have a vessel of water one foot deep, each square foot of the bottom will sustain the pressure of a cubic foot of water, 1l or nearly 1000 ounces: if e have a vessel of mercury an ineh in depth, each square foot will sustain a pressure of one twelfth part of a cubic foot of mercury, or 1150 ounces; the atmosphere presses on each square foot of the earth's surface with a force of about 34000 ounces, which is equivalent to the pressure of a column of mercury 30 inches high. The pressure of the water on a small portion of the lowest part of the side of the vessel containing it, is also equal to the weight supported hy an equal portion of the bottom; but we cannot estimate the force sustained by any large portion of the side, without considering the difſerent depths below the surface, at which its difſerent parts are situated. It is obvious that if we conceive a ſluid to he divided by an imaginary surface of any kind, the particles contiguous to it are urged on cither side by equal forces, the fluid below resisting them, and pressing them upwards, with as much force as the ſluid above presses them downwards, their own weight being comparatively inconsiderable, for without this equality of pressures, they could not possibly remain at restt And if ve employ a vessel of such a form às to occupy the place of any superior portion of the fluid, the pressure against that part of the vessel which is thus substituted vill be the same that before supported the weight of the fluid removed; and in order that all may remain in equilibrium, the vessel must itself exert an equal pressure on the fluid below it; so that the pressure on the bottom will be the same as if the vessel had remained in its original state, and vere ſilled to the same height with the ſluid. (Plate XIX. Fig, 242.) In order to understand this the more readily, we may suppose the portion of the ſluid, instead of being removed, to have been congealed into a solid mass of equal density; it is obvious that this congelation of the ſluid would not have altered the quantity of its pressure; it would, therefore, have remained in equjlibrium with the water below; the mass might also be united with the sides of the vessel, so as to form a part of it, without increasing or diminishing any of the pressures concerned: and we should thus obtain a vessel similar to that which was the subject of our investigation, the pressure on the bottom being always the same, as if the mass, supposed to be eongealed, had remained ſluidl. Thus, the pressure on the base oſ a conical or pyramidical vessel, full of water, is three times as great as the weight of the water, since its content is one third of that of a column of the same height, and standing on the same hase. (Plate XIX. Fig. 243.) In this manner the smullest given quantity of any ſluid contained in a pipe may be made to produce a pressure equivalent to any given weight, however large, which rests on the cover of a close vessel communicating with the pipe, and this may be done either by diminishing the diameter of the pipe, and increasing its height, while the weight is supported by a surface of a certain extent, or by increasing the magnitude of this surface, without adding to the height of the pipe; for in either case the ultimate force of the fluid, in supporting the weight, will be equal to the weight of a column of tPe same height, standing on the whole surface which is subjected to its action. And if the effect of the column be increased by any additional pressure, independent of its weight, that pressure may be represented by supposing the height of the column to be augmented; and the effect of the additional pressure will also be increased in proportion to the magnitude of the surface which supports the veight. It is on this principle that the pressure of vater has been applied, by Mr. Bramah, to the construction of a very convenient press. (Plate XIX. Fig. 244.) Although this property of ſluids is the cause of some results which would scareely be expected by a person not accustomed to reſlect on the subject, and has, therefore, not improperly, been called the hydrostatic paradox, yet it depends wholly on the general and acknowledged principles of mechanical forces; nor can we agree with those authors, who have asserted, that a very small quantity of a ſluid may, without acting at any mechanical advantage” vhatever, be made to balance a weight of any assignable magnitude: for the immediate operation of the force very much resembles, in the most common cases, the eſſeet of a wedge, or of a moveable inclined plane; thus, a wedge remains in equilibrium, when the forces acting on each side are in proportion to its length, like the hydrostatic pressure on a vessel of a similur form. The conditions of the equilibrium of ſluids may also be determined, in all cases, from the general law of the descent of the centre of gravity to the lowest point. Thus, it is easy to show that even when two branches of a tube are of unequal diameter, a ſluid must stand at the same height in both of them, in order to remain in equilibrium: for if any portion be supposed to stand, in either leg, above the surface of the ſluid in the other leg, it is obvious that its contre of gravity may be lowered, by removing so much of it as will raise the ſluid in the opposite leg to its own level, the situation of the fluid below remaining unaltered: consequently the centre of gravity of the whole ſluid can never acquire ĩts lowest situation, unless both the surfaces are in the same level The air, and all other elastic ſlulds, are equally subject vith liquids to this general law. Thus, a much greater force is required, in order to produce a blast oſ a given intensity, with a large pair oſ bellows, than vith a smaller pair; and for the same reason, it is much easier to a glassblower, vhen he uses a blowpipe, to employ the muscles of his mouth and lips, than those of his chest, although these are much more powerful. If we estimate the section of the chest at a foot square, ĩt will require a force of seventy pounds to raise a column of mercury an inch high, by means of the muscles of respiration, but the section of the mouth is scarcely more than eight or nine square inches, and a pressure of the same intensity may here be produced by a force of about four pounds. The glassblower obtains, besides, the advantage of being able to continue to breathe during the operation, the communication of the chest with the nostrils remaining open, while the root of the tongue is pressed against the palate. It is obvious that the pressure on each square inch of the side of a vessel, or on each square foot of the bank of a river, continually increases in descending towards the bottom. If we wish to know the sum of the pressures on all the parts of the side or bank, we must take some mean depth by which e can estimate it; and this must be the depth of the point which would be the centre of gravity of the surface, if it were possessed of veight. Thus, if we had a hollow cube filled with water, the centre of gravity of each side being in its middle point, the pressure on each of the upright sides would be half as great as the pressure on the hottom, that is, it wosld be equal to half the veight of the water contained in the cube. If, however, ve wished to support the side of the cube externally by a ſorce applied at a single point, that point must be at the distance of one third of the height only from the bottom. For the pressure at each point may be represented by a line equal in length to its depth below the surface, and a series of such lines may be supposed to constitute a triangle, of which the centre of gravity will indicate the place of the centre of pressure of the surface; and the height of the centre of gravity will always be one third of that of the triangle. It is easily inferred, from this representation, that the vhole pressure on the side of a vessel, or on a bank, of a given length, is proportional to the square of the depth, below the water, to which it extends. (Plate XIX. Fig. 245.) The magnitude of the whole pressure on a concave or convex surface may also be determined by the position of its centre of gravity; but such a determination ĩs of no practical utility, since the portions of the forces, which act in different directions, must always destroy each other. Thus, the perpendicular pressure on the whole internal surface of a sphere ſilled with a fluid, is three times as great as the weight of the fluid; but the force tending to burst the sphere, in the circumference of any vertical circle, is only three fourths of that weight. If two ſluids are of different specific gravities, that is, if equal bulks of them have different weights, their opposite pressures will counterbalance each other, when their heights above the common surface are inversely as their specific gravities; for it is obvious that the greater density of the one ill precisely compensate for its deficiency in height. Thus, a column of mercury, standing at the height of 30 inches, in a tube, will support the pressure of æ column of water, in another branch of the tube, exactly 34 feet high: since the veight of 30 cubic inches of mercury is equal to that of 408 cubic inches of water. (Plate XIX. Fig. 246.) We have hitherto considered the properties of ſluids in contact vith solids which are immoveable, and of invariable form; but it often happens that they act on substances which are moveable; and they are sometimes contained in vessels of which the form is susceptible of variation; in these cases, other considerations are necessary for the determination of the equilibrium of fluids and solids with each other; and in the first place the properties of ſloating hodies require to be investigated. VOL. I. M m When a solid body ſloats in a fluid, it displaces a quantity of the ſuid, equal to itself in weight; and every solid, which is incapable of doing this, must sink. For in order that the solid may remain at rest, the pressure oſ the ſluid below it, reduced to a vertical direction, must he precisely equal to its weight; but before the body was immersed, the same pressure was exerted on the portion of the ſluid which is now displaced, and was exactly counterbalanced by its weight; consequently that weight was equal to the weight oſ the ſoating body. Since the force, which supports the weight of a ſloating hody, is the pressure of the ſuid immediately below it, iſ this pressure be removed or diminished, the body may remain at rest below the surface of the ſluid, even when it is speciſically lighter. Thus a piece of very smooth wood vill remain, for some time, in contact with the ſlat hottom of a vessel of vater, until the water insinuates itself beneath it; and it will continuę at the bottom of a vessel of mercury, without any tendency to rise, since the merc ury has no disposition to penetrate, like water, into any minute interstices which may be capable of admitting it. And, for a similar reason, if the pressure of the incumbent fluid be removed from the upper surface of a solid substance, wholly immersed in it, the solid may remain suspended, although heavier than an equal bulk of the ſluid. Thus, if a tube or vessel of any kind, open above and below, have a bottom of metal, ground 50 as to come into perfect contact with it, vithout being fixed, the bottom will appear to adhere to the vessel, when it is immersed to a suſficient depth in water, the vessel remaining empty. In order that a ſloating body may remain in equilibrium, iĩt is also necessary that its centre of gravity be in the same vertical line with the centre of gravity of the fluid displaced; otherwise the weight of the solid will not be completely counteracted by the pressure of the fluid. The nature of the equiJibrium, with respect to stability, is determined by the position of the metacentre, or centre of pressure, vhich may be considered as a fixed point of suspension, or support, for the solid body. It is obvious that when the lower surface of the body is spherical or cylindrical, the metacentre must coincide with the centre of the ſigure, sinee the height of this point, as well as the form of the portion of the ſluid displaced, must remain invariable in all circumstances, and the nature of the equilibrium ill depend on the distance of the centre of gravity àhiove of below the centre of the sphete or cylinder. And the place of the metacentre may ãlvays be determincd from the form and extent of the surface of the displaced portion of the ſluid, compated with its bulk, and vith the situation of its centre oſ gravity. For example, if a rectangular beam be ſloating on its flat surface, the height of the metacentre above the centre of gravity will be to the breadth of the beam, as the breadth to twelve times the deoth of the part immeried Hence, if the beam be square, it will float securely when either the part immersed or the part above the surface is less thah 2 of the whole; but when it is less unequally divided by the surface of the fluid, it will overset. If, liowever, the hreadth be so increased as to bæ nearly one fourth greater than the depth, it will possess æ certain degree of stability whatever its density may be. (Plate XIX. Fig. 247.) When the equilibrium of a floating body is stable, it may oscillate hackwards and forwards in the neighbourhood of the quiescent position: and the oscillations will be the more rapid in proportion as the stability is greater in comparison with the bulk of the body. Such oscillations may also be combined with others which take place in a transverse direction: a ship, for example, may roll on an axis in the direction of her length, and may heel, at the same time, npon a second axis in the direction of the beams. Besides these rotatory vibrations, a floating body which is suffered to fall into a ſluid, vill commonly rise and sink several times by its on weight; and in all these cases, the vibrations of any one kind, when they are small, are performed nearly in equal times: but various and intricate combinations may sometimes arise, from the difference of the times, in which the vibrations of different kinds are performed. Wnhèén a solid body is wholly immersed in a fluid, and is retained in its situation by an external force, it loses as much of its weight as is equivalent to an equal bulk of the ſluid. For, conceiving the fluid, which is displaced by the body, to have been converted into a solid by congelation, it is obvious that it would retain its situation, and the difference of the pressures of the fluid on its various parts would be exactly sufficient to support its veight. But these pressures will be the same if a body of any other kind be substituted for the congealed ſluid; their buoyant effect may, therefore, he always estimated by the veight of a portion of the fluid equal in bulk to the solid. Thus, when a little ſigure, containing a bubble of air, is immersed in a jar of water, vhich is s0 covered by a bladder that it may be compressed by the hand, the bulk of the figure with its bubble is diminished by the pressure, it is, therefore, less supported by the water, and it begins to sink: and when the hand is removed, it immediately rises againn. (Plate XIX. Fig. 48.) While a body is actually rising or sinking in a ſluid, with an accelerated motion, the force of gravity being partly employed in generating momentum, either in the fluid or in the solid, the whole pressure on the bottom of the vessel is necessarily somewhat lessenedc Hence the apparent weight of a jar of water will suffer a slight diminution, while a bullet is descending in it, or while bubbles of air are rising in it, but the difference can seldom be great enough to be rendered easily discoverable to the senses. It sometimes happens that a solid body is partly supported by a fluid, and partly by another solid; of this we have an example in one of Dr. Hooke's ingenious inventions for keeping a vessel always full. A half cylinder, or a hemisphere, being parily supported on an axis, which is in the plane of the surface of the ſluid, its weight is so adjusted, as to be equal to that of a portion of the ſluid of half its magnitude: when the vessel is full, iĩt is half immersed, and exerts no pressure on the axis: it descends as the ſluid is exhausted, and jts tendency to turn round its axis can only be counteracted, by the pressure of the ſluid on its ſlat side, as long as the surface of the remaining portion of the ſluid retains its original level. (Plate XIX. Fig. 249.) When a ſluid is contained in a vessel of a ſlexible nature, the sides of the vessel will alvays become curved, in consequence of the pressure, and the more, in proportion as the pressure is greater; the form of the curved surface will also be such that the common centre oſ gravity of the ſluid and the vessel may deseend to the lowest point that the circumstances of the case allow; this form is generally of too intricate a nature to be determined by calculotion: no mathematician has hitherto been able to investigate, for example, the eurvature which a square or reetangular hag of learher vill assume when filled with water or with corn. When, indeed, one dimension only of a vessel is considered, for instance, when the bottom of a cistern is supposed to he fiexible, and to be fixed at two opposite sides, while the ends are simply in ON HYDROSTATICS. a269 eontact with upright walls, without allowing the water to run out, the nature of the curve may be determined with tolerable facility, whether the weight of the bottom itself be considered or not. If the weight be exactly equal to that of the water, the form of a semicirele will agree with the conditions of equilibrium, as Bernoulli has demonstrated, supposing the fixed points at the distance of its diameter; but if the weight of the bottom be neglected, the curvature will be every where proportional to the distance below the surface, the form being the same as that of an elastic rod, bent by two forces in the direction of the surface. The same principles, with a slight difference in the calculations, will serve to determine the forms adapted to the equilibrium of arches, intended for supporting the weight of superincumbent ſluids, or of such soft materials as approach nearly in their operation to more perfect ſluidss. (Plate XIX. Fig. 250.) LECTURE XXII. ON PNEUMATIC EQUILIBRIUM. THE laws of the pressure and equilibrium of liquids, which are the peculiar subjects of hydmstatics, are also applicable in general to ſluids of all inds, as far as they are compatible with the compressibility of those ſluids, or with their tendency to expand. Elastic ſluids are distinguished from liquids by the absence of all cohesive force, or hy their immediate tendency to expand when they are at liberty. Such are atmospheric air, steam, and guses of various kinds; and the consideration of these fluids, in the state of rest, constitutes the doctrine of pneumatostatics, or of the equilibrium of elastic fluids. That the air is a material substance, capable of resisting pressure, ĩs easily shown, by inverting an empty jar in water; and by the operation of transferring airs and gases from vessel to vessel, in the pneumatic apparatus used by chemists. The tendency of the air to expand is shown hy the experiment in which a flaccid bladder becomes distended, and shrivelled fruit recovers its full size, as soon as the external pressure is removed from it, by the operation of the air pump: and the magnitude of this expansive force is more distinctly seen, when a portion of air is inclosed in a glass vessel, together with some mercury, in which the mouth of a tube is immersed, while the other end is open, and vithout the vessel; so that when the whole apparatus is inclosed in a very long jar, and the air of the jur is exhausted, the column of mereury becomes the measure of the expansive force of the air (Plate XIX. Fig. 251.) If the diameter oſ the tube, in an apparatus of this kind, were very small in comparison with the bulk of the air confined, the column of mercury would be raised, in the ordinary circumstances of the atmosphere, to the height of nearly 30 inches. But supposing the magnitude of the tube such, that the portion of air must expand to twice its natural bulk, before the mercury acquired a height sufficient to counterpoise it, this height would be 15 inches only. For it appears to be a general law of all elastic ſluids, that their pressure on any given surface is diminished exactly in the same proportion as their bulk is increased. If, therefore, the column of mercury in the vacuum of the air pump were 60 inches high, the air would be reduced to half its natural bulk; and for the same reason, the pressure of a column of 50 inches of mercury in the open air ill reduce any portion of air to half its bulk, since the natural pressure of the atmosphere, which is equal to that of about 30 inches of mercury, is doubled hy the addition of an equal pressuree In the same manner the density of the air in a diving bell is doubled at the depth of 34 feet below the surface of the water, and tripled at the depth of 68 feet. This law was discovered by Dr. Hooke; he found, however, that when a very great pressure had been applied, so that the density became many times greater than in the natural state, the elasticity appeared to be somewhat less increased than the density; but this exception to the general law has not been conſirmed by later and more accurate experiments. Not only the common air of the atmosphere, and other permanently elastie gases, but also steams and vapours of all kinds, appear to be equally subject to this universal law: they must, however, be examined at temperatures suſficient to preserve them in a state of elasticity; for example, if we wished to determine the force of steam twice as dense as that which is usually produced, we should be obliged to employ a heat 30 or 40 degrees above that of boiling water: we should then find that steam of such a density as to support, when confined in a dry vessel, the pressure of a column of 30 inches of mercury, would be reduced to hulf its bulk by the pressure of a column of 60 inches. But if we increased the pressure much beyond this, the steam would be converted into water, and the experiment would be at an end. That the air which surronnds us is subjected to the power of gravitation, and possesses weight, may be shown by weighing a vessel which has been exhausted by means of the air pump, and then allowing the air to enter, and weighing it a second time. In this manner ve may ascertain the speciſic gravity of the air, even if the exhaustion is only partial, provided that we know the proportion of the air left in the vessel to that which it originally contained. The pressure derived ſrom the weight of the air is also the cause of the ascent of hydrogen gas, or of another portion of air which is rareſied by heat, and carries with it the smoke of a ſire; and the effect is made more conspicuous, when either the hydrogen gas, or the heated air, is confined in a balloonn. The diminution of the apparent weight of a body, by means of the pressure of the surrounding air, is also shown by the destrucetion of the equilibrium between two hodies of diſſerent densities, upon their removal from the open air into the vacuum of an air pump. For this purpose, a light hollow bulb of glass may he exactly conterpoised in the air by a much smaller weight of brass, with an index, which shows, on a graduated scale, the degree in which the large ball is made to preponderate in the receiver of the air pump, by the rarefaction of the air, lessening the buoyant power which helps to support its weight. (Plate XIX. Fig. 252) From this combination of weight and elasticity in the atmosphere, it follows, that its upper parts must be much more rare than those which are nearer to the earth, since the density is every where proportional to the whole of the superincumbent weight. The weight of a column of air one foot in height is one twenty eight thousandth of the whole pressure; consequently that pressure is increased one twenty eight thousandth by the addition of the veight of one foot, and the next foot will he denser in the same proportion, since the density is always proportionate to the pressure; the pressure thus increased vill therefore still be equal to twenty eight thousand times the veight of the next foott. The same reasoning may be continued without limit, and it may be shown, that while we suppose the height to vary by any uniform steps, as by distances of a fout or a mile, the pressures and densities will increase in continual proportion; thus, at the height of about 3000 fathoms, the density willbe about half as great as at the earth's surface; at the height of GOOO, one fourth; at 9000, one eighth as greatt. Hence it is inferred that the height in fathoms may be readily found from the logarithm of the number expressing the density of the air: ſor the logarithm of the number 2, multiplied by 10000, ĩs 3010, the logarithm of 4, 6020, and that of 8, 9031; the logarithms of numbers always increasing in continual proportion, when the numbers are taken larger and larger by equal steps. (Plate XIX. Fig. 258.) Hence we obtain an casy method of determining the heights of mountains with tolerable accuracy: for if a bottle of air were closely stopped on the summit of a mountain, and, being brought in this state into the plain below, its mouth vere inserted into a vessel of vater or of mercury, a certain portion of the liquid vould enter the bottle; this being weighed, if it were found to be one half of the quantity that the whole hottle would contain, it might be concluded that the air on the mountain possessed only half of the natural density, and that its height was 3000 ſathoms. It appears also, from this statement, that the height of a column of equal density with any part of the atmosphere, equivalent to the pressure to which that part is subjected, is every where equal to about 28000 feet. Many corrections are, however, necessary for ascertaining the heights of mountains with all the precision that the nature of this kind of measurement admits; and they involve several determinations, which require a previous knowledge of the effects of heat, and of the nature of the ascent of vapours, which cannot be examined vith propriety at present. We may easily ascertain, on the same principles, the height to which a balloon will ascend, if we are acquainted vith its bulk and with its veight: thus, supposing its weight 500 pounds, and its bulk such as to enable it to raise 300 poundis more, its speciſie gravity must be five eighths as great as that of the air, and it will continue to rise, until it reach the height, at which the air is of the same density: but the logarithm of eight ſifths, multiplied by 10000; is 2040; and this is the number of fathoms contained in the height, which ill, therefore, be a little more than two miles and a quarter. It may be found, by pursuing the calculation, that at the distance of the earth's semidiameter, or nearly 4000 miles, above its surface, the air, if it existed, would become so rare, that a cubie inch would oceupy a space equal to the sphere of Saturns orbit: and on the other hand, if there were a mine about 42 miles dep, the air would become as dense as quicksilver at the bottom of it. It appears, therefore, that all bodies existing on or near the earth's surface may b considered as subjected to the pressure of a column of air, 28000 feet high, supposing ĩts density every where equal to that which it possesses at the VOL. I. NDn æarth's surſace, and which ĩs usually such, that 100 wine gallons veigh a ponnd avoirdupois, creating a pressure equal to that of 30 inches of mereury, or 34 feet of water, and which amounts to I44 pounds for each square inch. This pressure acts in all directions on every substance which is exposed to it: but heing counterbalanced by the natural elasticity of these substances, it produces in common no apparent effects; when, however, by means of the air pump, or otherwise, the pressure of the air is removed from one side of a body, while it continues to act on the other, its operation becomes extremely evident. Thus, vhen two hollow hemispheres, in contact with each other, are exhausted of air, they are made to cohere with great force; they are named Magdeburg hemispheres, because Otto von Guerike, of Magdeburg, construeted two such hemispheres, of suſficient magnitude to withstand the draught of the emperor's six conch horses, pulling with all their force to separate them. By a similar pressure, a thin square bottle may be crushed when it is suſficiently exhausted, and a bladder may be torn with a loud noise: and the hand being placed on the mouth of a vessel which is connected with the air pump, it is ſixed to it very forcibly, when the exhaustion is performed, by the pressure of the air on the hack of the hand; the ſluids also, which cireulate in the bloodvessels of the hand, are forced tovards its lower surface, and the eſfeet which is called suetion is produced in a very striking manner. It is on the sume principle that cupping glasses are employed, a partial exhaustion being procured by means of the flame of tow, which heats the air, and expels a great part of it: so that the remainder, when it cools, is considerably rareſied. It vas Galileo that first explained the nature of suction from the effects of the pressure of the atmosphere; and his pupil Torricelli confirmed his doctrines by employing a column of mercury, of suſficient height to overcome the whole pressure of the atmosphere, and to produce a vacuum in the upper part of ſhe tube or vessel containing it. In the operation of sucking up a ſluid through a pipe, with the mouth or otherwise, the pressure of the air is but partially removed from the upper surface of the ſluid, and it becomes capable of ascending to a height which is determined by the difference of the densities of the air within and without the cavity concerned: thus, an exhaustion of one fourth of the air of the cavity would enable us to raise water to the height of 85 feet, and mereury to 74 inches, above the level of the re- servoir from which it rises. We can draw up a much higher column of mercury hy sucking with the muscles of the mouth only, than by inspiring with the chest, and the difſerence is much more marked than the diſference in the forces vith which we can blow: for in sucking, the cavity of the mouth is very much contracted by the pressure of the external air, and the same foree, exerted on a smaller surface, is capable of counteracting a much greater hydrostatic or pneumatic pressure. VWhen a tube of glass, about three feet long, closed at one end and open at the other, is filled vith mercury, and then immersed in a bason of the same ſluid, the pressure of the atmosphere is wholly removed from the upper surface of the mereury in the tube, while it continues to act on the mercury in the bason, and by its means on the lower surface of the column in the tube. If such a tube be placed under the receiver of an air pump, the mercury vill subside in the tube, accordingly as the pressure of the atmosphere is diminisheq; and if the exhaustion be rendered very perfect, it will descend very nearly to the level of the open bason or reservoir. When the air is readmitted, the mercury usually rises, on the level of the sea, to the height of about 0 inches; but the air being lighter at some times than at others, the height varies between the limits of 27 and 31 inches. This well known instrument, from ĩts use in measuring the weight of the æair, is called a barometer. In the same manner a coIunn of vater from 30 to 35 feet in height may be sustained in the pipe of a pump; but if the pipe vere longer than this, a vacuum would be produced in the upper part of it, and the pump would be incapable of acting. In order to observe the height of the mercury in the barometer with greater convenience and accuracy, the scale has sometimes been amplified by various methods; either by bending the upper part of the tube into an oblique position, as in the diagonal barometer, or by making the lower part horizontal, and of much smaller diameter than the upper, or by making the whole tube straight, and narrow, and slightly conical, or by placing a ſloat on the surface of the mercury in the reservoir, and causing an axis, which carries an index, to revolve hy its motion. But a good simple barometer, about one third of an inch in diameter, furnished with a vernier, is perhaps fully as accurate as any of these more complicated instruments. In order to exclude the air the more completely from the tube, the mereury must at least be shaken in it for a considerable time, the tube being held in an inverted position; and where great accuracy is required, the mercury must be boiled in the tube. The reservoir most commonly employed is a ſlat wooden box, vith a bottom of leather; the cover, which is unscrewed at pleasure, being comented to the tubee. Sometimes a screw is made to act on the leather, by means of which the surface of the mereury is always brought to a certain level, indicated by a ſloat, whatever portion of it may be contained in the tube; but the necessity of this adjustinent may be easily avoided, by allowing the mereury to play freely between two horizontal surfaces of wood, of moderate extent, and at the distance of one seventh of an inch: the height may then be always measured from the upper surface, without sensible error. Dut if the surfaces were closer than this, the mercury would stand too high in the tube. (Plate XIX. Tig. 254.) The same method vhich is employed for determining the relation between the heights and densities of elastic ſluids, may be extended to all bodies which are in any degree compressible, and of which the elasticity is subjected to laws similar to those which are discoverable in the air and in other gases: and it is not improbable that these laws are generally applicable to all bodies in nature, as far as their texture vill allow them to submit to the operation of pressure, without wholly losing their form. Water, for example, hus been observed by Canton to be compressed one twenty two thousandth of its bulk by a force equal to that of the pressure of the atmosphere; consequently this force may be represented by that of a column of water 750 thousand feet in height; the density of the water at the bottom of a lake, or of the sea, vill he incrensed by the pressure of the superincumbent ſluid; and supposing the lav of compression to resemble that of the air, it may be inferred that at the depth of 100 miles, its density would he doubled; and that at 200 it would be quadrupled. The same measures would also be applicable to the elasticity of mercury But there is reason to suppose that they are in both cases a little too small - LECTURE XXIII. ON THE THEORY OF HYDRAULICS, HAVING considered the prineipal cases of the equilibrium of fluids, both liquid and aeriform, ve proceed to examine the theory of their motions. Notwithstanding the diſficulties attending the mathematical theory of hydraulics, 50 much has already been done, by the assistance of practical investigations, that we may in general, by comparing the results of former experiments with our calculations, predict the effect of any proposed arrangement, vithout an error of more than one ſifth, or perhaps one tenth of the whole: and this is a degree of accuracy fully sufficient for practice, and which indeed could scarcely have been expected from the state of the science at the beginning of the last century. Many of these improvements have been derived from an examination of the nature and magnitude of the friction of fluidss which, although at first sight it might he supposed to be very inconsiderable, is found to be of so much importance in the application of the theory of hydraulics to practical cases, and to affect the modes of calculation so materially, that it will require to be discussed, hereaſter, in a separate lecture. There is a general principle of mechanical action, which was ſirst distinctly stated by Huygens, and which has heen made by Daniel Bernoulli the basis of his most elegant calculations in hydrodynamies. Supposing that no force is lost in the communication of motion between different hodies, considered as belonging to any system, they always acquire such velocities in descending through any space, that the centre of gravity of the system is capable of ascending to a height equal to that from which it descended, notwithstanding any mutual actions between the bodiess. The truth of this principle may easily be inferred from the laws of collision, compared with the properties of accelerating and retarding forces. Thus, if an elastic hall, weighing 10 ounces, and descending from a height of 1 foot,be caused to act in any manner on a similar hall of one ounce, so as to lose the whole of its motion, the smaller Lall will acquire a velocity capable of carrying it to the height of 10 feet. it is true that some other suppositions must be made, in applying this lav to the determination of the motions of ſluids, and that in many cases it becomes necessary to suppose that a certain portion of ascending force or energy is lost, in consequence of the internal motions of the particles of the ſluid. But still, wſI proper restrictions and corrections, the principle afſords us a ready method o⸗ obtaining solutions of problems, which, without some such assistance, it vould be almost impossible to investigate. The principal hypothesis which is assumed by Bernoulli, without either demonstration, or even the appearance of perfect accumcy, ĩs this, that all the particles of a ſluid in motion, contained in any one transverse section of the vessels or pipes through which it runs, must always move vith equal velocities; thus, if water he descending through a vessel of any form, either regular or irregular, he supposes the particles at the same height to move vith the same velocity; so that the velocity of every particle in every part of a cylindrical vessel 10 inches in diameter, through which a fluid is moving, must be one hundredth part as great as in passing through a cireular orifice, an inch in diameter, made in its hottom. It is evident that this cannot possibly be true of the portions of the ſluid nearest the bottom of the vessel, since the particles most distant from the oriſice must be nearly at rest, while those which ure immediately over the oriſice are in rapid motion; but still the calculations founded on the hypothesis agree tolerably well with experiments. In this case the actual descent, in any instant, may be estimated by the removal of the quantity discharged, from the surface of the ſluid to the oriſice, since the intermediate space remains always occupied. The ascending force thus obtained is to be distributed throughout the ſluid, according to the respective velocities of its difſerent portions; and it may easily be shown, that when the oriſice is small, the part Which helongs to the fluid in the vessel is vholly inconsiderable in comparison with the ascending force required for the escape of the small portion which is ſlowing through the oriſice, and the whole ascending force may, therefore, he suppnsed to be employed in the motion of this portion; so that it will acquire the velocity of a body ſalling from the vhole height of the surface of the reservoir, or the velocity due to that height. It appears also that very nearly the same velocity is acquired by almost the first particles that escape from the oriſice, so that no sensihle time elapses before the jet ſlows with its utmost velocity. This velocity may be found, as we have already seen, by multiplying the square root of the height of the reservoir, expressed in feet, by 8, or more correctly, by 82; thus, if the height be 4 feet, the velocity will be sixteen feet in a second; it the height be 9 feet, the velocity will be 24, the squares of ę and ꝗ being 4 and 9; and if the height were 14 feet, the velocity would be 30 feet in a second, and a circular oriſice an inch in diameter vould discharge exacetly an ale gallon in a second. In the same manner, the pressure of the atmosphere heing equal to that which would be produced by a column of air of uniform density 28000 feet high, the air would rush into a vacuum with a velocity of more than 1300 feet in a second. The velocity ĩs also equal, whatever may be the direction of the stream; for since the pressure of ſluids acts equully in all directions, at equal depths, the cause being the same, the effect must also be the same. And if the motion be occasioned by a pressure derived from a force of any other kind, the eſfect may he found by calculating the height of a column of the ſluid, which would be capable of producing an equal pressuree When also the force arises from the difſference of two pressures, the velocity may be determined in a similar manner. Thus, the pressure of a column of water, I foot in height, would force the air through a small orifice, with a velocity of 230 feet in a second, corresponding to the height of 830 feet; a column of mercury I inch high, would produce the same effect as a reservoir of water more than thirteen times as high, and the force of the air confined in a elosed hottle under the receiver of the air pump, Vill cause a jet to rise to the same height as a column of mereury which measures the difference of the elasticities of the air in the bottle and in the receiver. But these calculations are only confirmed by experiment in cases when the ajutage through which the ſuid runs is particularly constructed; that is, when it is formed by a short tube, of which the sides are so curved that the particles of the ſluid may glide along them for some distance, and escape in a direction parallel to the axis of the stream. A short cylindrical pipe is found to answer this purpose in some measure; but the end may be more completely obtained by a tube nearly conical, but with its sides a little convex inwards, 50 as to imitate the shape which a stream or vein of water spontaneously assumes when it runs through an oriſice in a thin plate: for in such cases the stream contracts itself, after it has passed the oriſice, for the distance of abont halſ its diameter, so that at this point its thickness is only four fifths as great as at its passage; and the quantity discharged is only five eighths as great as that vhich the whole orifice would furnish, according to the preceding calculation: instead, therefore, of multiplying the square root of the height by 8, we may employ the multiplier  for determining the actual discharge. But the velocity, where the stream is most contracted, is only one thirtieth less than that which is due to the vhole height; and when the jet is discharged in a direction nearly perpendicular, it rises almost as high as the surface of the fluid in the ton This contraction of the stream, and the consequent diminution of the discharge, is unquestionably owing to the interference of the particles of the ſluid coming from the parts on each side of the oriſice, with those which are moving directly towards it; and the effect is more perceptible when the oriſice is made by a pipe projecting within the reservoir, so that some of the particles approaching it must acquire in their path a motion contrary to that of the stream. It would he possible to obtain an approximate calculation of the magnitude of this contraction, from the equilibrium which must subsist between the centrifugal forces of the particles, as they pass out of the orifice, describing various curves, according to their various situations, and the pressure required for the contraction of the internal parts of the stream, vhich obliges the particles to move more rapidly as they proceed, and vhich must he proportional to the height required for producing this acceleration. (Plate XX. Fig. 255.) When a short eylindrical tube is added to the oriſice, it is probable that the motion of the ſluid within the tube is still in some measure similar: but the vessel must now be supposed to he prolonged, and to have a new orifice at the ænd of the tube, at which the particles cannot arrive by any lateral motions, and which will, therefore, not be liable tu a second contraction: the discharge may, therefore, be estimated nearly according to the true measure of this oriſice; the original pressure of the ſluid continuing to act until the stream escupes. The effect oſ a short pipe, in increasing the discharge, ceases when the vater separates from its sides, so that it is no longer filled by the stream: since there ĩs then nothing to distinguish its motion from that of a stream pussing through a simple orifice: but the increase is not owing merely to the cohesion of the vater to the sides of the pipe; for the effect, as I have found by experiment, is nearly the same in the motion of air as in that of water. The contraction caused by the motion of the water at the entrance of the short pipe, may be considered simply as a contraction in the pipe itself, and the subsequent part of the pipe either as cylindrical or as nearly conical: for in this case it follows, from the general law on which Bernoullĩs caleulations are founded, that as long as the fluid remains in one mass, the discharge vill be nearly the same, as if the mouth of the pipe were the only orifice, supposing that no foree is lost: and the exceptions which Bernoulli has made to the general application of the principle in such cases, although partly supported by experiments, have been extended somevhat further, both by himself and by other authors, than those experiments have warranted. In the case of a diverging conical pipe, or of a pipe vith a conical termination, the discharge is found to be considerably greater than that which a eylindrical pipe would produce, but not quite so great as vould be produced on the supposition that no foree is lostt (Plate XX. Fig. 256.) This analogy hetveen the effects of a eylindrical and conical pipe ĩs strongly supported by the experiments of Venturi, compared with those of Bernoulli. Bernoulli found that when a small tube was inserted into any part of a conical pipe, in which the water was ſlowing tovards the vider end, not only none of the vater escaped through the tube, but the vater of a vessel, placed at a considerable distance below, was drawn up by it; Venturi observed the same, when the tube was inserted into the side of a eylindrical pipe, near to its origin; and in hoth eases air was absorbed, as vell as vater, 30 that cohesion could not be in any manner concerned. But the pressure of the atmosphere is generally necessary for all eſfects of this kind, and both Venturi and Dr. Matthew Young have ohserved, that a short pipe has no eſect, in increasing the discharge through an orifice, in the vacuum oſ an air pump: but even if ſhe diſference were sometimes found to exist in the absenee of atmospherical pressure, it might he produced hy an accideutal cohesion, like that which sometimes causes a column of mereury to remain suspended in similar circumstancess. Plate XX. Fig. 257.) VOL I. o o t⸗ The effect o ajutages of different kinds, on the quantity of water discharged through an oriſice of a given magnitude, may be most conveniently ex hibited by placing them side by side at the same height in a reservoir, and suffering the water to begin to ſlow at the same moment through any two of them; the quantities discharged in a given time will then obviously indicate the respective velocities. Ifa very long pipe were employed, some time would be required hefore the velocity became uniform; but in such cases the retardation arising from friction is 3o considerable, as to cause a still greater deviation ſrom the quantity which would be discharged by a shorter pipe in the same time. When the aperture, through which a ſluid is discharged, instead of being every way of inconsiderable magnitude, is contimued throughout the height of the vessel, and is every where of equal breadth, the velocity must be materially different at different parts of its height; but we may find the quantity of the discharge, by supposing the whole velocity equal to two thirds of the velocity at the lowest point. Anud we may ſind the quantity discharged by an orifice not continued to the surface, but still of considerable height, by subtracting from the whole discharge of an orifice so continued, that which would have been produced by such a portion of it, as must be shut up, in order to form the oriſice actually existing. But in this case, ilie result will seldom diſfer materially, from that which is found by considering the pressure, on the whole orifice, as derived from the height of the fluid above its centre. When a eylindrical vessel empties itself by a minute orifice; the velocity of the surface, which is always in the same proportion to the velocity of the ſluid in the oriſice, is, therefore, uniformly retarded, and follows, in its descent the same lav àa a heavy body, projected upwards, in its ascent; consequently the space actually described, in the whole time of descent, is equal to half of that which would have heen deseribed, if the initial motion had been uniformly continued; and in the time that such a vessel occupies, in umptying itself, twice the quantity of the fluid would be discharged if it were kept full by a new supply. This may be easily shown, by filling two eylindrical vessels, having equal oriſices in their bottoms, and while the one is left to empty itself, pouring into the other the contents of two other equal vessels, in suceession, so as to keep it constantly full; for it will be seen that both nperations will terminate at the same instant. A similar lawv may be applied to the ſilling of a lock, from æ reservoir of constant height; for in all such cases, twioe as long a time is requirod for the effect, as would be necessary if the initial velocity were continued. The immersion of the orifice in a large reservor has been found to make no ſifference in the magnitude of the discharge, s0 that the pressure may always be estimated by the difference of the levels of the two surfacess Thus, when a number oſ reservoirs communicate vith each other by orifices of any dimensions, the velocity of the fluid flowing through each orifice being inversely as the magnitude of the orifice, and being produced by the difference of the heights of the fluid in the eontiguous reservoirs, this difference must be every vhere as the square of the corresponding velocity But if the reservoirs were small, and the oriſices opposite and near to each other, a much smalier difference in the heights of the surfaces would be sufficient for producing the required velocityn. The same circumstances must be considered, in determining the velocity of a fluid, forced through a vessel divided by severul partitions, with an orifice in each; if the orifices are small in proportion to their distance from each other, and if they are tumed in different directions; each orifice will require an additional pressure, equivalent to the whole velocity produced in it: but i the partitions occupy a small part only of the vessel, und are placed near to each other, the retardation will,be much less considerable. Cases of this kind occur very frequently in the passage of water through the pipes and valves of pumps, and it is, therefore, of consequence to avoid all unnecessary expansions, as well as contractions, in pipes and in canals, since there is always a useless expense oſ force in restoring the velocity vhich is lost in the wider parts. When a siphon, or bent tube, is ſilled with a fluid, and its extremſytes are immersed in fluids of the same kind, contained in different vessels ſ both their surfaces are on the same level, the whole remains at rest; buſ if otherwise, the longer column in the siphon preponderates, and the pressure of the atmosphere forces up the ſluid from the higher vessel, until the equilibrium is restored; provided, however, that this pressure be sufficiently powerful: for if the height of the tube were more than 34 feet for water, or than 30 inches for mercury, the pressure of the atmosphere would be incapable of foreing up the ſluid to its highest part, and this part remaining empty, the fluid could no longer continue to run. (Plate XX. Fig. 258.) aii IF the lower vessel be allowed to empty itself, the siphon will continue running as long as it is supplied from the upper, with a velocity nearly corresponding to the height of that portion of the ſluid in the longer leg, which is not counterbalanced by the fluid in the shorter; that is, to the height of the surface of the upper vessel above that of the lower une, or above the end of the siphon, when it is no longer immersed; for the height of the pipe is in all cases to be considered as constituting a part of that height which produces the pressure. Thus the discharge of a pipe, descending from the side or bottum of a vessel, is nearly the same as ſrom a similar horizontal pipe, inserted into a reservoir of the whole height of the descending pipe and of the fluid above it; and this is true even when the depth of the vessel is inconsiderable, in comparison vith the length of the pipe, if its capacity is suſſicient to keep the pipe running ful. It appears at ſirst sight extremely paradoxical, that the whole water discharged, each particle of which is subjected to the action of gravitation in a pipe I6 ſeet long, for half a second only, should acquire the velocity of 52 feet in a second, which would require, in common circumstance:, the action oſ the same foree of gravitation for a whole second, and this fact may be considered as favourable to the opinion of those, who wish to estimate the magnitude of a foree, rather by the spuce through which it is continued, than by the time during which it acts; but if we attend to the nature of hydrostatical pressure, we shall ſind that the eſfect of the column on the atmosphere is such, as to produce, or to develope, a portion of accelerating force which is actually greater than the weight of the particles immediately concerned. If a doubt could be entertained of the truth of this theory, it might be easily removed by recurring to the general law of ascending force, since it follows from that law, that ench particle, which descends in any manner through the space of I6 ſeet, must acquire, either for itselſ or for some other particles, a power oſ ascending to the sume height; and on the other hand, the event of the experiment conſirms the general luv. For if ve ſix a shallow ſunnel on a vertical pipe, and pour vater into ĩt, so as to kee) it constantly ſull, while the pipe dischurges ĩtselſ into a reservoir, out of which the water runs through a second pipe, placed horizontally, of exactly the same dimensions vith the ſirst, the height, at which the water in the reservoir becomes stationary, vill be very nearly equal to the height of the funnel above its surſuee, s0 that the sume height produces the same velocity in both cases. (Plate NX. Tig. 250.) We may understand the action oſ che forces immediately concerned in this experiment, by attending to the mutual effects of the vater and oſ the atmosphere. The water entering the oriſice must immediately acquire a velocity equal to that of the whole water in the pipe, otherwise there would be a vacuum in the upper part. oſ the pipe, which the pressure oſ the atmosphere vill not permit; and this pressure, considered as a hydrostatic force, is equal to that which would be derived in any other way from a column of the same height vith' the nipe, since the veight of the water in the pipe ĩs wholly employed in diminishing the counterpressure of the atmosphere belov, not only in the beginning, vhen it is at rest, but also while it is in motion; for that motion being uniform throughout ĩts descent, the power of gravitation is expended in producing pressure only; so that the pressure of the atmosphere on the vater in the funnel becomes completely analogous to the pressure of a reservoir of vater, oſ the same height with the pipe. The circumstance, which causes the appearance of paradox in this experiment, exisis also in the simplest case of the discharge of water; for it may be shown, that the portion of accelerating foree actually employed in generating the velocity vith which a stream is discharged through a small oriſice, is twice as great as the pressure of the ſluid on a part of the vessel equal in extent to the orifice; and in the same manner the quantity of force exerted hy the atmosphere on the water in the funnel, as vell as that with which the descending fluid impels the air below, is equal to twice the weight oſ the quantity existing at any time in the pipe. There is, however, a limit, which the mean velocity in such a pipe can never exceed, and which is derived from the magnitude of the pressure of the atmospheree For the water, cannot enter the pipe with a greater velocity than that with which it would enter an exhausted pipe, and which ĩs produced by the whole pressure of the atmosphere; and this pressure being equivalent to that of a column of vater 34 feet high, the velocity derived from it is about 47 fſect in a second: so that if the vertical pipe were more than 34 feet long, there would be a vacuum in a part of it near the funnel Wherever a pipe of considerable length descends ſrom a funnel, if the supply of the fluid be scanty, and especially if it approach the orifice ohliquely, the pressure of the atmosphere, and the centrifugal force of the particles which must necessarily revolve round the oriſice, will unite in producing a vacuity in the centre; and when this happens, the discharge is considerably diminished. In order that a siphon may run, it is obvious that it must ſirst be filled; and vhen it is once ſlled, it will continue to run till the reservoir is exhausted, as far as the level of its upper orificec. And from this circumstance, the phenomena of some intermitting springs have been explained, which only begin to run, when the reservoirs from which they originate have been filled by continued rains, and then go on to exhaust them, even though the weather may be dry. From a combination of several such siphons and reservoirs, a great number of alternations may sometimes be produced. (Plate XX. Fig. 260.) Since the velocity of a strenm or jet issuing in any direction, out of a simple orifice, or a converging one, is nearly equal to that of a heavy body falling from the height of the reservoir, ĩt will rise, if directed upwards, very nearly to the same height, excepting a slight difſerence occasioned by the resistance of the air, anũd by the force which is lost, in producing the velocity with which the particles must escape laterally, before they begin to descend. The truth of this conclusion is easily confirmed by experiment. (Plate XX. Fig. 261.) If a jet issue in an oblique or in a horizontal direction, its form vill be parabolie, since every particle tends, as a separate projectile, to describe the same parabola in its range: and it may be demonstrated, that if it be emitted horizontally from any part of the side of a vessel, standing on a horizontal plane, and a circle be described, having the whole height of the fluid for its diameſer, the jet will reach the plane, at a distance from the vessel twice as great as the distance of that point of the circle, through which it would have passed, if it had continued to move horizontally. And if the jet rise in any angle from the bottom of the vessel, the utmost height of its ascent will be equal to that of the point in which it would meet the same semicirele, if it continued to move in a right line, and the horizontal range will be equal to four times the distance, intereepted hetween the same point and the side of the vessel. This lav is equally true with regard to simple projectiles: but the experiment is most conveniently exhibited in the motion of a jet. (Plate XX. Fig. 262.) We have hitherto considered the motions of ſluids as continued principally in the same direction; but they are frequently subjected to alternations of motion, vhich bear a considerable analogy to the vibrations of pendulums; thus, if æ long tube be immersed in a fluid, in a vertical diretion, and the surface of the ſluid within the tube be elevated a very little, by some externat cause, the whole contents oſ the fluid will he urged downwards by a force, which decreases in proportion to the elevation of the surface above the general lIevel of the vessel, and vhen both surfaces have acquired the same level, the motion vill be continued by the inertia of the particles of ihe fluid, until it be destroyed by the difference of pressures, which now tends to retard it; and this alternation will eontinue, until the motion be destroyed by friction and hy other resistances. It ĩs also obvious, that since any two vibrations, in Which the forces are proportional to the spaces to be described, are performed in equal times, these alternations will require exactly the same time for their completion, as the vibrations of a pendulum, of which the length is equal to that of the whole tube; for the relative force in the tube is to the whole force of gravity as the elevation or depression is to the whole length of the tube. Hence it follows, that if two such tubes were united below, so as to form a single bent tube, the vibrations might take place in the whole eompound tube, in the same manner, and in the same time, as in each of the separate tubes; nor would the effects be materially altered if any part of the middle of the tube vere in a horizontal or in an oblique direction, provided that the whole length remained unalteredl. In such a tube also, all vibrations, even if of considerable extent, would he performed in the same time, and vould long remain nearly of the same magnitude; but in a single tube, open below, the vibrations would continually become less extensive, and their duration would also be altered as vell as their extent; besides the unavoidable resistances, which would in both cases interfere with the regularity of the effects. But ĩit does not appear that the laws of the vibrations of fluids in pipes will at all serve to elucidate the phenomena of waves. Sir Isaac Newton has supposed that each wave may he compared with the ſinid oscillating in a bent pipe; but the analogy is by far too distant to allow us to found any demonstration on it. The motions of waves have heen investigated in a new and improved manner by Mr. Lagrange; and I have given a concise demonstra- tion of a theorem similar to his, but perhaps still more general and explicit. Tt appears from these determinations, that supposing the ſluids concerned  le inſinitely elastic, thut is, absolutely incompressible, and free from fnt of all inds, any small impulse, communicated to a ſluid, vould be transmit⸗ every vay along its surface, ith a velocity equal to that which a heavy Luo;y would acquire in falling through hulf the depth oſ the ſluid; and I hue reason to believe, from observation and experiment, that where the elevation or depression of the surface is considerably extensive in proportion to the depth, the velocity approaches nearly to that which is thus determined, being frequently deficient one eighth or one tenth only of the whole; in other cases, where a number oſ small vaves follow each other at intervals considerably less than the depth, I have endeavoured to calculate the retardation which must be occasioned by the imperfect elasticity or compressibility of the ſluid; but it seems prohable that the motion oſf small vaves is still much slower than this calculation appears to indicate. Whatever corrections these determinations of the velocity oſ waves may be found to require, the laws of their propagation may still be safely inferred from the investigation. Thus, it may be shown, supposing the waves to flow in a narrov eanal of equable depth, that, whatever the initial figure oſ the vaves may be, every part of the surface of the ſluĩd will assume in succession the same form, except that the original elevations and depressions, extending their inſluence in both directions, ill produce efeets only half asgreat on each side, and thnse effeets will then be continued until they are destroyed by resistances of various kinds. It may also be inferred, that the surſuce of a ſluid thus agitated hy any series of impressions, will receive the cſſcets oſ another series, in the same manner as a horizontal surface, and that the undulations, thus erossing each other, will proceed without any interruption, the motion oſ each particle heing always the sum or diſſerence of the motions belonging to the separate series. Supposing two equal and similar series of vaves to meet each other in such a canal, in opposite dircetions, the point in which their similar parts meet must he free from all horizontal motion, so that any ſixed ohstacle in an upright position would have the same efiect on the motions of the ſluid on either side as the opposition of a similar series; and this effect constitutes the reflection of a series of waves, which is casily obse?ved, when they strike against a steep wall or bank; and when this reflection is sufiiciently regular, it is easy to show. that the combination of the direct with the reflected motions must constitute a vibration, of such a nature, that the whole surface is divided into portions, which appear to vibrate alternately upwards and downvards, without any progressive motion, while the points which separate the portions remain always in their natural level. (Plate XX. TFig. 563.) But those series of waves which are usually observable in any broad surface, and which constitute a number of concentric circles, are usually reflected in such a manner as to appear to diverge after reſlection from a centre beyond the surface which reſlects them, and to be subject to all those laws, which are more commonly noticed in the phenomena of reſlected light; but as these laws are of more practical importance in their application to opties, than to hydraulics, it is unnecessary at present to examine their consequences in detail. It may, however, be easily understood, that a new series of vaves, proceeding from a centre at the sume distance behind the reſlecting surface, as the centre of the original series is before it, would produce precisely the same effect as a fixed ohstacle; consequently the law of reſlection at equal angles is a very simple inference from this mode of reasoning. (Plate XX. Fig. 264.) When a series of waves proceeds in an equable canal, it is obvious that the centre of gravity of the whole ſluid neither rises nor falls; from this analogy, as ell as from the general application of the law of ascending force, it is probable that in all cases of the propagation of waves, the place of the centre of gravity remains unaltered; so that when a circular wave spreads further and further from its centre, its height ĩs not diminished in the same ratio as its diameter is increased, but the square of its height only varies in this proportion; that is, a wave which is a yard in diameter, and an inch high, will retain a height of half an inch, when its diameter is increased to four yards. Many of the phenomena of vaves may he very conveniently exhihited, by means of a wide and shallow vessel, with a hottom of glass, surrounded hy sides inclined to the horizon, in order to avoid the confusion which would arise from the continual reſlections produced by perpendicular surfaces. The voL. I. ? ꝑ waves may be excited hy the vibrations oſ an elastic rod or vire, londed vith a weight, by means of vhich its motions may be made more or less rapid at pleasure; und the form and progress of the waves may be easily observed, by placing a light under the vessel, so that their shadows may fall on a white surface, extended in an inclined position above. In this manner the minutest inflections of the surface of the water may be made perfectly conspicuous. (Plate XX. Fig. æ65.) By means of this apparatus, ve may examine the manner in which a vave diverges, when a portion of it has been intercepted on eiĩther side or on both sides. Thus, if a vave is admitted, hy an aperture which is very narrow in proportion to its own breadth, into the surface of a part of the water vhich is at rest, it diverges from the aperture as from a new centre; but when the aperture is considerably wider than the wave, the vave conſines its motion in great measure to its original direction, with some smull divergence, while it is joined on each side by fainter circular portions, spreading from the angles only. late XX. Fig. 266.) When two equal series of circular waves, proceeding from centres near each other, begin their motions at the same time, they must so cross cach other, in some parts of their progress, that the elevations of the one series tend to ſill up the depressions of the other; and this eſſect may be actually ohserved, by throwing two stones of equal size into a pond at the same instant; for we may easily distinguish, in favourable circumstances, the series of points in which this efect takes place, forming continued curves, iũ which the water remains smooth, while it is strongly agitated in the intermediate paris. These curves are of the kind denominated hyperbolas, each point of the curve being s0 situated with respect to ĩts foci, as to be nearer to one than the other by a certain constant distance. (Plate XX. Fig. 267.) The subject of waves is of less immediate importance for any practical application than some other parts of hydraulics; but besides that it is intimately eonnected with the phenomena of the tides, it afſords an elegant employment for speculative investigation, and furnishes us with a sensible and undeniable evidence of the truth of some facts, which are capable of being applied to the explanation of some of the most interesting phenomena oſ acustics and optics. It may be shown, by steps nearly similar to those by which the velocity of the motions of vaves is investigated, that a ſluid which is contained in an elastic pipe, and which receives an impulse at any part of the pipe, will transmit its effects, vith the same velocity, as a wave vould have in a reservoir, of that depth which measures the elasticity of the pipe, that is, with half the velocity which a body would acquire, in falling from the height at which a portion oſ the ſluid, connected with the contents oſf the pipe, would stand in a vertical tube. It is in this manner that the blood is transmitted, by means of the impulse given to it by the heart through the bloodvessels; the pulse moves on with great rapidity, the elastic force of the vessels being considerably assisted by the temporary actions of the muscular coats of the arteries, vhich cause a contraction more rapid than. the dilatation; while the whole mass of the arterial blood continues, at the same time, to ad vance vith a much smaller velocity; like the slow stream of a river, on the surface of which undulations are continually propelled, with motions independent of its own. LECTURE XXIV ON THE FRICTION OF FLUIDS. WE have hitherto considered the motions of fluids independently of the resistance which they undergo from the vessels containing them, and from the surfaces in contact with them, as well as from the interference of the neighbouring particles with each other; there is, however, a variety of cases of very common occurrence, in which these frictions most materially affect the results of our calculations; so that before this subject was laboriously and judiciously investigated by the Chevalier de Buat, it was almost impossible to apply any part of our theoretical knovledge oſ hydraulics to practical purposes. The effect of friction is particularly exemplified by the motions of rivers, in which almost the whole force of gravity is employed in overcoming it. When the inclination and the dimensions of a river continue uniform, the velocity is also every where equal; for otherwise the depth would become unequal: here, thereſore, the force of gravitation must be an exact counterpoise to the resistance which is to be overcome, in order that the water may flow with its actual velocity; this velocity having been originally derived from the effect of a greater inclination near the origin of the river. When the river is thus proceeding, with an equable motion, it is said to be in train; and it is obvious that no increase of its length will produce any alteration in its velocity. There is, therefore, a very material diſference between the course of a river, and the descent of a body, with an accelerated motion, along an inclined surfacee For when a solid hody is placed on an inclined plane, the force of friction is either great enough to overpower its relative weight, and to retain it at rest, or else the friction is constantly less than the gravitation, and the motion is always accelerated. But the resistance to the motions of ſluids arises principally from diſſerent causes; not from the tenacity of the fluids, which, where it exists, is a force nearly uniform, like that of friotion, but principally from the irregular motions and mutual collisions of their particles; and in this case, according to the lavs oſ mechanics, it must vary nearly in proportion to the square of the velocity. For when a body is moving in a line of æ certain curvature, the centriſugal force is always as the square of the velocity; and the particles of water in contact with the sides and bottom of a river or pipe, must be deflected, in consequence of the minute irregularities of the surfaces on which they slide, into nearly the same curvilinear paths, whatever their velocity may he, so that the resistance, vhich is in great measure occasioned by this centrifugal force, must also vary as the square of the velocity. Thus also the curvature assumed by the outline ofa stream of vater issuing from a simple orifice, which constitutes the contraction already described, is very nearly the same, whatever the velocity may be: nor does the friction increase with the pressure, as is demonstrated by an experiment of Professor Robison on the oscillations of a fluid through a bent tube, terminated by two bulbs, which were performed in the same time, whether the tube was in a horizontal or in a vertical position. Mr. Coulomb has also proved the same fact by experiments on the vibrations of hodies immersed in fluids, and suspended by twisted wires; he finds that precisely at the surface, the friction is somewhat greater than at any depth below it: he also considers a certain part of the friotion as simply proportional to the velocity, and a very small portion only, in common ſluids, as perfectly independent of it. It is obvious that wherever the friction varies as the square oſ the velocity, or even when it increases in any degree vith the velocity, there must always be a limit, which the velocity can never exceed, by means of any constant force, and this limit must be the velocity at which the resistance would hecome equal to the forcee It is for this reason that a light body, descending through the air, soun acquires a velocity nearly uniform; and if it be caused, by any external force, to move for a time more rapidly, it will again be speedily retarded, until its velocity be restored very nearly to its original state. In the same manner the veight of the vater in a river, which has once acquired a stationary velocity, is wholly employed in overcoming the friction produced by the bottom and the banks. From considering the effect of the magnitude of the surface exposed to the friction of the water, in comparison with the whole quantity contained in the river, together with the degree in which the river is inclined to the horion, ve may determine, by following the methods adopted by Mr. Buat, the velocity of any river of which we know the dimensions and the inclination. Supposing the whole quantity of water to be spread on a horizontal surface, equal in extent to the bottom and sides of the river, the height, at which it would stand, is called the hydraulic mean depth; and it may be shown that the square oſ the velocity must he jointly proportional to the hydraulic mean depth, and to the fall in a given lengthh If we measure the inclination by the fall in 2800 yards, the square of the velocity in a second vill be nearly equal to the product of this fall multiplied by the hydraulio mean depth. For example, in the Ganges, and in some other great rivers; the mean depth being about 30 feet, and the fall 4 inches in a mile, the fall in 2800 yards will be about 6; inches, which, multiplied by 360 inches, gives 2340 inches for the square of the mean velocity, and 48; inches, or about four feet, for the mean velocity im a second, that is, not quite three miles an hour, which is the usual velocity of rivers moderately rapid. If, however, great precision were required in the determination, some further corrections would be necessary, on account of the deviation of the resistance from the exact proportion of the squares oſ the velocities; since the friction, as we have already seen, does not increase quite so fast as this. It is obvious that the friction of a fluid, moving on the surface of a solid alone, would not produce any material retardation of its motion, if the particles of the ſluid themselves were capuble of moving on each other, without the least resistance; for in this. case a small portion of the fluid, in immediate contact with the solid, might remain at rest, and the remaining mass of the fluid might slide over this portion without any retardation. It appears, however, that the water in contact with the bottom of a river moves with a very considerahle velocity, and the water next above this only a little faster, so that the velocity inerenses almost uniformly as we ascend towards the surface. It ſollows, therefore, that the resistance must he much greater where the particles of water slide on each other, than where they glide along the surſace of a solid. This internal friction operates gradually throughout the vater; the surſace being retarded by the particles immediately helow it, those particles by the next inferior stratum, and each stratum being actuated, besides its ovn relative weight, by the friction of the water above, tending to draw it forwards, and hy that of the water below, tending still more to retard it; the retardation being communicated, from below upwards, in such a manner as to be every where equivalent to the relative weight oſ the water above the part considered. It appears from observation, that when ve have determined the menn velocity in English inches, we may ſind the superſicial velocity, very nearly, by adding to it its square root, and the velocity at the bottom, by subtracting from iĩt the same number: thus the square root of 48 being nearly 7, the superficial velocity of the Ganges will be about 55 inches, or 4 feet 7 inches in a second, and the velocity at the bottom 413. There are, however, frequent irregularities in the proportions of the velocities at different depths, and it has sometimes been ohserved, perhaps on necount of the resistance of the air, that the velocity is a little less, immediately at the surface, than a few inches below it. For similar reasons, the velocity of a river is also generally greater in the middle than at the sides; and the motion of the particles in the middle must be retarded, not only by those which are below them, but also by those on each side, while these, on the contrary, are dragged on by the water in the middle: the middle parts tend, therefore, to draw the sides towards them, which they cannot do, without lowering the surface of the ſluid next to the banks, in such a degree as to make the difſerence of level an equivalent to this tendency to approach the middlee. This appears to be the reason, that the surface of a large river may generally be observed to be slightly convex, or a little elevated in the middie. The course of a river is sometimes interrupted by a were or a fall, natural or artificial; in such cases the velocity may be calculated in the same manner as when a ſluid is discharged ſrom a reservoir through an aperture of considerable height: supposing the whole section of the were to be such an aperture, in a vessel 50 much higher, that the velocity of a fluid issuing from it at the upper part of the aperture would be precisely equal to the actual veloeity oſ the river. The extent of the swell caused by a were, or by any partial elevation thrown across the bed of a river, may also he found hy first determining the height at which the surface must stand immediately above the were, and then calculating the inclination of the surface which vill be required for producing the actual velocity, in the river thus made deeper; which of course will determine the situation of the surface where the vater approaches the vere; and this surface, which is more nearly horizontal than the general surface of the river, will be so joined to it as to have a curvature nearly uniform throughout. It appears from calculations of the effects of various changes in the dimensions of rivers, as well as from immediate observation, that a considerable diminution of the breadth of a river at a particular place, will often produce but a small elevation of its surfacee. The velocity, however, may sometimes be considerably increased by such a change, and where the bottom is of a loose nature, its particles may be carried away by means of the increased velocity, and the bed of the river may be deepened. Where a river bends in a considerable degree, iĩt is generally remarked that the velocity of the vater is greater near the concave than the convex side of the ſlexure, that is, at the greatest distance from the centre oſ its curvaturee. This effect is probably occasioned by the centrifugal force, which accumulates the water on that side; so that the banks are undermined, and the channel is deepened by its friction. Some authors have been led to expect that the velocity would be greater nearest to the convex bank, because the inclination of the surface must be a little greater there; but the effect of the accelerating force, in any short distance, is inconsiderable, and it is more than compensated by the want of depth. It may easily be understood, that all angles and flexures must diminish the general velocity of the rivers motion, and the more as they are more abrupt. . It has sometimes been imagined, that because the pressure of fluids is propagated equally in all directions, their motions ought also to diverge in a similar manner; but this opinion is by no means well founded, even with respeet to those particles which receive their motions in an unlimited reservoir from the impulse ofa stream which enters it. An experiment, which sets this fact in a clear point of view, vas made long ago hy Hauksbee. He produced a very rapid current of air, by means of a vessel, into which three or four times as much air as it naturally contained had been condensed by means of a syringe, and causing the current to pass through a small box, in which the bason of a barometer was placed, the mercury was depressed more than two inches, in consequence of the rarefaction which the current produced in the air of the box. (Plate XXI. Fig 2068.) Professor Venturi has also made several experiments of a similar nature on the motion of vater: he observes that not only the vater in contact with a stream is drawn along by it, but that the air in the neighbourhood of a jet is also made to partake of its motion. hen the mouth of a pipe, through which a stream of water is discharged, is introduced into a vessel a little below the surface of the vater which it contains, and is allowed to escape by ascending an inclined surface placed opposite to the pipe, and leading over the side of the vessel, the stream not only ascends this surface without leaving any portion of itself behind, but carries also with it the whole of the water of the vessel, until its surface becomes level with the lowest part of the stream. (Plate XXI. Fig. 269.) The effect of a jet of water, in draving towards it a current of air, is in some measure illustrated by an experiment which is often exhibited among the amusements of hydraulics. A ball of cork, or even an egg, being placed in the middle of a jet, which throws up a pretty large stream to a moderate height, the ball, instead of falling, or being thrown off, as it might naturally have been expected to do, remains either nearly stationary, or playing up and down, as long as the experiment is continued. Besides the current of air which Venturi has noticed, and which tends to support the ball in a stable equilibrium, the adhesion of the water, combined with its centrifugal force in turning round the ball, assists in drawing it buck, when it has declined a little on either side, s0 that the stream has been principally in contact with the other side A similar efſect may be observed in the motions of the air only, as I have shown by some experiments of which an account is published in the Philosophical Transactions. Thus, if we bend a long plate of metal into the form of the letter S, and suspend it in the middle by a thread, so that it may move freely on its centre, and if we then blow on its convex surface with a tube directed obliquely towards the extremity, instead of retreating before the blast, it will on the contrary appear to be attracted; the pressure of the atmosphere being diminished by the centrifugal force of the current, which voL. I. q q glides along the convex surface, because it finds a readier passage in the neighbourhood of the solid, towards which it is urged by the impulse of the particles oſ the air approaching it on one side, and by the deſect oſ pressure on the other side, occasioned hy the removal of a certain portion of the air which it carries with itt. (Plate XXI. Fig. 270, 271.) Trom considerations similar to those hy which the velocity oſ a river ĩs determined, ve may calculate the quantity of water discharged from a pipe of any given dimensions, and in any position. The same expressions will serve ſor estimaiing the magnitude of the friction in both cases; the ꝑipe heing considered as a small river, oſf which the mean depth is one fourth oſ ĩts diameter: but a part only of the force of gravity is now expended in overcoming the friction, the rest being employed in producing the momentum of the water. We may obtain a suſliciently accurate determination of the velocity, by supposing the height of the reservoir above the oriſice of the pipe to be diminished in the same proportion as the diameter of the pipe vould be increased by adding to it one ſiſtieth part of the length, and ſinding the whole velocity corresponding to four ſiſths of this height. Thus, if the diameter of the pipe were one inch, and its length 100 inches, we must suppose the eſſeetive height to be reduced to one third by the frietion, and the discharge must be calculated from a height ſour ſifths as great as this, vhich may be considered as a reduction derived from the interſerence of the particles, entering the pipe, vith each others motions. If the diameter of the pipe had been two inches, the height must only have been supposed to be reduced to òne hulf by the friction; such a pipe would, thereſore, discharge about ſive times as much vater as the former, although of only tuice the diameter; and this circumstance requires the attention of all those who are concerned in regulating the distribution of vater by pipes for domestic use, or for any other purpose. In such cases it becomes also frequently necessary to attend to the angle in which a small pipe is inserted into a larger; whenever a pipe is bent, there is a loss of force according to the degree of ſlexure, and to the velocity of the ater, which may be calculated, if it be required; but if a pipe be ſixed into another through which the water is moving very rapidly, in a direction contrary to that of the stream, its discharge will not only be much smaller than if the directions more nearly coincided, hut sometimes such a pipe vſl ũũ- charge nothing at all; on the contrary, like the air in Hauksbee's experiment, the vater which it contains may be dragged aſter the stream in the larger pipe. The bad effſect of unnecessary dilatations, as well as contractions, in aqueducts and in pipes, may be understood from what has been already said of the loss of force attendant on every change of velocity; a circumstance of a similar nature sometimes happens in the animal economy. When an artery is dilated so as to form an aneurism, it has been observed that the artery is usually distended above the cavity; and this effect is easily understood from the actual inerease of resistance which the aneurism produces, united perhaps vith the previous debility of the artery. Mtr. Gerstner, has found by some very accurate observations on the motion of water in very small pipes, that the resistance is considerably affected by the temperature at which the experiment is performed; but in the cases of rivers, and of such pipes as are commonly used in practice, no variations of temperature, to which they can be liable; will produce any sensible effects. His experiments indicate a resistance, where the tubes are very small, which follows a law so different from that which is observed in more common cases, that it appears to be owing to some other cause: this cause is perhaps the capillary attraction of the open end of the tube, and it is the more probable that the resistance depends on some such circumstance, as there is reason to think that the irregularity may be in great measure removed by placing the tube wholly under water. LECTURE XXV. ON IIVDRAULIC PRESSURE. THE mutual eſects oſ ſiuids and moveable solids on each other depend principally on the laws of hydraulic pressure, and of the resistance oſ ſluids, which have been considered by Bernoulli as constituting a separate department of hydrodynamics, under the name of hydraulicostatics, and which are of the utmost practical importance, since the application of the powers of wind or water to the working of mills, and to the navigation of ships, are wholly dependent on them. The impulse of a ſluid differs very materially from that of a solid, for in the motions of solids, the least possible ſinite momentum must overpower the strongest possible pressure; but sinee the particles oſ fluids are supposed to be inſinitely small, the momentum of a ſluid stream may always he balanced by a certain determinate pressure, vithout producing motion in the solid opposed to it; so that this division of the subject of hydraulies has nothing analogous to ĩit in simple mechaniess. It is true that when a certain quantity of a fluid is made to concentrate its action almost instantaneously, its effect is nearly similar to that of a solid, for here the essential distinetion, derived from the successive action of the particles, no longer exists. Thus, when a stream of ſluid filling a pipe acts suddenly on an obstacle at the end of it, it requires to be resisted by a force far greater than that which originally caused its motion, unless the action of the force be continued through a considerable space: and for this reason the strength of the pipe ought to he so calculated as to be able to resist this action; its intensity may, however, be easily diminished by means of an air vessel communicating with the pipe, which will allow the motion to be changed in a less abrupt manner. But in the principal cases which we are about to consider, the action of the ſluid on the solid is supposed to be confined to such of its particles as are nearly in contact with the surface. When a part of the weight of any ſluid is expended in producing a motion in any direction, an equal force is deducted from its pressure on the vessel in that direction: for the gravitation, employed in generating velocity, cannot at the same time he causing pressure; and vhen the motion produced is in any other direction than a vertical one, its obliquity must be immediately derived from the reaction of the vessel, or of some fixed obstacle; for it is obvious that a vertical force, like that of gravity, cannot of itself produce an oblique or a horizontal motion. If a small stream descends from the hottom of a vessel, the weight expended in producing its motion is equal to that of a column of the ſluid standiug on a hase equal to the contracted orifice, and of twice the height oſ the vessel. Thus, if the vessel be I6 feet high, the velocity of the stream will be 39 feet in a second, and a column 32 feet in length vill pass through the orifice in each second, with the whole velocity derivable from its weight acting for the same time; so much, therefore, of the pressure of the ſluid in the reservoir must be expended in producing this motion, and must of course be deducted from the whole force with which the fluid acts on the hottom oſ the reservoir; in the same manngr as when two unequal weights are connected by means of a thread passing over a pulley, and one of them begins to descend, the pressure on the pulley is diminished, by a quantity, which is as much less than the sum of the weights, as the velocity of their common centre of gravity is less than the velocity of a body falling freely. If the stream issue from the vessel in any other direction, the eſfect of the diminution of the pressure in that direction will be nearly the same as if the vessel were subjected to an equal pressure of any other kind in a contrary direction; and if the vessel be moveable, it will receive a progressive or rotatory motion in that direction. Thus, when a vessel or pipe is ſixed on a centre, and a stream of vater is discharged from it by a lateral orifice, the vessel turns round at first with an accelerated motion, but on account of the forcg consumed in producing the rotatory motion, in successive portions of the water, the velocity 500m becomes nearly stationary (Plate XXI. Fig. 272.) From similar reasoning it appears, that the effect of a detached jet on a plane surface perpendicular to it must be equivalent to the weight of a portion of the same stream equal in length to twice the height vhich is capable of pro- ducing the velocity. And this result is confirmed by experiments: but it ĩs necessary, that the diameter of the plane be at least four times as great as that of the jet, in order that the full eſſeet may be produced When also a stream acts on an obstacle in a channel suſliciently closed, on all sides, to prevent the escape of any considerable portion of water, its effect is nearly the same as that of a jet playing on a large surfacee But if the plane, opposed to the jet, be only equal to it in diameter, or if it be placed in an unlimited stream, the whole velocity of the ſluid column will not be destroyed, iĩt will only be divided and diverted from its course, its parts continuing to move on, in oblique directions; in such cases the pressure is usually found to be simply equivalent to the weight of a column equal in height to the reservoir, the surface being subjected to a pressure nearly similar to that which acts on a part of the bottom of a vessel, while a stream is descending through a large aperture in another part of itt. (Plate XXI. Fig. 273.) ſ It is obvious that, in all these cases, the pressure varies as the square of the velocity, since the height required to produce any velocity is proportional to its square. This inference was first made in a more simple manner, from comparing the impulse of a ſluid on a solid with that of a number of separate particles, striking the surface of the body, each of which would produce an effect proportional to its velocity, while the whole number of particles, acting in a given time, would also vary in the same ratio. If the solid were in motion, and the ſluid either in motion or at rest, ĩt is obvious that the relative velocity of the solid and the fluid, with regard to each other, would be the only cause of their mutual effects, and that the hydraulic pressure or resistance must be dependent on this velocity alone, except so far as the limited dimensions of the reservoir, containing the fluid, might produce a difſerence in the internal motions of its particles in diſferent casess. Thus, where the fluid ĩs so confined, that the whole of the stream acts on a succession of planes, each portion into which it is divided may be considered as an inelastic solid, striking on the surface exposed to it with a certain velocity: and in this cuse the force must be considered as simply proportional to the relative velocity, and not to its square. For want of this consideration, the effects of water wheels have frequently been very erroneously stated. When a jet strikes a plane surface obliquely, its force, in impelling the body forwards, in its ovn direction, is found to be very nearly proportional to the height to which the jet would rise, it it were similarly inclined to the horizonn. But when a plane is situated thus obliquely with respect to a wide stream, the foree impelling it in the direction of the stream is somewhat less diminished by the obliquity, at least i we make allowance for its intercepting a smaller portion of the stream: thus, if the anterior part of a solid be terminated by a wedge more or less acute, the resistance, according to the simplest theory of the resolution of forces, might be found hy describing a cirele on half the hase of the wedge as a diameter, which woulid cut off a part from the oblique side of the vedge that would be the measure of the resistance, the whole side representing the resistance to the same solid without the wedge: but the resistance is alvays somewhat more than this, and the portion to be added may be found, very nearly, by adding to the fraction thus found one ten millionth of the cube of the number of degrees contained in the external angle of the wedge. (Plate XXI. Fig. 274.) The pressure of a ſluidq, striking perpendicularly on a plane surface, has been found to be very different at different parts of the surface; being greatest at the centre, and least towards the edges; so that if an aperture be made in the centre of a circular plane, covering the mouth of a bent tube, the ſluid vithin it will rise half as high again as if the whole mouth vere open. It ĩs also observable, that two hodies, equal and similar in the form of the part meeting the ſluid, undergo very different degrees oſ resistunce according to the forms of their posterior terminations, and that a thin circular plate is much more retarded than a long cylinder oſ the same diameter. These circumstances are utterly inexplicable upon the vague approximation of supposing the resistance produced by the immediate impulse of separate particles of the ſluid on the solid; but they are no longer surprising, when we consider the true mode of action of continuous ſluids, since all the motion which is produced by the fſluid in the solid or by the solid in the fluid is communicated much more by means of pressure than by immediate impulse. The minute operations of this pressure are too intricate to be aconrately developed, but ve may observe in general, that when a body moves along the surface ofa resisting medium at rest, or vhen an obstacle at rest is opposed to a ſluid in equable motion, the pressure ĩs inereased before the moving substance, and diminished hehind it; so that the surface is elevated at the one part, and depressed at the other, and the more as the velocity is greater. Now it is obvious that the pressure must he greatest where the elevation is greatest, and hence a perforation at the centre of the surface indicates a greater pressure than at the circumſerence. Behind the body, this pressure becomes negative, and has sometimes been called nonpressure; hence it happens that a tube, opening in the centre of the posterior surface, exhibits the fluid within it depressed below the level of the general surface of the water. Thus, i we suppose the velocity of a body, terminated by perpendicular surfaces, to be 8 feet in a second, it will require the pressure of about a foot, to produce such a velocity, and we may, therefore, expect an elevation of about a foot before the body, and an equal depression behind it: consequently an equivalent difference must be found in the pressure of the water at any equal depths on the anterior and posterior surfaces of the body. The vater elevated before the hody escapes continually towards each side, and the deſiciency behind is also ſilled up in some measure by the particles rushing in and following the body: but there is in both cases, a certain quantity of water vhich moves forwards, and constitutes what ĩs called the dead water: before, where it is usually most ohservable, it forms an irregular triangle, of which the sides are convex inwardss. If the posterior part of the body be formed like a wedge, the water on each side will he advancing to ſill up the vacuity, even while it remains in contact with the sides, and the negative pressure will be considerably diminished. For this reason, the bottoms of ships are made to terminate behind in a shape somewhat resembling a wedge; and the same economy may be observed in the forms of fishes, calculated by nature for following their prey with the greatest possible rapidity. In general, ſishes, as well as ships, are of a more obtuse form before than behind, but ĩit is not certain that there would be any material difference in the resistance in a contrary direction, although some experiments seem to favour such an opinion. Perhaps if the natural form of the dead ater, moving before an obtuse budy, were ascertained, it might serve to indicate a solid calculated to move through the water with the least resistance; for the water must naturally assume such a form for ĩits own motions, and the frietion of ſluids on solids heing less than that of ſluids moving vithin themselves, the resistance would be diminished by substituting a solid of the same form for a fluid. (Plate XXI. Fig. 275.) Supposing a hody to move through a ſluid at a considerable depth below jts surface, there vill still be an elevation before and a depression behind it, the less in height, and the greater in extent, as the depth at which the body is situated is greater. Such an elevation appears to be in some measure analogous to the effect of a low were thrown across a river, which raises its surface, and produces a swell. If two or more hodies, differently formed, the resistances to the motions of which had heen ascertained, vere caused to move through a fluid in contact vith each other, it is obvious that the paths described by the particles of the ſluid, in gliding by them, must be very materially altered by their junction; and it seems natual to expect that the joint disturbance produced in the motions of the fluid, when the surfaces are so united as to form a convex outline, would be somewhat less than if each surface werc considered separately. Accordingly it is found that no calculation, deduced from experiments on the resistance opposed to oblique plane surfaces, vill determine with accuracy the resistance to a curved surface. It appears from experiment that the resistance to the motion of a sphere is usually about two fifths of the resistance to a flat circular substance of an equal diameter. The resistunce to the motion of a concave surface is greater than to a plane, and it is easily understood, that since the direction, in which the particles of the fluid recede from the solid, must be materially influenced hy the form oſ the solid exposed to their action, their motion in this case must be partly retrograde, when they glide along towards the edges of the concave surface, and a greater portion of force must have been employed, than when they escape with a smaller deviation from their original direction. (late XXI. Fig. 276.) For some reason which is not vell understood, the hydraulic pressure oſ the air appears to be somewhat greater, in proportion to iĩts density, than thæt of water. It has been found that the perpendicular impulse of the air, on a plane surface, is more than equivalent to the weight of a column of air of a height corresponding to the veloeity, and the excess is said by some to amount to one third, by others to two thirds oſ that weight. The resistance appears also to be a little greater for a large surface, than for a number of smaller ones, which are together oſ equal extent. The resistance or impulse of the air, on each square foot of a surface directly vOL. I. R I opposed to it, may in general be found, with tolerable accuracy, in pounds, by dividing the square oſ the velocity in a second, expressed in ſeet, by 500. Thus, if the velocity vere 100 feet in a second, the pressure on each square foot would he 20 pounds; if 1000 feet, 2000 pounds. For a sphere of a foot in diameter, ve may divide the square of the velocity by 16000. We may also find, in a similar manner, the utmost velocity that a given body can acquire or retain in falling through the air; for the velocity at which the resistance is equal to the weight must be iĩts limit. Thus, if a sphere one foot in dinmeter weighed 100 pounds, the squure of its utmost velocity would be 160000, and the velocity itself 400 feet in a second; if a stone of such dimensions entered the atmosphere with a greater velocity, its motion would very soon be reduced to this limit; and a lighter or a smaller body would move still more slowly. The weight of Mr. Garnerin's parachute, with its whole load, was about a quarter of a pound for each s quare foot, the square of its greatest velocity must, therefore, have been about 125, and the velocity I1 feetin a second, which is no greater than that with which a person would descend, in leaping from a height of two feet, without stooping. Mr. Garnerin found the velocity even less than this, and it is not improbable that the concave form of the parachute might considerably increase the resistance. Thus, Mr. Edge vorth found that a plate ꝗ inches long, when bent into an are of vhich the chord was 7, had the resistance inereased more than one seventh. The diminution of the resistance of the air by the ohliquity of the surface is still less than that of the resistance of water: thu⸗, the resistanee on the oblique surfaces of a vedge is not quite so much less than the resistance on ĩts base, as its breadth is less than the length of those surfaces. When the velocity of a body moving through an elastic fluid is very great, the resistance is inereased in a mueh greater proportion than the square of the velocity: thus, the retardation of a cannon hall moving vith a velocity of 1000 feet in a second, or a little more, hecomes suddenly nuch greater than the caleulation indicates. The reason of this change appears to be, that the condensation of the air before the hull is necessarily conſned to a smaller portion, which is very intensely compressed, because the efiect of the impulse can only spread through the air with a certain velocity, which is not muceh greater than that of the ball; and this smæller portion of air must necessatily be much more condensed than a larger portion vould have been. Thus, when a cannon ball moves slowly, its effect at any instant is in some degree divided throughout all that part of the atmosphere, vhich the sound of the report has reached; and if the ball follows the sound very speedily, it is obvious that the portion of the air before the ball, which partakes of the eſfect, must be very small. The sound is observed to be propagated with a velocity of about 1130 feet in a second, and a cannon ball may be discharged vith a velocity of 2000; but one half of this is very speedily lost, so as to he wholly useless with regard to the effect of the ball. If, therefore, we wish to increase the range of a cannon hall, ve must increase its weight; for the resistance increases only in proportion to the surface of the ball, while the weight is determined by its solid content. It is not easy to explain, in a manner perfectly satisfactory, the reſlection of a cannon ball, or of a stone, which strikes the surface of the sea, or of a piece of vater, in an oblique directionn. We may, however, assign some causes hich appear to be materially concerned in this effect. In the first place the surface of the water, acting at first for some time on the lover part of the hall, produces, hy its friction, a degree of rotatory motion, by means of which the ball, as it proceeds, acts upon the mass of water vhich is heaped up before it, and is obliged by a similar friction to roll upwards, so that it mounts again to a much greater height than ĩit could possibly have attained by the mere hydrostatic pressure of the water at a depth so inconsiderable But a more poverful cause than this appears to be the continual succession of new surfaces which are to be depressed, and which may be supposed to react on the ball, so as to produce the same eſfeet, as a more intense pressure would have done, iſ it had continued stationary; and the mutual action of the water and the hall may be compared to the impulse of an ublique stream, moving vith the vlocity of the ball, which would impel it much more poverfully than the simple hydrostatic pressure at a much greater depth. It happens in this case, as in many others, that the eſſects which appear to be the most familiar to us, do not by any means admit the clearest and simplest explanation. LECTURE XXVI. ON HYDROSTATIC INSTRUMENTS, AND IYDRAULIC ARCHITECTURE. WE have now examined the fundamental laws of the principal departments of hydrodynamics, which may be considered as constituting the theory of the science: we are next to proceed to the application of this theory to a variety of practical purposes. Following the same general order as we have observed in mechanics, our ſirst division will he analogous to the subject of staties, and vill relate to hydrostatic instruments; the second to architecture, containing some particulars respecting canals and embankments; the third to machinery, comprehending the modiſication and application of the force of fluids considered as inelastic; the fourth and the fifth to the methods of raising and removing veights, in which the principal hydraulic and pneumatic machines will be respectively explained, and, as a part of this subject, the application of pneumatic foree vill also be examined. The principles of hydrostatios are very frequently applied to the determination of the speciſic gravities of the various productions of nature or of art. The diminution of the apparent weight oſ a solid body, upon immersion into a ſluid, affords an easy method of comparing its density with that of the fluid. For the weight of the solid heing previously determined, if we examine how much that weight is diminished by plunging the body in pure water, ve shall have the veight of an equal bulk oſ water; and thence we may immediately obtain the proportion of the specific gravity of the hody to that of water, vhich is the usual standard of comparison. And if we weigh a solid of given magnitude, for instance, a ball of glass, first in water, and then in any other ſluid, the quantities of weight lost in each case will be in the same proportion as the specific gravities of the two fluidss A balance adapted for such cxaminations is called a hydrostatic balance; on one side it has a scale as usual, and on the other a loop of ſine wire, or of horse hair, for holding the solid to be weighed, which may be changed occasionally for a hall of glase, suspended in a similar manner: sometimes also a dish is added for holding any Ioose substances which vill sink in vater, proper counterpoises being used as equivalents for the weight of the dish either in air or in water; and vhen a body lighter than vater is examined, a veight oſ known magnitude and density is employed for sinking it. (Plate XXI. Fig. 277.) The specific gravities of any substances, and in particular of such as are lighter than water, may also be very conveniently determined by means of a common balance, employing a phial with a conical ground stopple, filling it first with water, and then either with a given ſluid, or with a portion of the solid of which the weight has been ascertained, together with as much water as is suſficient to exclude all the air. For the speedy examination of a variety of ſluids, diſſering but little in speciſic gravity from some known standard, a hydrometer may he very conveniently employed. This instrument is said to have been invented by Archimedes: it consists of a hollow ball, with a weight belov it, and a slender stem above, so graduated as to express the speciſic gravity of the ſluid by the degree to which it sinkss. Sometimes the instrument is sunk to a certain mark, by means of weights placed in a dish at the end of the stem; or diſſerent veights are fixed to it below, while the graduations of the scale are still observed; and it may even be applied to ſinding the speciſic gravities of solids, the solid being ſirst placed in the dish at the end of the stem, and then in a second dish which is suspended from the hulb below the water. (Plate XXI. Fig. 278) Another mode of ascertaining the speciſic gravities of ſluids differing but little from each other in density, is to have a series of glohules of glass, so loaded as to correspond to the specific gravities indicated by as many numbers, vhich are marked on them; and, throwing several of them together into the fluid, to observe which of them remains nearly stationary, without eĩther rising to the surface or sinking. This method, though not expeditious, appears to be very secure from error: the globules are sold by patent, adapted for the measurement of the strength of spirituous liquors. In vhatever manner we compare the specific gravities of bodies with that of water, it is necessary, for very accurate experiments, eſther thut the water be employed at the temperature of the air when moderately warm, or that a proper correction should be made for its chunge of bulk at diſſtrent temperatures. Platina, the densest known substance, is ĩ times as heavy as distilled water, gold 195, mereury 135, lead Il, silver 11, copper , iron and steel 73, stony substances usually about 2&, rectiſied spirits;, nuphtha, the lightest liquid;, cork aboutĩ, common air , steam ;,⸗, and pure hydrogen gas Læ VFrom this comparison, the weight oſ a cubic foot of any of these substances may he easily determined; since a cubic foot of water weighs nearly I000 ounces avoirdupois, or more nearly 998; thus a cubic foot of gold would weigh about 195 000 ounces, and be worth above 60 000 pounds sterling; a cubic foot of iron weighs 7750 ounces, and a cubie foot of common stone about 2500. . The method of measuring the bulk of solid hodies by immersing them in a ſluid was applied, by its inventor Archimedes, to the detection of a fraud in the composition of a mixed metal: and at present the principal use of hydrometers is for ascertaining, by the specific gravity of a compound of alcohol and water, the proportional quantities of its ingredients. But in all experiments of this kind, iĩt is necessary to be avare, that a considerable change of the joint bulk of two substances is often produced by their mixture: and that in general their dimensions are considerably contracted. Thus, 18 gallons of ater, and 18 of alcohol, instead of 56 gallons, make only 35, consequently the specific gravity of the compound is one 35th greater than the mean of the speciſic gravities of the ingredientss. And in some cases the whole dimensions of a single substance may even be contracted by the addition oſ another substance: thus iron, by the addition of one eighth of its bulk of platina, becomes contracted one fortieth of that bulk. The use of the spirit level depends on the tendency of all fluids to preserve a horizontal surface, and the freedom, with which the particles of fluids move on each other, renders it an instrument capable of the greatest delicacy. A tube, which is very slightly curved, heing nearly ſilled with alevhol or ether, and then perfectly closed, the bubble vill always rise to the highest part of the tube, and will never be stationary at the point which is marked as its proper place, unless the instrument be very accurately horizontal, or in the same position in which the mark vas adjustedl. The surfuce of the bubble, especially when it is small, cannot, in a strict sense, be called perfectty horizontal, since its form approaches nearly to that of a sphere; but in order that the centre of gravity of the water may attain the lowest possible situation, the bubble must necessarily occupy the highest point of the tube. (Plate XXI. Fig. 799 The principles of hydrostaties have been employed in various ways for supplying lamps with oil. It is found that a lamp vill hurn, without consuming any considerable portion of its vick, ũs long us it is amply supplied vith oil; hence it becomes desirable that itshould always be level with the surface uf the reservoir, and this may be effectud sufficiently well by placing the wick at the edge of a very large vessel, or atthe end ofa tube projecting from such a vessel, or from a vessel closed ahove, and opening only hy an oriſice below, which lets in the air as the oil escapes through it.. But all these methods are often attended with inconveniences of various kinds, especially where the lamp is to be employed like a candle, and placed on a table A French artist has applied a little pump, which is orked by means of a spring, for raising the oil from a vessel under the lamp; but this reſinement is too. complicated to be practically useful. Mr. Keirs lamp contains a divided cavity, one part of which is ſilled with oil, and the other with a saline or succharine ſluid of greater density, 50 that when the oil contained in the upper part of the tube is exhausted, its place is partly supplied by a fresh portion, which is forced up in consequence of the descent of the denser ſluid in a much larger vessel. Still, however, the surface must he lowered by degrees; but by combining the invention with Dr. Hookes semicylindrical counterpoise, a little modiſied, the height of this fluid may be so regulated, that the surface of the oil may remain almost invariable, until the reservoir is quite exhausted. For this purpose, the centre of gravity of the counterpoise must be a little higher than the line which bisects it; and its speciſic gravity must be about three fourths as great as that of the ſluid; and in this manner it may be made to raise the surface of the heavier ſluid, in proportion as a greater quantity of ĩt escapes, to supply the place of the oil; and to keep it always at a sufficient height above the surface which separates it from the oil, so that the wick may be amply and almost unitormly supplied. (Plate XXI. Fig. 250.) The art of embankment is a branch of architecture entirely dependent on hydrostatical and hydraulic principles. In Holland, and in some parts of Germany, this art is indispensable to the existence of large tracts of country; and even in this island, it has been of extensive utility, in gaining and securing ground on the sea coast. The construction of canals, and the management of rivers and harbours, are also dependent on the same principles; and these important subjects have been discussed by various writers, in many copious treatises, expressly devoted to hydraulic architecture. When a bank or dike is to he constructed, it niust be composed of materials capuble of resisting, by their weight, the effort of the fluid to overtum them; by their lateral adhesion, the force tending to thrust them aside horizontally; and by their density and tenacity, the penetration of the water into their substance. If the water be in motion, they must also be able to resist its friction, without being carried away by it, and they must be arranged in such a form, as to be least liable to' be undermined. For many of these reasons, the surface of the bank exposed to the water must be inclined to the horizon: the line expressing the general direction of the pressure of the vater ought to be confined entirely within its substance, so that no force thus applied may be able to overtum it as a whole; and this condition vill always be fulfilled, vhen the sides of the hunk make an angle with each other not less than a right angle. The pressure acting on a bank thus inclined will also tend to condense the materials, and to increase their lateral adhesion, and the particles will become less liable to crumble avay hy their weight, than if the surface were more nearly vertical. For embankments opposed to the sea, a bank much inclined has also the additional advantage of breaking the force of the waves very effectually. An emhankment of this kind is usually furnished with drains, formed by wooden pipes or by brickvork, elosed by falling doors, or valves, which allow the vater to flow out at low water, but do not permit the tide to enter. To prevent the penetration of the water, clay is often used, either mixed with gravel, or sunk in a deep trench cut on each side of the canal or reservoir. (Plate XXI. Fig. 281.0 The greater or less velocity of a river must determine what substances are capable of vithstanding its tendency to disturb them; some are carried away by a velocity of a few inches in a second, others remain at rest when the velocity amounts to several feet. But in general, the velocity of a river is suſicient to produce a gradual transſer of the particles of its bed, which are shiſted slowly downwards, towards the sea, being occasionally deposited in those parts where the water has least motion, and serving at last to form the new land, vhich is always advancing into the sea, on each side of the mouth of a large river. It has been recommended, as a good form for a navigable river or canal, to make the breadth of the horizontal bottom one fifth of that of the surface, and the depth three tenthss (Plate XXI. Fig. 282.) If a canal or a reservoir were conſined by a perpendicular surface of boards. and it were required to support it by a single prop, the prop should be placed, as we have already seen, at the distauce of one third of the whole height from the bottom; but it would be always more convenient in practice to fix the side of the reservoir at the bottom, than to allow the whole pressure to be supported by the prop, and it might also be strengthened by means of ribs, thicker below than above, so as to produce an equal strength throughout, wherever the prop might be placed: but if the side were formed of a single plank, of uniform thickness, the strain would be most equally divided by placing the prop very near the middle of its height. The strength of the materials employed for flood gates and sluices requires to be determined according to the principles, which have been laid down, in treating of the passive strength of substances used for purposes simply mechanical; but the calculations become in this case much more intricate. Thus, if we have a circular plate or plank, of a uniform elastic substance, constituting the bottom of a pipe or cistern, and simply supported at the circumference, a very complicated calculation is required for determining the proportion of its strength to that of a square plate of the same breadth, supported only at two opposite ends, since at each point of the circular piece, there are two curvatures which require to be consideredl The square plate will support a column of ſluid twice as heavy as the weight which would brea it, if placed at its centre; and if I have been correct in the calculation, a circular plate vill support a height of water nearly sixteen sevenths as great as a square plate. But for ordinary purposes, it will be sufficient to consider the strength as derived only from the resistance opposed to the flexure in one direction, since the additional strength, obtained from the lateral supports, may very properly be negvOoL. I. 8 s lected, as only assisting in affording that additional security which is alvays necessary, to compensate for any accidental defects of the materials It has heen asserted that the strength of a square plate is doubled when it is supported onboth sides; hut this appears to be a mistake. We may, therefore, be contented with determining the strain on the materials in that direction in which they afford the greatest resistance, either ſrom the shorter distance between the supports, or by the disposition of the ſibres; and it will be always most eligible to combine these circumstances, s0 that the fibres of the vood may be arranged in the direction of the shortest dimensions of the sluice Ifa sluice be supported above and below only, the greatest strain will be at the distance of about three sevenths of its height from the bottom; and it ĩs at this point that the greatest strength is required. But if the boards forming the sluice be ſixed across it, in horizontal directions, their strength must be greatest at the bottom (Plate XXI. Fig. 283.) In the construction of ſlood gates, the principles of earpentry must be applied in a manner nearly similar to that which serves for the determination of the best forms of roofs. The flood gates, if they are double, without a solid obstacle between them, must meet al an angle: and when this angle is very open, the thrust against the walls or hinges must necessarily he very great. If, however, the angle were too acute, the flond gates wouli require to be lengthened, and in this case their strength would be far more diminished than that of a roof similarly clevated, since the hydrostatic pressure acts always with full toree in a perpendicular direction. The thickness required for each flood gate may be determined in the same manuer as the thickness of a sluice. Where a sluice board oſ considerable dimensions is to hbe occasionally raised, it may be necessary to ascertain tle force which will be required for overcoming its friction; this friction is nearly proportional to the whole pressure of the water, and may he found, with suſficient accuracy, in pounds, by multiplying the square of the depth of the sluice, in feet, by IO. Thus, if the depth he 3 feet, the frietion or adhesion will be about ꝗO pounds for each foot of the breadth. If the side of a canal gives vay, it is sometimes of consequence to prevent, as much as possible, the escape of the water. Tor this purpose iĩt is usual to have doors or valves in various parts of the canal, which, when the vater is at rest, lie nearly ſlat at the bottom; but when it begins to run over them, vith a considerable velocity, they are raised by its force, and put a stop to its motion. The utility oſf the introduction of canals into a commereial country may be estimated in some measure by the effect of the same labour, employed in removing weights by land carriage and by water. Thus, a single horse can scarcely drawv more than a ton weight on the hest rond, hut on a vanil, the same horse can drav a hoat of 30 tons at the same rate. The construction of piers and quays, and the management of harbours, are also importunt departments of hydraulic architecture; it often happens that hesides the application of the general principles of mechanics and hydrostatics to these purposes, the peculiar circumstances of the case may indicate to an ingenious artist a mode of performing the required vork in an eſfectual and economical manner. We may find a good example of such an arrangement, in the account given, by Mr. Smeaton, of the method which he adopted for the improvement of the port of Ramsgate, and which indeed resembles some that had been hefore employed in similar cases: by forming a large excavation, which is furnished with ſlood gates, and is constantly ſilled at high vater, he has procured a number of artificial torrents, which escape through the sluices, and become powerſul agents for carrying avay the matter deposited by the sea, and tending to impede the navigation of the harbour. LECTURE XXVIL ON THE REGULATION OF HYDRAULIC FORCES. THOSE modiſications of the motions of ſuids which are employed either for conducting them from place to place, or for applying their povers to the production of mechanical efſects, may be considered as constituting a separate division of practical hydraulies, vhich is analogous to the sulject of general machinery in practical mechanics. A supply of water may be obtained from a reservoir, situated above the level at which it is wanted, whatever its distance may be, either by means of open canals, or aqueduets, or of closed pipess Where an uninterrupted declivity cannot be obtained, it is necessary to employ pipes, which may be bent upvards or downvards at pleasure, provided that no part of them be more than thirty feet above the reservoir, and when the pipe is once ſilled, the water will continue to flow from the lower oriſice; but it is best in all such cases to avoid unnecessary angles; for when the pipe rises and falls again, a portion of the air, vhich is always contained in water, is frequently collected in the angle, and very materially impedes the progress of the water through the pipe. When the bent part is wholly below the oriſices of the pipe, this air may be discharged by various methodss. The ancients used small upright pipes, called columnaria, rising from the convexity of the principal pipe, to the level of the reservoir, and suffering the air to escape without vasting any of the water. It may however frequently be inconvenient or impossible to apply a pipe of this kind; and the same purpose may be answered, by fixing on the pipe a box containing a small valve, which opens downwards, and is supported by a float, so as to remain shut while the box is full of water, and to fall open when any air is collected in it. (Plate XXI. Fig. 238.) If the pipe were formed into a siphon, having its lexure above both oriſices, it would be necessary to bend it upwards at the extremities, in order to keep it always full: but in this case the accumulation of the air would be extremely inconvenient, since it would collect so much the more copiously, as the vater in the upper ſart of the pipe would be more free from pressure, and neither of the methods which have been mentioned would be of any use in extricating it. It has been usual in such cases to force a quantity of vater violently through the pipe, in order to carry the air with it; but perhaps the same eſect might be produced much more easily, by making a small airtight valve in the upper part of the pipe, opening outwards, and a stopeock immediately before it: the stopeock being suddenly turned as often as might be necessary, the momentum of the water in the pipe would probably carry it forwards with sufficient force to throw out the air; or, if it were necessary external pressure might be added, and the air might even in this manner he discharged by the valve much more readily than without it. But it might be still simpler to have a pretty large vessel of water screwed on to the pipe, which would not be ſilled with air for a consiqęrable time; and which, when full, might be taken off and replenished with water. (Plate XXI. Fig. 285.) The diameter of a pipe, required for conveying a given quantity of water to a given distance, may be calculated from the experiments of Mr. Buat, which have been already mentioned. Pipes are usually made of wood, of lead, or of cast iron; hut most commonly of lead; and of late tinned copper has been employed with considerable advantage. A pipe of lead will bear the ptessure of a column of water 100 feet high, if its thickness be one hundredth of its diameter, or even less than this; but when any alternation of motion is produced, a much stronger pipe is required, and it is usual to make leaden pipes of all kinds far thicker than in this proportion. The form and construction of stopeocks and valves are very various, according to their various situations and uses. Stopcocks usually consist of a cylindrical or conical part, perforated in a particular direction, and capable of being turned in a socket formed in the pipe, so as to open or shut the passage of the fluid, and sometimes to form a communication with either of two or more vessels at pleasure. Avalve is employed where the ſluid is to be allowed to pass in one direction only, and not to return. For water, those valves are the best which inter rupt the passage least; and none appears to fulfil this condition better than the common elack valve of leather, which is generally either single, or divided into two parts; but it ĩs sumetimes composed of four parts, united so as to form a pyramid, nearly rescmbling the double and triple valves which are formed by nature in the hearts of animalss A board, or a round ſlat piece of metal, divided unequally by an axis on which it moves, makes also a very good simple valvee Where a valve ĩs intended to intercept the passage of steam, it must be of metal; such a valve is generally a ſlat plate, with its edge ground a little conically, and guided in its motion hy a vire or pin. For air, valves are commonly made of oiled silk, supported byperforated plate or grating. (Plate XXI. Fig. 256, 287.) Before we consider the application of the force of ſluids in motion to practical purposes, ve must attend to the methods of measuring the velocity of their motions. This may be done either by a comparison with linear measures, or by instruments founded on the laws oſ hydraulic pressuree One of he best of such instruments is the tube invented by Pitot, and improved by Buat. A funnel is presented to the stream, and the water in a vertical tube connected with it is elevated above the level of the river, nearly to the height corresponding to the velocity: but it ĩs said that the result will be less liable to error, if the funnel be covered by a plate with a small oriſice in its centre, the elevation heing in this case always half as great again as the height due to the velocity. Other instruments, intended for the same purpose, require some previous experiments for determining the degree in which they are affected by difſerent velocities; in this manner the hydrometrical fly is adjusted; the impulse of the water on two inclined planes turning an axis to which they are fixed, and by its means a series oſ wheels, with an index, which expresses the space described during the time oſ ohservation. Instruments similar to these have also sometimes been employed, for measuring the relative velocity, with which a ship under vay passes through the water; and an apparatus, resembling Pitot's, has been adapted to this purpose by Captain Hamilton, with the addition of a tube inserted into it on a level vith the surface oſ the water, which continually discharges a small stream into a reservoir with a veloeity regulated hy the pressure, and consequently equal or proportional to that oſ the ship itsel?. In this manner he obtains an accurate register of the whole distance described, including the effect of all the variations of the velocity. Iſ the oriſice be small, ĩt will be necessary to attend to the temperature of the vater, since the discharge is considerably retarded by any considerable degree of cold. DBut when the aperture, which determines the magnitude oſ the discharge, is wholly under water, as Captain Hamilton has placed it, this source of error is probably much diminished. (Plate XXII. Fig. 288, 289.) The motions of the air may also be measured by instruments similar to those which are employed for determining the velocity of streams of water. The direction of the wind is sometimes indicated by a wind dial, consisting 1imply of an index, connected by wheels with a common vane or veathercock. Its velocity may be found hy means of wind gages of diſſerent kinds: these are sometimes constructed by opposing a ſlat surface to the vind, the pressure being measured by the flexure of a spring, or by the winding up oſ a weight on a spiral barrel; and sometimes by receiving the stream in the mouth of a funnel, so as to raise a column of vater, in a vertical tube, to a height equivalent to the pressure, or to condense a quantity of air inclosed in a cavity, to a degree which is indicated by the place of a small portion of mercury, moving in a horizontal tube, which leads to the cavity. A little windmill, like the hydrometrical fly, may also be employed for measuring the rvelocity of the wind, with the assistance of a watch. The principal methods of applying the force of fluids to useſul purposes are to employ their weight, their impulse, or their pressuree The weight of water may be applied, by collecting it in a reservoir, which alternately ascends and descends, by causing it to act within a pipe on a moveable piston, or by condueting it into the buckets of a revolving wheel; its impulse may be directed either perpendicularly or obliquely against a moveable surface; and its pressure may he ohtained, without any immediate impulse, by causing a stream to ſlow horizontally out of a moveable pipe which revolves round an axis. The force of the air can only be applied by means of its impulse, and this may be employed either perpendicularly or obliquely. When wvater is collected in a single reservoir, which serves to work a pump or to raise a weight, the mode of its operation may be determined from mechanical considerations only; and it is obvious that if we are desirous of preserving the whole force of the water, ve must employ a second reservoir to be filled during the descent of the first, vhich may either descend in its turn, or empty itself into the first when it has ascended again to its original situation. The action of a column of water, inclosed in a pipe, is of a nature nearly similar to that of such a reservoir, excepting that the apparatus is more liable to friction; the arrangement of its parts is nearly similar, although in an inverted position, to that which is more commonly employed for raising water by means of pumps. But both these methods oſ employing the veight of water, are in great measure conſined to those cases in which it is to be procured in a small quantity, and may be allowed to descend through a considerable height, and when the circumstances do not allow us to employ machines which require a greater space. We have seen that in order to determine the effect of any force employed in machinery, ve must consider not only its magnitude, but also the velocity with which it can be brought into action, and ve must estimate the ultimate value of the power, hy the joint ratio, or the produet, of the force and the velocity. Thus, if we had a corn mill, for example, in which we wished the millstone to revolve with a certain velocity, and to overcome a given resistance, and supposing that this effect could he obtained by means of a certain train of wheels from a given source of motion; if the velocity of the motion at its source be reduced to one half, ve must double the diameter of one of the wheels by which the force is communicated, in order to give the millstone the desired velocity, and thus we must introduce a mechanical disadvantage, which can only be compensated by a double intensity in the force at its origin. If we apply this estimation of effect to the motion of an overshot wheel, we shall find that the velocity of the wheel, and consequently its breadth, and the magnitude of its buckets, is perfectly indifferent with respect to the value of its operation: for supposing the stream to enter the buckets with the uniform velocity of the wheel, the quantity of water in the wheel at any one time, and consequently the pressure, must be inversely as the velocity, so that the produet of the force into the velocity will be the same, however they may sepurately vary. If, hovever, the velocity were to become very considerable, it vould be necessary to sacrifice a material part of the fall, in order that the water might acquire this velocity beſore its arrival at the wheel; but a fall oſ one foot, or even less, is suſficient for producing any velocity that would be practically convenient: and it is obvious, on the other hand, that a certain velocity may he procured from a wheel moving rapidly, with less machinery than from another which moves more slowly. In geneial the velocity of the surface of the wheel is between two and six ſeet in a second; and vhether it he greater or smaller, the force actually applied will alvays be equal in effect to the weight of a portion of the stream employed, equal in length to the height oſ the wheel. In order to avoid the resistance whieh might be occasioned by the stagnant water below the wheel, ĩt is a good practice to turn the stream backwards upon its nearer half, so that the water, when discharged, may run off in the general direction of its motion. (Ilate XXII. Fig. 290.) If we suffer the stream of water tò acquire the utmost velocity that the whole fall can produce, and to strike horizontally against the ſloatboards of an undershot wheel, or if we wish to employ the foree of a river running in a direction nearly horizontal, the wheel must move, in order to produce the greatest effect, with half the velocity of the stream. For the whole quantity of water impelling the ſloathoards is nearly the same, whatever may he the velocity, especially iſ the wheel is properly inclosed in a narrow channel, and hence it is easy to calculate that the greatest possible effect will be produced vhen the relative velocity of the stream, striking the ſloatboards, is equal to the velocity of the wheel itselfl. The pressure on the ſloathoards is equal to that of a stream containing the same quantity of water, and striking a ſixed obstacle with half the velocity, that is, such a stream as escapes from the wheel, which must be twice as deep or twice as wide as the original stream, since its motion is only one halſ as rapid; and a column of such a stream, of twice the height due to its velocity, that is, oſ half the height of the ſull, being, as we have already seen, the measure of the hydraulic pressure, this force vill be precisely half as great as that oſ a similar eolumn, acting on an overshot wheel, which moves with the sume velocity. But the stream thus retarded vill not retain the other half oſ its mechanical pover; since its greatest eſſcet vill bę in the same proportion to that of an equal stream acting on an overshot wheel with one fourth oſ the fall of the former: and the remaining fourth of the power is lost in producing the change of form of the water and in overcoming its frictionn. In whatever vay we apply the force of water, we shall find that the mechanical pover which it possesoevoL. I. Tt must hbe measured by the produet of the quantity multiplied by the height from which it descends: for example, a hogshead of water capable of descending from a height of I0 feet, possesses the same power as 10 hogsheads descending ſfrom a height of one foot; and a cistern ſilled to the height of I0 feet above its orifice possesses 100 times as much power as the same cistern filled to the height of one foot only. When, therefore, the fall is sufficiently great, an overshot wheel is ſar preferable to an undershot wheel, and where the fall is too small for an overshot vheel, it is most advisable to employ a breast wheel, which partakes oſ its properties; its ſloathoards consisting of two portions meeting at an angle, so as to approach to the nature of buckets, and the water being also in some measure confined vithin them by the assistance of a sweep or arched channel which folIows the curve of the wheel, without coming too nearly into contact with it, 30 as to produce unnecessary frictionn. When the circumstances do not admit even of a breast wheel, we must be contented with an undershot wheel: it is recommended, for such a wheel, that the ſloatboards be so placed as to be perpendicular to the surface of the water at the time that they rise out of it: that only one half of each should ever be helow the surface, and that from three to five should be immersed at once, according to the magnitude of the wheel. Sometimes, however, it has been thought eligible to employ a much smaller number: thus the water wheel which propels Mr. Symingtons steam boat has only six ſloathoards in its whole circumference. (Plate XXII. Fig. 291, 292.) Since the water escaping from an undershot wheel still retains a part of its velocity, it is obvious that this may be employed for turning a second wheel, if it be desirable to preserve as mueh as possible of the forcee In this case, by causing the ſirst wheel to move with two thirds of the velocity of the stream, the whole effect of both will be one third greater than that of a single wheel placed in the same stream; but it must be considered that the expense of the machinery will also be materially increased. Considerable errors have frequently been made by mathematicians and practical mechanics in the estimation of the force of the wind or the water on obligue surfaces: they have generally arisen ſrom inattention to the distine- tion between pressure and mechanical power. It may be demonstrated that the greatest possible pressure of the wind or water, on a given oblique surface at rest, tending to turn it in a direction perpendicular to that of the wind, is obtained when the surface forms an angle of about 55° with the vind; but that the mechanical power of such a pressure, which is to be estimated from a combination of its intensity with the velocity of the surface, may be increased without limit by increasing the angle of inelination, and consequently the velocity. The utmost effect that could be thus ohtained vould he equal to that of the same wind or stream acting on the ſloatboards of an undershot vheel: but since in all practical cases the velocity is limited, the effect will be somewhat smaller than this: for example, if the mean velocity of the sails or floathoards be supposed equal to that of the wind, the mechanical pover will be more than four fifths as great as that of an undershot wheel, that is, in the case of a windmill, more than four ſifths of the utmost efſect that can be obtained from the wind. In such a case Maclaurin has shown that the sails ought to make an angle of 74?with the direction of the wind: but in practice it is found most advantageous to make the angle somewhat greater than this, the velocity of the extremities of the sails being usually, according to Mr. Smeaton, more than twice as great as that of the wind. It appears, therefore, that the oblique sails of the common windmill are in their nature almost as well calculated to make the hest use of any hydraulic force as an undershot vheel; and since they act without intermission throughout their whole revoIution, they have a decided advantage over such machines as require the sails or fans to be exposed to a more limited stream of the wind, during one half only of their motion, which is necessary in the horizontal windmill, where a sereen is employed for covering them while they are moving in a direction contrary to that oſ the wind: and such machines, according to Smeaton, are found to perform little more than one tenth of the work of those which are more usually employed. The sails of a common windmill are frequently made to change their situation according to the direction of the wind, by means of a small wheel, with sails of the same kind, which turns round whenever the wind strikes on either side of it, and drives a pinion turning the whole machinery; the sails are sometimes made to furl or unfurl themselves, according to the velocity of the wind, by means of a revolving pendulum, which rises to a greater or less height, in order to prevent the injury which the flour would suffer from too great a rapidity in the motion, or any other accidents which might happen in a mill of a diſſerent nature. The inelination of the axis of a windmill to the horizon is principally intended to allov room for the action of the vind at the lower part, vhere it would be weakened if the sails came too nearly in contact with the building, as they must do if they were perfectly uprightt. When it is necessary to stop the motion of a windmill, a break is applied to the surface of a large wheel, so that its frietion operates with a considerable mechanical advantage. Water wheels with oblique ſloathoards are sometimes used with good eſfect in China and in the south of rance: for tide wheels, such ſloatboards have the advantage that they may be easily made to tum on a hinge with the stream, so as to impel the wheel in the same direction whether the tide be ſlowing or ebbing. (Plate XXII. Fig. 203.) A smoke jack is a windmill in miniature; a kite affords a very familiar example of the efſeet of the oblique impulse of the air, of which the action first causes a pressure perpendicular to the surface of the kite, and this force, combined vith the resistance of the string, produces a vertical result capable of counteracting the weight of the kite. (Plate XXII. Fig. 2n4.) The counterpressure of the water, occasioned by the escape of a stream from a moveable reservoir, was applied by Parent to the purpose of turning a millstone, and various other authors have deseribed machines of a similar nature: they may be constructed with little or no vheel work, and iĩt does not appear to be necessary that much of the foree of the water should be lost in their operation; but they have never been practically employed with success, nor have they perhaps ever had a fair trial. The art of seamanship depends almost entirely on the management of the forces and resistances of air and water, and ĩf the lavs of hydraulic pressure, with respect to oblique and curved surfaces, were more completely ascertained, we might calculate not only what the motions of a ship would be under any imaginahle circumstances, but we might also determine precisely what would be the best possible form of a ship, and what the best arrangement oſ her rigging. When a ship is sailing imm ediately before the wind, little or no art ĩs required in setting her sails, and her velocity is only limited by that of the wind, and by the resistance of the water: but for sailing with a side wind, it becomes necessary that the immediate force of the wind should be considerably modified. If ve had a circular vessel or tub, with a single mast, and a sail perfectly flat, and if the sail were placed in a direction deviating but little from that of the wind, the tub would begin to move in a direction nearly at right angles to that of the wind, since the impulse oſ the wind acts almost entirely in a direction perpendicular to that of the sail: but the slightest inequality of the dimensions of the sail, or of the force of the wind, wounld immediately disturb the position of the vessel; and in order to avoid this inconvenience, it would be necessary to have a moveable body projecting into the vater, so as to create a resistance by means of which the vessel might be steered, and the sail confined to its proper place: and this might be done more effectually by changing the form of the vessel from round to oval; it would then also have the advantage of moving much more easily through the water in the direction of its length than a circular vessel of equal size, and of creating still more resistance in a transverse direction, so that when urged by an oblique foree, it would move in some measure obliquely, but always much more nearly in the direction of its length than of its breadth. The angular deviation from the track of the ship is called its lee way, and if we know the direction of the sails, and the actual proportions oſ the resistances opposed to the ships motion in different directions, ve may calculate from these resistances the magnitude of the angular deviation or lee way: but hitherto such calculations have generally indicated a lee way three or four times as great as that which has been observed. The use of the keel ĩs not only to assist in confining the motion of the ship to its proper direction, but also to diminish the disposition to vibrate from side to side, which would interfere with the effect of the sails, and produce many other inconveniencess When the principal foree of the wind is applied to the anterior part of the ship, her head would be naturally turned from the vind if the rudder vere not made to project from the stern in a contrary direction, and to present the surface of an inclined plane to the water which glides along the keel, so as to preserve the ship, by means of the pressure which it receives, in any direction that may be required for her manoeuvres. Commonly, however, although the sails may be so arranged that the principal foree of the wind appears to be on the fore part of the ship, the curvature oſ the sails, or some other cause, throws the pressure further hackwards, and the action of the rudder is necessary to prevent the ship's head turning towards the wind. (Plate XXII. Fig 295.) When a ship ĩs steering in this manner on a side wind, the effect oſ the vind has a natural tendency to overset her, and if she is too erank, that is, deficient in stability, she cannot sail well, otherwise than directly before the wind. The place of the centre of gravity, compared with that of the metacentre, or imaginary centre of pressure, determines the degree of stability, and the most general way of increasing it is to lessen the veight of the upper part, and of the rigging of the vessel, to diminish her height, or to increase her breadth, and to stow the ballast as low as possible in the hold. Too little attention has ſrequently been paid to this subject, as well as to many other departments of naval architecture; and although mere theoretical investigations have hitherto been but of little service to the actual practice of seamanship, yet it cannot be doubted that an attention to what has already been discovered of the laws oſ hydrodynamics, as well as to the principles of mechanies in general, must be of great advantage to the navigator, in enabling him to derive from his own experience all the beneſits, which a correct mode of reasoning is capable of procuring him. ON HYDRAULIC MACHINES. WE shall apply the denomination of hydraulic machines to such only, as are intended for counteracting the gravity of water, that is, for raising it from a lower situation to a higher. The simplest of these are buckets, bucket vheels, and friction ropes; moveable pipes are the next in order; and pumps of various kinds constitute the most extensive and the most important part of the subject. Besides these and some other similar machines, hydraulic air vessels and artificial ſfountains vill also require to be examined. A series of earthen pitchers, connected by ropes, and turned by trundles or pinions, over which they pass, has long been used in Spain, under the name of noria: in this country, buckets of wood are sometimes employed in a similar manner. A bucket wheel is the reverse of an overshot waterwheel, and the water may he raised by buckets nearly similar to those which are calculated for receiving it in its descent: sometimes the buckets are hung on pins, so as to remain full during the vhole ascent; but these wheels are liable to be frequently out of repai. Sometimes the reverse of an undershot wheel or rather of a breast wheel, is employed as a throwing wheel, either in a vertical or in an inclined position. Such vheels are frequently used for drain ing fens, and are turned by windmills; the floatboards are not placed in the direction which would be best for an undershot wheel, but on the same principle, so as to be perpendicular to the surface when they rise out of it, in order that the water may the more easily flow oſſ them. (Plate XXII. Fig. 206.. 298.) Instead of a series of buckets connected by ropes or chains, a similar effect is sometimes produced by a simple rope, or a bundle of ropes, passing over a vheel above, and a pulley below, moving vith a velocity of about 8 or 10 feet in a sccond, and drawing a certain quantity of water up by its friction. It is prohable that the water commonly ascends with about half the velocity of the rope, and on this supposition ve might calculate its depth on the rope by comparing its relative motion with that oſ a little river: but the rules, which serve ſor calculating the velocity of rivers, do not perfeetly agree in this case with the results of direct experiments; for the frietion required for elevating the quantity raised by such a machine, appears from calculation to correspond to a velocity about twice as great as the actual relative velocity. While the water is principally supported hy the friction of the rope, its own cohesion is amply suſiicient to prevent its wholly ſalling, or heing scattered, by any accidental inequality of the motion. (Plate XXII. Fig. 299.) The lateral frietion of water has heen applied in a very simple manner by Venturi to the draining of land, by means of a stream which runs through it, allowing the stream to acquire suſſicient velocity to carry it over an inclined surface, and to drag with it a certain portion of water from the lowest part of this surſace: hut the quantity of water raised in this manner must be very inconsiderable, and the loss oſ foree by friction very great. A system of spiral pipes may be placed in the plane of a wheel, receiving the vater at ĩts circumference, and nſng it by degrees, as the wheel turns, towards the axis, where ĩt is discharged; the motion of the wheel being usually derived from the same stream which supplies the pipes: but the height to vhich the vater is raised by this machine is very small in proportion to its bulk. A single pipe wound spirally round a e; linder which revolves on an axis in an oblique situation, has been denominated the serew oſ Archimedes, and is called in Germany the water snail. Its operation, like that of the ſlat spiral, may be easily conceived by imagining a nexible pipe to he laid on an inclined plane, and its lover part to be gradunlly elevated, so that the ſuid in the angle or bend oſ the pipe may be ſorced to rise; or by supposing a tube, formed into a hoop, to be rolled up the same plane, the ſuĩl heing ſoreed by the elevation of the tube behind it to run as it were up hill. This instrument is sometimes made by ſixing a spiral partition round a c;linder, and covering it with an external coating, either of wood or of metal; it should he so placed with respeet to the surſace of the water as to ſill in each turn one half of a convolution; for when the oriſice remains always immersed, its effect is much diminished. It is generally inclined to the horizon in an angle of betveen 45 and 60 degrees; hence it is obvious that its utility is limited to those cases in which the vater is only to be raised to a moderate height. The spiral is seldom single, but usually consists of three or four separate coils, forming a serew which rises slowly round the cylinder. (Plate XXII. Fig. 300, 301.) An instrument of a similar nature ĩs called by the Germans a water screv; it consists of a cylinder with its spiral projections detached from the external cylinder or coating, within which it revolves. This machine might not improperly be considered as a pump, but its operation is precisely similar to that of the screw of Archimedes. It is evident that some loss must here Le occasioned by the want of perfect contact between the screw and its cover; in general, at least one third of the water runs back, and the machine cannot be placed at a greater elevation than 30°; it is also very easily clogged by accidental impurities of the water: yet it has been found to raise more vater than the screw of Archimedes, when the lower ends of both are immersed to a considerable depth; so that if the height of the surface of the water to be raised were liable to any great variations, the water screw might be preferable to the screw of Archimedess (Plate XXII. Fig. 502.) When a spiral pipe, consisting of many convolutions, arranged either in a single plane, or in a cylindrical or conical surface, and revolving round a horizontal axis, is connected at one end by a watertight joint with an ascending pipe, while the other end receives during each revolution nearly equal quantities of air and water, the machine is called a spiral pump. It vas invented about 1746, by Andrew Wirtz, a pewterer at Zurich, and it is said to have been used with great success at Florence and in Russia: it has also been employed in this country by Lord Stanhope, and I have made trial of it for raising water to a height of forty feett. The end of the pipe is furnished with a spoon, containing as much water as will fill half a coil, vhich enters the pipe a little before the spoon has arrived at iĩts highest situation, the other half remaining full of air, which communicates the pressure of the column of vater to the preceding portion, and in this manner the effect of nearly all the water in the wheel is united, and becomes equivalent to that of the covoL I. vu Iumn of water, or of water mixed with air, in the ascending pipe. The air nearest the joint is compressed into a spuce much smaller than that which it occupied at its entrance, s0 that vhere the height is considerable, it hecomes advisable to admit a larger portion of air than would naturally ĩll half the coil, and this lessens the quantity of water raised, but ĩt lessens also the force required to turn the machinee. The joint ought to be conical, in order that it may be tightened when it becomes loose, and the pressure ought to be removed from ĩt as much as possiblee The loas of power, supposing the machine well constructed, arises only frum the ſriction of the water on the pipe, and the friction of the wheel on its axis; and where a large quantity of water is to be raised to a moderate height, both of these resistances may be rendered inconsiderablee But when the height is very great, the length of the spiral must be mueh inereased, s0 that the weight of the pipe becomes extremely cumhersome, and causes a great frietion on the axis, as well as a strain on the machinery: thus, fur a height oſ 40 feet, I found that the wheel required above I00 feet of a pipe which was three quarters of an inch in diameter; and more than one half of the pipe being always full of vater, ve have to overcome the frietion of about 50 feet of such a pipe, which will require 24 times as much excess of pressure to produce a given velocity, as if there were no ſriction. The centrifugal force of the water in the wheel would also materially impede its ascent if the velocity vere considerable, since it would be alvays possible to turn it so rapidly as to throw the whole water back into the spoon. The machine which I had erected being out of repair, I thought it more eligible to substitute for ita common forcing pump, than to attempt to make any further improvement in jt, under circumstances so unfavourable. But if the wheel with its pipes were entirely made of wood, it might in many cases succeed better: or the pipes might be made of tinned copper, or even of earthenware, vhich might be cheaper and lighter than lead. (Plate XXII. Fig. 508.) l The centrifugal force, which is an impediment to the operation of Wirtæ's machines, has sometimes been employed, together with the pressure of the atmosphere, as an immediate agent in mising water, by means oſ the rotatory pump. This machine consists of a vertical pipe, caused to revolve round its axis, and connected above with a horizontĩl pipe, which is open at one or at both ends, the whole being furnished with proper valves to prevent the escape of the water when the machine is at rest. As soon as the rotation becomes sufficiently rapid, the centrifugal foree of the water in the horizontal pipe causes it to be discharged at the end, its place being supplicd by means oſ the pressure of the atmosphere on the reservoir below, which forces the water to ascend through the vertical pipe. It has also heen proposed to turn a machine of this kind by the counterpressure of another portion of water, in the manner of Parent's mill, where there is fall enough to carry it off. This machine may be so arranged that, according to theory, little of the force applied may be lost; but it has failed of producing in practice a very advantageous effect. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 304.) A pump is a machine so well known, and so generally used, that the denomination has not uncommonly been extended to hydraulic machines of all kinds; but the term, in its strictest sense, is to be understood of thosc machines, in which the water is raised by the motion of one solid within another, and this motion is usually alternate, but sometimes continued so as to constitute a rotationn. In all the pumps most commonly used, a cavity is enlarged and contracted by turns, the water being admitted into it through one valve, and discharged through another. One of the simplest pumps, for raising a large quantity of water to a small height, is made by fitting two upright beams or plungers, of equal thickness throughout, into cavities nearly of the same size, allowing them only room to move vithout frietion, and connecting the plungers by a horizontal beam moving on a pivot. The vater heing admitted, during the ascent of each plunger, by a large valve in the huttom of the cavity, it is forced, when the plunger descends, to escape through a second valve in the side of the cavity, and to ascend by a wide pipe to the level of the beam. The plungers ought not to be in any degree tapered, hecause oſ the great foree which would be unnecessarily consumed, in continually throwing out the water, vith great velocity, as they descend, from the interstice formed by their elevation. This pump may be worked by a labourer, walking backwards and forwaris, either on the heam or on a board suspended helow it. By means of an apparatus of this ind, deseribed by Profesor Robison, an active man, loaded with a weight of thirty pounds, has heen able to raise 580 pounds of vater every minute, to a height of 11feet, for ten hours a day, vithout fſatigue; this is the greatest eſſect produced by a labourer that has ever been correctly stated by any author; it is equi- valent to somewhat more than I1 pounds raised through I0 feet in a second, instead of I0 pounds, which is a fair estimate of the usual force of a man, without any deduetion for frietion. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 305.) It is ohvious that if the plungers were so vell ſitted to the cavity as to prevent the escape of any water between them, the ascending pipe might convey the vater to any required height; the machine would then become a forcing pump, and the plungers might be shortened at pleasure, so as to assume the form of a piston sliding within a barrel. The piston might also be situated above the level of the reservoir, and in this case the vater would be forced up after it by the pressure of the atmosphere to the height of about 30 feet, but not much further: and even this height vould be somewhat too great for practice, because the water might sometimes follow the piston in its ascent too slowly. Such a pump, partaking of the nature of a forcing and a sucking pump, is sometimes called a mixed pump. In Delahire's pump, the same piston is made to serve a double purpose, the rod vorking in a collur of leathers, and the water being admitted and expelled in a similar manner, above and below the piston, by means of a double apparatus of valves and pipes. Plate XXIII. Fig. 506.) For forcing pumps of all kinds, the common piston, with a collar of loose and elastic leather, is preferable to those of a more complicated structure: the pressure of the vater on the inside of the leather makes it sufficiently tight, and the frietion is inconsiderable In some pumps the leather is omitted, for the sake of simplicity, the loss of water being compensated by the greater durability oſ the pump; and this loss will be the smaller in proportion as the motion of the piston is more rapid. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 507.) Mr. Bramah has very ingeniously applied a forcing pump, by means of the vell known properties of hydrostatic pressure, to the construction of a convenient and poverful press. The water is forced, by a small pump, into a barrel in which it acts on a much larger piston; consequently this piston ĩs urged by a force as much greater than that which acts on the ſirst pump rod, as its surface is greater than that of the small one. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 308.) In the common sucking pump, the valve through which the water escapes is placed within the piston itself, so that the same harrel serves for the ascent of the vater, which rises in one continued line, while the piston is raised, and rests on the ſixed valve while it is depressed. The velocity of the stroke ought never to be less than 4 inches in a second, nor greater than two or three feet; the stroke should also be as long as possible, in order to avoid unnecessary loss of water during the descent of the valves. The diameter of the pipe, through which the water rises to the barrel, ought not to be less than two thirds of the diameter of the barrel itself. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 5309.) A bag of leather has also been employed for connecting the piston of a pump with the harrel, and in this manner nearly avoiding all friction: but it is probable that the want of durability would be a great objection to such a machine. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 310.) Where the height, through which the vater is to be raised, is considerable, some inconvenience might arise from the length oſ the barrel through which the piston rod of a sucking pump ould have to descend, in order that the piston might remain within the limits of atmospheric pressuree This may be avoided hy placing the moveable valve below the fixed valve, and introducing the piston at the hottom of the barrel. Such a machine is called a lifting pump: in common vith other forcing pumps, it has the disadvantage of thrusting the piston before the rod, and thus tending to bend the rod, and produce an unequal friction on the piston, while, in the sucking pump, the principal force alvays tends to straighten the rod.. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 31l.) The rod of a sucking pump may also he made to vork in a collar of leather, and the water may be forced through a valve into an ascending pipe. By applying an air vessel to this, or to any other forcing pump, its motion may be equalised, and its performance improved; for if the orifice of the air vessel be sufficiently large, the water may be forced into it, during the stroke of the pump, with any velocity that may be required, and with little resistance from friction, while the loss of force, from the fiequent accelerations and retardations of the whole body of water, in a long pipe, must always be considerablee. The condensed air, reacting on the water, expels it more grodually, and in a continual stream, so that the air vessel has an effect analogous to that of a ſly wheel in mechaniess. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 312.) If, instead of foreing the vater to a certain height through a pipe, we cause it to form a detached jet, ve convert the forcing pump into a fire engine; and in general to barrels, acting alternately, are connecteqd, for this purpose, ith the same air vessel; so that the discharge is thus rendered very nearly uniform. The form of the ajutage, or orifice oſ the pipe, is hy no means indifferent to the effect of the machine, since the height oſ the jet may be much increased by making it moderately contracted, and a little conical rather than cylindrica. When the air vessel is half ſilled with water, the height of such a jet will be about 50 feet, vhen two thirds ſilled, about 60, the height being always nearly proportional to the degree of condensation of the air, or to the cxcess of its density above that of the surrounding atmosphere. Sometimes a double forcing pump, or fire engine, is formed by the alternate rotatory motion of a flat piston within a eylindrical barrel; the axis oſ jts motion coinciding with that of the barrel, and the harrel being divided hy a partition into two cavities, which are filled and emptied in the same vay as the separate barrels oſ the common fire engine. The mechanical advantage of this machine is nearly the same as that of the more usual constructions, but it appears to be somewhat more simple than a common engine of equal forcee. The partition may be extended throughout the diameter of the cylinder, the opposite pairs of cavities being made to communicate with each other, and thus hoth sides oſ the piston may he employed at oncee (Plate XXIII. Fig. 18.) A piston placed in a similar manner has sometimes heen made to revolve continually, and to force the water through a pipe by means of a slider or a spring, vhich intercepts ĩts passage in any other direction. Machines of this kind have been invented and reinvented, by Ramelli, Cavalleri, Amontons, Prince Rupert, Dr. Ilooke, Mr. Bramah, and Mr. Gwynn. Mr. Gwynn's engine, which has heen employed in many cases with eonsiderable success, consists oſ a piston or roller nearly elliptical, vell fitted to the eylinder within which it revolves, with a valve pressed lightly against it hy a spring, which eauses a considerable part of the water contained in the cy linder to be foreed in each revolution into the pipe: the whole machine is made of brass; the pring requires very little force, ſor the pressure oſ the water on the valve Feeps it alvays elose to the roller, anl the frietion arising from this cause is even an objection to the machine. The stream, although never vholly intermitted, is, however, by no means uniform in ĩts velocity. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 314.. 317) The pipes, through which water is raised, by pumps of any kind, ought to be as short and as straight as possible; thus, if ve had to raise water to a height of ę0 feet, and to carry it to a horizontal distance of 100 by means of a forcing pump, it would be more advantageous to raise it first vertically intoa cistern 20 feet ubove the reservoir, and then to let it run along horizontally, or ſind its level in a hent pipe, than to connect the pump immediately with a single pipe earried to the place of its destination And for the same reason a sucking pump should be placed as nearly over the vell as possible, in order to avoid a loss of force in vorking it. If very small pipes are used, they will much increuse the resistance, by the frietion which they occasion. Water has been sometimes raised by stuffed cushions, or by oval blocks of wood, connected with an endless rope, and caused by means of two wheels or drums, to rise in succession in the same barrel, carrying the water in a continual stream before them; but the magnitude of the friction of the cushions appears to be an objection to this method. From the resemblance of the apparatus to a string of beads, it has been called a bead pump, or a paternoster vork. When ſlat boards are united by chains, and employed instead of these cushions, the machine may be denominated a cellular pump; and in this case the barrel is usually square, and placed in an inclined position, but there is a considerahle loss from the facility with which the water runs hack. The chain pump generally used in the navy is a pump of this Kind, with an upright harrel, through which leathers, strung on a chain, are drawn in constant succession; these pumps are only employed, when a large quantity of water is to be raised, and they must be worked with considerable velocity in order to produce any effect at al. Mr. Cole has improved the construction of the chain pump, s0 as materially to increase the quantity of water raised by it. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 518.) It is frequently necessary to procure alternate motion in pumps by means of wheelvork, and for this purpnse the application of a crank is the most usual and perhaps the best method. Provided that the bar by whicl it acts be sufſiciently long, very little will be lost by the obliquity of its situation, and it is easy, by means of rollers, or of a compound frame, to confine the head of the pump rod to a rectilinear motion. When any other mode is employed, it must be remembered that the motion of the pump rod ought always to be slower at the beginning of each alternation, since a considerable part of the force is consumed in setting the water in motion, especially where the pipe is long, and the velocity considerable. But it may happen that, from the nature of hydraulic pressure under other circumstances, the resistance may be nearly equal throughout the stroke: for example, when the motion of the piston is slow in comparison of that of the water in the pipe, or when the force employed in producing velocity is inconsiderable, in comparison with that which is required for counteracting the pressuree In such cases it may sometimes be eligible to employ inclined surfaces, of such forms as are best adapted to communicate the most advantageous velocity to the pump rod by their pressure on a roller, which may be conſined to its proper direction by the same means as when a crank is used. (Plate XIV. Fig. 184.. 187.) The Chinese work their cellular pumps, or bead pumps, by walking on bars which projeet from the axis of the wheel or drum that drives them, and vhatever objection may be made to the choice of the machine, the mode of communicating motion to it must be allowed to he advantageous. Pumps have sometimes been vorked hy means of the weight of ater acting vithin a barrel, which resembles a second pump placed in an inverted position. The only ohjection to the machine appears to be the magnitude of the friction, and even this inconvenience may perhaps be inconsiderable. The invention is by no means modern, hut it is best known in Germany under the name of Hõll's machine, and it has been introduced into this country by Mr. Westgarth anid Mr. Trevithick. A chain pump, or a series of buckets, may also be applied, in a manner nearly similar, to the working of machinery of any kind. (late XXIII. Fig. 519.) The mediation of a portion of air is employed for raising water, not only in the spiral pump, but also in the air vessels of Schemnitz. A column of water, descending through a pipe into a closed reservoir, full of air, obliges the air to act, by means of a pipe, leading from the upper part of the reservoir or air vessel, on the water in a sccond reservoir, at any distance either below or above it, and forces this water to ascend through a third pipe to any height less than that of the first column. The air vessel is then emptied, and the second reservoir filled, and the whole operation is repeatedl. The air must, however, acquire a density equivalent to the pressure, before it can begin to act; s0 that if the height of the columns were 34 feet, it must be reduced to half its dimensions before any water would he raised; and thus half of the force would be Iost; in the same manner, if the height were 68 feet, two thirds of the force would he lost. But where the height is small, the force lost in this manner is not greater than that which is usually spent in overcoming friction and other imperfections of the machinery employed; for the quantity of water, actually raised by any machine, is not often greater than half the power which is consumed. The foree of the tide, or of a river rising and falling vith the tide, might easily he applied by a machine of this kind, to the purposes of irrigationn. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 520, 321.) The fountain o? Hero precisely resembles in its operation the hydraulie vessels of Schemnitz, which were probably suggested to their inventor by the construction of this fountain. The first reservoir of the fountain is lower than the orifice of the jet; a pipe descends from it to the air vessel, which is at some distance below, and the pressure of the air is communicated, by an ascending tube, to a third cavity, containing the water which supplies the jett. Many other hydraulic and pneumatic instruments, intended for amusement only, and some of them of much more complicated structure, are also described in the works of Heroo. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 5329.) The spontaneous vicissitudes of the pressure of the air, occasioned by changes in the weight and temperature of the atmosphere, have been applied, by means of a series of reservoirs, furnished with proper valves, to the purpose of raising water hy degrees to a moderate height. But it seldom happens that such changes are capable of producing an elevation in the water of each reservoir of more than a few inches, or at most a foot or two, in a day: and the whole quantity raised must, therefore, be very inconsiderable. The momentum of a stream of water, flowing through a long pipe, has also been employed for raising a small quantity of water to a considerable height. vOoL. I. x x LECTURE XXVIII. The passage of the pipe heing stopped by a valve, which is raised by the stream, as soon as its motion becomes suſſiciently rapid, the whole column of fluid must necessarily concentrate its action almost instantaneously on the valve;. and in this manner it loses, as we have before observed, the characteristic property of hydraulic pressure, and acts as if it were a single solid; so that, supposing the pipe to be perfectly elastic, and inextensihle, the impulse must overcome any pressure, however great, that might he opposed to it, and if the valve open into a pipe leading to an air vessel, a certain quantity of the water will be forced in, s0 as to condense the air, more or less rapidly, to the degree that may be required, for raising a portion of the water contained in it, to any given height. Mr. Whitehurst appears to have been the ſirst that employed this method: it was afterwards improved by Mr. Boulton; and the same machine has lately attracted much attention in France under the denomination oſ the hydraulic ram of Mr. Montgolfier. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 523.) LECTURE XXIX. ON PNEUMATIC MACHINES. PNEUMATIC machines are such as are principally dependent, in their operation, upon the properties of elastic ſluids; they may be calculated either for diminishing or increasing. their density and pressure, as air pumps and condensers; or for directing and applying their force, as bellows, ventilators, steam engines, and guns. The density and pressure of the air may be ſiminisheã, or the air may be perfectly or very nearly vithdravn from a given space, either by means of a column of mercury, or by the air pump. The ancients sometimes exhausted a vessel imperfectly hy the repeated action of the mouth, and preserved the rarefaction by the assistance of a stopcock. The Torricellian vacuum, obtained by inverting a receiver ſilled with mercury, and furnished with a descending tube at least 30 inches long, is the most perfect that can be procured; but there is generally a portion of air adhering to the vessels, and mixed with the mercury, which may often be considerably diminished by agitation, but can only be completely expelled by boiling the mercury for some time in the vessel and its tube, previously to their inversion. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 524.) The construction of an air pump greatly resembles that of a common sucking pump for raising water; but the difference in the operation to be performed requires a difference in several particular arrangements. The objects are, to rarefy or exhaust the air as completely, as expeditiously, and as easily, as possiblee In order that the exhaustion may be complete, it is necessary that no air remain in the barrel when the valve is opened, and that the process be very long continued. For, supposing all the parts of an air pump to be perfectly well fitted, and the exhaustion to be carried on for any length of time, the limit of its perſection will be a rarefaction expressed by the proportion of the air remaining in the barrel, when the piston is down, to the whole air that the barrel is capable of containing; for such will be the rarity of the air in the barrel vhen the piston is raised. It becomes, therefore, of consequence to lessen the quantity of this residual air as much as possible; and at the same time to take carę that the valve may be capable of being accurately closed and easily opened, or that a stopcock may be occasionally substituted for it, vhich may be opened and shut by external force, vhen the elasticity oſ the air remaining is too small to lift the valvee. In pumping water from a vell, we raise an equal quantity at each stroke, but in the air pump, ve vithdrav at most only equal bulks of the air differently rarefied, s0 that the quantity extracted is continually diminished as the operation proceeds. Thus, if one tenth of the air vere exhausted by the first stroke, only nine tenths as much, that is, one tenth of the remainder, would be drawn out by the second; hence, in order that the process may bhe expeditious, it is of importance to have the barrel as large as possible in proportion to the teceiver. In cases where the presence of aqueous vapour vould be of no consequence, the exhaustion might be made very rapidly by filling the whole apparatus with water, vhich was the method ſirst employed by Otto von Guericke, the inventor of the modern air pump. In order to lessen the labour of the operation, two harrels may be employed, and s0 connected as to work alternately; in this manner the pressure of the atmosphere, acting on both pistons at once, opposes no resistance to their motion in either direction. In Smeaton's pump a single barrel has nearly the same advantage, the rod of the piston working in a collar of leathers with oil, and the air being excluded from the upper purt of the barrel by a valve, through which the air passes when the piston is raised near to the top; so that in the descent of the piston there is a vacuum above it, and the air below opens the valve much earlier, and passes more completely through it, than in the common air pump; and the piston is only exposed to the whole pressure of the atmosphere during the discharge of the air through the upper valvee (Plate XXIV. Tig. 525.) That the air is really removed by the operation of the air pump, may be demonstrated by various experiments, which show the absence oſ its resist2 ance, oſ its buoyant effect, and of ĩts pressure; such are the descent of a guinea and a feather at the same time, the equal duration of the motion of two ſfly wheels, with their plates placed in different directions, the preponderance of the larger of two bodies which balance each other in the open air, the descent of mercury or of water in a barometrical tube, the playing of a fountain urged by the expansion of a portion of conſined air, and the ebullition of ether, or of water moderately varmm. (Pate XXIV. Fig. 326, 397.) The degree of perfection of the vacuum formed by the air pump, or the rarity of the air remaining in the receiver, is measured hy gages of diſferent Kindss. The simplest gage is a short tube ſilled with mereury, and inverted in a hason of the same ſluid: in this the mercury hegins to descend when the elasticity of the air becomes diminished in the proportion of the height of the gage to that of the barometer; but on account of the capillary attraction of the particles of mercury for each other, there is a depression within the tube, differing in quantity according to its magnitude, which renders it difficult to observe the exact situation of the surface when the height of the column is very small, although, if that height were correctly ascertained, the allowance to be made for the depression might easily be calculated. It is, however, more usual to employ the long barometer gage, in which the pressure is removed ſrom the upper surface of the column of mercury in proportion as the exhaustion proceeds, and the height to which it is raised by the pressure of the external atmosphere, is compared vith that of a common barometer, the difference alvays indicating the density of the air left in the receiver. Sometimes also a hent tube is employed instead of the short gage, the difference of the height in its two branches indicating the pressure; and this instrument has the advantage of requiring no correction on account of capillary attraction, since the depressions of the two coIumns exactly counterbalance each other. But in all these cases the mercury must be well boiled in the tubes; and in the bent tube, or siphon gage, the operation is somevhat difficult. The pressure indicated by a gage of any kind depends on the elasticity of the whole of the ſluid remaining in the receiver; but this ſluid is not always atmospheric air alonee. In all common temperatures, vater, 5342 ] LECTURE XXIX. and many other liquids, have the property of emitting a vapour which possesses a very sensible degree of elasticity; so that if either water, or any moist substance, be present under the receiver, it will be impossible to procure a total ahsence of pressure, the short mercurial gage commonly standing at the height of at least half an inch, in the best pumps. Hence, the vacuum may be made more perfect when the receiver is ground to the plate of the pump, with the interposition of an unctuous substance, than when it is placed on vet leather, as it has sometimes been usual to do. The quantity of atmospherical or incondensable air actually existing in the receiver, whether mixed with vapour or alone, is measured by means of Smeaton's pear gage, which is leſt open under the receiver during the exhaustion, and having its orifice then plunged, by means of a wire passing through a collar oſ leather, into a bason of mercury, receives, upon the readmission of the air, as much of the mercury as is sufficient to ſill it, leaving only in a tube rising from the neek of the gage, the small quantity of air which had before filled the whole cavity, so that from the space occupied by this air, compared, by means of previous measurements, with the eapacity of the gage, the degree of exhaustion of the pump with respect to air may be estimated. It is said that in an air pump of Cuthbertson's construetion, sucha rarefaction has been procured that the air sustained but one hundredth part of an inch of mercury, that is, it was expanded to nearly 3000 times its origiual bulk. The pear gage often indicates a much more complete exhaustion, but this measurement relates only to the quantity of dry air present. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 528.) A condenser is the reverse of an air pump; and sometimes the same machine is made to serve for both purposes; but the condenser requires more strength than the air pump, and less delicacy The gage for measuring the degree of condensation is a small portion of air contained in a graduated cylindrical tube, the space that it occupies heing indicated by a drop of mereury vhich confines it. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 529.) Diving bells were formerly supplied with air by means of harrels let down continually from the surface of the water, and taken into the hell by the divers; but it is now more usual to force down a constant stream by means of a pump resembling a condenser in its construction and operation: the heated air is suſferod to escape by a stopcock at the upper part of the bell. When proper care is tuken to lower the machine gradually, the diver can support the pressure of an atmosphere of twice or thrice the natural density. It would be advisable that every diver should be provided with a float of cork, or with a hollow hall of metal, vhich might be suſficient to raise him slowly to the surface, in case of any accident happening to the bell; for vant of a precaution of this kind, several lives have been lost from confusion in the signals. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 350.) Bellows are commonly made of boards connected hy leather, so as to allow of alternately increasing and diminishing the magnitude of their cavities, the air being supplied frõm without by a valve. The blast must be intermitted while the cavity is replenished; and in order to avoid this inconvenience, a second cavity is sometimes added, and loaded with a weight, which preserves the continuity of the stream. If great uniformity be required in the blast, it will he necessary to take care that the cavity be so formed as to be equally diminished while the weight descends through equal spaces; but notwithstanding ſhis precaution, there must alwvays be an additional velocity while the new supply of air is entering from the first cavity. Sometimes the construetion of the bellows resembles that of a forcing pump; and then, if the harrel is single, a second barrel, loaded with a weight, must be provided, in order to equalise the blast: or a vessel inverted in vater, and either loaded or ſixcd, may supply the place of the second barre. The ſirst cavity may also be formed of a similar inverted vessel, suspended to a heam, so as to be moved up and down in the water, and such a machine is much used, in large founderies, under the name of hydraulic bellows. The quantity of water employed may be much diminished, and the operation expedited, by introdueing, in the centre of the inverted vessel, a ſixed solid, or an internal inverted vessel, capable of nearly ſillimg up the cavity of the moveable vessel when it is in its lowest position, so that the water only occupies a part oſ the interstice between the vesselss. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 351.) The gasometer differs little from the hydraulic bellows, except that it is provided vith stopeocks instead of valves, and the moveable cylinder is supported by a counterpoise, which, in the best kind, acts on a spiral fusee, 5 calculated to correct the difference of pressure arising from the greater or less immersion of the cylinder. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 552.) A shover of water, or even an irregular stream, being conveyed through a descending pipe, plunged into the water of a reservoir, a large quantity of air is carried down with the vater, and rises to the upper part of an inverted vessel which surrounds the pipe, whence it may be conveyed through another pipe, in a rapid stream, for any required purpose; and the water escapes at the bottom of the air vessel into the general reservoir, from the surface of which it runs off. The quantity of air supplied by these shower bellows is, however, small. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 333.) The velocity of the blast produced by any pressure, forcing the air through a pipe of moderate dimensions, may readily be determined from the height of a column of air equivalent to the pressuree Thus, if the hydraulic bellows were worked with a constant pressure of 4 feet of water, the velocity would correspond to a height of about 3300 feet, and the air would move through a space of about 460 feet in a second. But in this caleulation no allowance is made for any of the causes which diminish in all cases the discharge of fluids, and the velocity actually observed is only ſive eighths as great as that which corresponds to the height; that is, in the example here given, 285 feet in a second, when the air escapes through a small orifice; but vhen it moves in a pipe, about three fourths, or 345 feet. If the pipe vere of considerable length, there would also he a diminution of velocity on account of friction. In some bellows actually employed, a pressure equivalent to ꝗ feet of water is applied, and in this case the velocity must be about 500 feet in a second. Bellows may be used for the ventilation of a mine, either by forcing air into it, or by drawing it out through a pipe connected with the valve. The wind may also be received by the mouth of a tube a little conical, and may be made to cause a current where it is conveyed; such an instrument is sometimes called a windsail, or a horse head. It has been proposed to draw the air up through a pipe by the lateral friction of a current of air received by such a fumel, but the effect would probubly be 100 small to be of much practical utility. A corn fan is turned by the hand, or by machinery; its simplest operation is to cause a portion of air to revolve with it, and to ereate a wind in the direction of its circumferencee But when a small fan is made to revolve with great rapidity, as in Papin's Hessian bellows, the centrifugal force causes the air admitted at the centre to rush towards the circumference, and to pass with great velocity through a pipe inserted there. The common ventilator placed in windows, which revolves in the same manner as a smoke jack, in consequence of the impulse of a current of air, serves only to retard a little the entrance of that current, to disperse it in some measure in different directions, and to prevent any sudden increase of the intensity of the draught; but it has little or no power of acting on the air, so as to prevent the decrease of the velocity of the current. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 334.) The operation of heat affords us also a very effectual mode of ventilation. Its action upon air at common temperatures occasions an expansion of about 44 for every degree that Falirenheit's thermometer is ruised; the air becomes in the same proportion lighter, and the ſluid belov it is consequently relieved from a part of its weight: the pressure of the surrounding atmosphere, therefore, preponderates, and the lighter column is forced upwards. When the shaft of a mine communicates with the external air at two diſferent heights, there is generally a sufficient ventilation from the difference of the temperatures of the air in the shaft, and of the surrounding atmosphere: for the temperature of the earth is nearly invariahle, it therefore causes ſhe air in the shaft to be varmer in vinter than the external air, and colder in summer; so that there is a current upwards in winter, and downwards in summer; and in the more temperate seasons, the alternations take place in the course of the day and night. For a similar reason, there is often a current down a common chimney in summer; but vhen the ſire is burning, the vhole air oſ the chimney is heated, and ascends the more rapidly as the height is greater. It would be easy, from the principles of hydraulics, if the length of the chimney, and the mean temperature of the air in it were given, to calculate the velocity of the draught; thus, i the height of the chimney were 50 feet, and the air contained in it 10 degrees hotter than the external air, the expansion vould he one ſiſtieth, and the pressure of the whole column being diminished one ſiftieth, the difference would be equivalent to a column of one foot in height, voL. I. Yy and such a column would represent the pressure causing the draught, which might, therefore, be expected to have a velocity of 6 feet in a second. If the room were perfectly elosed, the air contained in it vould by degrees become so much lighter than the external air, as vould be equivalent to one foot oſ the height of the column causing the pressure, and the current would then stop; if fresh air were gradually admitted by a small orifice, the current would again go on, but the air in the room would always remain somewhat rarer than the external atmosphere, unless a fresh supply were admitted through ample openings. The object of a chimney is not so much to ventilate the room, as to provide a sufficiently rapid supply of air for maintaining the process of combustion, and to carry off the products of that process: hence, it is desirable to allow as little air as possible to enter the chimney vithout passing through the fire; and this is the best general mode of avoiding smoky chimnies. For wind furnaces, the ſlue should be as equable as possible, throughout its height, or widened rather than contracted in its ascent, and free from any considerable angles. The ascent of a halloon is an eſfect of the same kind as that of air in a chimney, and arises sometimes from the same cause, when the air within it is expanded by heat; but more commonly from the greater rarity of hydrògen gas, with which the halloon iĩs filled, and which, when pure, is only one thirteenth as heavy as atmospherical air, but as it is commonly used, about one fifth or one sixth. The steam engine is perhaps the most magniſicent eſſort of mechanical pover; it has undergone suecessive changes, and it appears to have been brought very near to perfection by the improvements of Mr. Watt. The pressure of stcam was ſirst applied by the Marquis of Worcester, and afterwards by Savery, to act immediately on the surface of water contained in a close vessel, and this water was foreed, by the elasticity of the steam, to ascend through a pipe. But a great degree of heat vas required for raising water to any considerable height by this machine: for, in order that steam may be made capable of supporting, in addition to the atmospherical pressure, a column of 54 feet of ater, ĩts temperature must be raised to 248° of Fahen- heit, and for a column of 68 feet, to 271; such a pressure, also, acting on the internal surface of the vessels, made it necessary that they should he extremely strong; and the height to which water could he drawn up from below, when the steam was condensed, was limited to 33 or 34 feet. A still greater objection was, however, the great quantity of steam necessarily wasted, on account of its coming into contact with the cold water and the receiver, the surfaces of which required to be heated to its own temperature, before the water could be expelled; hence a tenth or a twentieth part only of the steam produced could be effective; and there would probably have been a still greater loss, but for the difficulty with which heat is conducted downwards in ſluids. These inconveniences vere in great measure avoided in Newcomens engine, vhere the steam was gradually introduced into a cylinder, and suddenly condensed by a jet of vater, so that the piston was forced down with great violence by the pressure of the atmosphere, which produced the effective stroke: this effect was, however, partly employed in raising a counterpoise, which descended upon the readmission of the steam, and worked a forcing pump in its return, vhen water was to be raised. The condensation, although rapid, was, however, neither instantaneous, nor complete, for the water injected into the cylinder had its temperature considerably raised by the heat emitted by the steam during its condensation; it could only reduce the remaining steam to its own temperature, and at this temperature it might still retain a certain degree of elasticity; thus, at the temperature of 1I80° steam is found to be capable of sustaining about half the pressure of the atmosphere, so that the depression of the piston must have been considerably retarded hy the remaining elasticity of the steam, when the vater was much heatedl. The water of the jet as let oſf when the piston was lowest, and was afterwards pumped up to serve the boiler, as it had the advantage of being already hot. This engine, vith Beighton's apparatus for turning the cocks, was until lately in general use, and it is still very frequently employed. In this, as well as in other steam engines, the boiler is furnished vitha saſety valve, which is raised when the ſorce of the steam becomes a little greater than that of the atmospheric pressure; and it is supplied with vater hy means of another valve, which is opened, when the surface of the water within it ſalls too low, by the depression of a block of stone, vhich is partly supported by the water. (Plate XXIV. Tig. 385, 356.) The eylinder of Beighton's machine is necessarily much cooled by the admission of the jet, and by exposure to the air. Mr. Watt has avoided this inconvenience by performing the condensation in a separate vessel, into which a small jet is lowing without intermission; and by introducing the steam alternately above and below the piston, the external air is wholly exeluded; the piston rod working in a collar of leathers, so that the machine has a double action, somevhat resembling that of Luhire's double pump; and the stroke being equally effectual in each direction, the same eylinder, by means of an increased quantity of steam, performs twice as much work as in the common engine. We might also employ, if ve thought proper, a lower temperature than that at which water usually boils, and vork in this manner with a smaller quantity of steam; but there would be some difficulty in completely preventing the insinuation of the common air. On the other hand, we may raise the fire so as to furnish steam at 220° or more, and thus obtain a power sumewhat greater than that of the atmospheric pressure; and this is found to be the most advantageous mode of vorking the engine; but the excess of the force above the atmospheric pressure cannot be greater than that which is equivalent to the column of water descending to supply the boiler, since the water could not be regularly admitted in opposition to such a pressure. The steam might also be allowed to expand itself within the eyIinder for some time after its admission, and in this manner it appears from calculation that much more foree might be obtained from it than if it were condensed in the usual manner as soon as its admission ceases; but the force of steam thus expanding is much diminished by the cold which alvays accompanies such an expansion, and this method would be liable to several other practical inconveniences. The peculiarities of Mr. Watt's construetion require also some other additional arrangements; thus, it is necessary to have a pump, to raise not only the water out of the condenser, but also the air, which is always extricated from the water during the process of boiling. If the vater employed has been obtained from deep wells or mines, it contains more air than usual, and ought to be exposed for some time in an open reservoir before it is used; for it appears that the quantity of air, vhich can be contained in water, is nearly in proportion to the pressure to which it is subjected. The admission of the steam into the eylinder is regulated by the action of a double revolving pendulum. The piston is preserved in a situation very nearly vertical by means of a moveable parallelogram, fixed on the beam, which corrects its curvilinear motion by a contrary curvature. In the old engines, a chain working on an arch was suſficient, because there vas no thrust upwardss. When a rotatory motion is required, it may be obtained either by means of a crank, or of a sun and planet vheel, with the assistance of a fly wheel; this machinery is generally applied to the opposite end of the beam; but it is sometimes immediately connected vith the piston, and the beam is not employed. The cylinder is usually inclosed within a case, and the interval is filled with steam, which serves to conſine the heat very effectually. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 557.) The steam engines of Messrs. Boulton and Watt are said to save three fourths of the fuel formerly used; and it appears that only one fourth of the whole force of the steam is wastedl. Such a machine, with a thirty inch cylinder, performs the work of 120 horses, vorking 8 hours each in the day. When the water producing the condensation is to be raised from a great depth, a considerable force is sometimes lost in pumping it up. Hence, Mtr. Trevithick has attempted, as Mr. Watt had indeed long before proposed, to avoid entirely the necessity of condensation, by employing steam at a very high temperature, and allowing it to escape, when its elasticity is 50 reduced by expansion, as only to equal that of the almosphere: the air pump is also unnecessary in this construction, and for a small machine, it may perhaps succeed tolerably wel. But there must always be a very considerable loss of steam, and although the expense of fuel may not be increased quite in the same proportion as the elasticity of the steam, yet the diſference is probably inconsiderable: A great number of less essential alterations have also been made in Mr. Watt's arrangements by various engineers, but they have generally been calculated either for obtaining some subordinate purpose of convenience, or for imposing on the public by a fallacious appearance of novelty. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 398.) i The force oſ steam, or oſ heated vapour, is probably also the immediate agent in the astonishing effects produced by the explosion of gunpowder. The initial elasticity of the ſluid by which a cannon hall is impelled, ap- pears, from Bernoulli's calculation, to he at least equal to ten thousand times the pressure of the atmosphere, and upon the most moderate c omputation, from Count Rumford's experiments, to be more than three times as great as thiss. The quantity of moisture, or of vater of erystalliation, contained in the powder, is certainly too small to furnish steam enough for so great an effectt. We have no reason to suppose that the elasticity of a given quantity of any aeriform fluid or vapour is increased more than ahout one five hundreth for each degree o Fuhrenheit that its temperature is elevated; and if ve suppose the heat to be raised to more than 5000 degrees, the force of each grain oſ vater converted into steam vill only be increased tenfold; so that if the elasticity were 40 thousand times as great, the density must be 4 thousand times as great as that of ordinary steam, and the whole space must be filled with an aqueous vapour almost twice as dense as ater itself. It is, therefore, probable that some other parts of the materials assume, together vith the vater, the state of vapour, and possess in this form a much greater elasticity than that of the steam: for the quantity of fluids permanently elastic, vhich are extricated, must be allowed to he wholly inadequate to the effeet. j The force of fired gunpowder is found to be very nearly proportional to the quantity employed; consequently, if we negleet the consideration of the resistance of the atmosphere, the square of the velocity of the ball, the height to which it will rise, and its greatest horizontal range, must be directly as the quantity oſ powder, and inversely as the veight oſ the ball. Count Rumford, however, found that the same quantity of powder exerted somewhat more force on æa large ball than on a smaller one. The essential properties of a gun are to conſine the elastic fluid as completely as possible, and to direct the motion of the bullet in a reetilinear path; and hence arises the necessity oſ an aceurate hboree. The advantage of a rifle barrel ĩs principally derived from the more perſect contact of the bullet with its cavity; it s also supposed to produce a rotation round an axis in the direction oſ its motion, which renders ĩt less linble to deviations from its path on account oſ irregularities in the resistance of the ai. The usual charge of powder is one fifth or one sixth of the weight of the hall, and for hattering one third. When a 24 pounder is fired with two thirds of its weight of powder, it may be thrown almost four miles, the resistance of the air reducing the distance to about one fifth of that which it would describe in a vacuum. Bullets of all kinds are usually cast in separate moulds: shot are granulated by alloving the lead, melted with a little arsenic, to pass through perforations in the bottom of a vessel, and to drop in a shover into vater. The patent shot fall in this process through a height of 120 feet: the roundest are separated by rolling them down an inclined plane slightly grooved, those which are of an irregular form falling off at the sides. l Condensed air may also be employed for propelling a bullet by means of an air gun, an instrument of considerable antiquity, but of little utility. It is obvious that no human force can so far increase the density of air as to make its elasticity at all comparable to that of the fluid evolved by ſired gunpowder, and even if it were reduced to such a state, its effects would still be far inferior to those oſ gunpowder; for the utmost velocity, with which it could expand itself, would not exceed 1300 feet in a second, and it would, therefore, be incapable of imparting to a ball a velocity ęven as great as this, while the vapour of gunpowder impels a heavy ball with a velocity of more than 2000 feet in a second. When, however, it is considered that by far the greatest part of such a velocity as this is uselessly employed, and that the mechanical power which is practically obtained from gunpowder is much more expensive than an equivalent exertion of any of the ordinary sources of motion, it must be allowed that the force of condensed air may possibly be applied in some cases, with advantage, as a substitute for that of gunpowder. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 359.) ON THE HISTORY OF HYDRAULICS AND PNEUMATICS. NOTWITHSTANDING a few observations and experiments made hy Aristotle and his predecessors, the properties of ſluids had scarcely been the subjects oſ much aceurate investigation before the time of Archimedes. The progress, which the science of hydrostaties in particular made under this eminent mathematician, does the highest honour to his genius and penetration. llis treatise on floating bodies, although the theorems which it contains are not so general as they have been rendered since the late improvements in the methods of calculation, still affords us instances of very ingenious determinations oſ the equilibrium of ſloating bodies of diſferent forms, grounded on the true principles of the opposition of the general directions of ihe veight of the body and of the pressure of the ſluid; and in this manner he has shown in what cases the equilibrium of conical and conoidal solids will be stable, and in what cases unstablee. Archimedes was the inventor oſ the mode of measuring the bulk of a solid by immersing it in a fluid: to us, indeed, there appears to have been little difſficulty in the discovery, but the ancients thought otherwise. Vitruvius observes that this invention indicates a degree of ingenuity almost incredible The philosopher himself is said to have valued it is so highly, that when iĩt ſirst occurred to him, in a public bath, he hastened home in an ecstasy, without recollecting to clothe himself, in order to apply it to the determination of the speciſic gravity of IIiero's crown, and to the detection of the ſraud of the maker, vho had returned the crown equal in weight to the gold that was given him, but had adulterated it vith silver, and imagined, that on account of the complicated form oſ the vork, which rendered ĩt almost impossible to determine its bulk by calculation, he must infallilly escape convietion. The hydrometer, v hich has sometimes been attributed to Hypatia, a learned Greek lady of Constantinople, is mentioned by Fannius, an early writer on weights and measures, and is ascribed by him to Archimedes. The forcing pump, or rather the fire engine, was the invention of Ctesibius of Alexandria, the greatest mechanic of antiquity after Archimedess He is also said to have invented the clepsydra, for the hydraulic measurement of time, and Philo informs us that he constructed an air gun, for propelling à stone, or rather a ball, by means of air, previously condensed by a syringe. The ball was not immediately exposed to the action of the air, but was impelled by the longer end of a lever, while the air acted on the shorter. Ctesibius is said to have been the soh oſ a barber, and to have had his attention turned to mechanics and pneumaties, by being employed to ſit æ shutter,. with a counterpoise sliding in a wooden pipe, for his father's shop vindow. i Hero was a cotemporary, and a scholar of Ctesibius; he describes, in his treatise on pneumatics, a number of very ingenious inventions, a few of which are calculated for utility, but the greater part for amusement only; they are principally siphons variously concealed and combined, fountains, and water organs, besides the syringe and the ſire engine. The description of this engine agrees precisely with the construetion which is at this day the most usual; it consists of two barrels, discharging the water alternately into an air vessel; and it appears from Vitruvius, that this was the original form in which Ctesibius invented the pump. Hero supposes the possibility of a vacuum in the intervals of the particles oſf bodies, observing that without it no body could be compressible; but he imagines that a vacuum cannot exist throughout a pereeptible space, and thence derives the principle of suetion. The air contained in a given cavity may be rarefied, he says, by sucking out a part of it, and he deseribes a cupping instrument, vhich approaches very nearly to the nature of an imperfect air pump. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 5324.) . ll After the time of Ctesibius and Hero, the science of hydraulies made little further progress, until the revival of letters. The Romans had vater mills in the time of Julius Caesar, which are deseribed by Vitruvius; and it appears that their aqueducts were vell built, and their vaterpipes. vell VOL. I. v z arranged. Pipes of lead were, however, less frequent than at present, from an apprehension of the poisonous quality of the metal, which was not wholly vithout foundationn. Some say that the ancients had no chimnies, but vhatever may be the authorities, the opinion is extremely improbablee. It was in the middle ages that navigable canals began to be considerably multiplied, first in China, and afterwards in other parts of the world. The canal from the Trent to the Witham, which is the oldest in England, is said to have been dug in 1134. The date oſ the earliest windmills has been referred to the year 1299. The invention of gunpowder possesses perhaps an equal claim with the art of printing, to the honour of being considered as constituting the most marked feature, that distinguishes the character of ancient from that of modern times; its introduction must necessarily have tended to produce material alterations, and perhaps improvements, in the hahits of nations and of individuals. It ĩs said to have been known long since to the Chinese, and our countryman Roger Bacon was evidently acquainted with its properties; but it as not actually employed in Europe or in its neighbourhood till about the year 1350; and the earliest artillery appears to have been that which was used by the Moors, at the siege of Algesiras, in 1333. King Edvard had four pieces of cannon at the memorable battle of Cressy, in 1346. About the year 1600, Galileo made the important discovery of the effects oſ the weight and pressure of the atmosphere, in the operation of suction, and in various other phenomena. Before his time, it was generally supposed that water was raised by a sucking pump, on account of the impossibility of the existence oſ a vacuum: if, however, a vacuum had been impossible in nature, the water would have followed the piston to all heights, however great, but Galileo found that the height of its ascent was limited to about 34 feet, and concluded that the weight of a column of this height vas the measure of the magnitude of the atmospherical pressure. His pupil Torricelli aftervards confirmed the explanation, by showing that a column of mercury was only supported vhen its weight was equal to that of a column of water standing on the same base; hence the vacuum obtained by means of mercury is oſten called the Torricellian vacuum. Torricelli corrected also, in 1644, the mistuke of Castelli respecting the quantities oſ water discharged by equal oriſices, at different distances below. the surfuce of the water in the reservoir. Castellis experiments, made about 1640, vere the fſirst of the kind, and some of them really tended to the. improvement of. the sciencæ of liydraulies, but others appeared to show, that a double height of the head of water produced a double discharge. Torrieelli's more accurate ohservations proved that a quadruple height was required in order to produce a double velocity; and his assertions were aſterwards fully confirmed by Mariotte and by Guglielmini. A little before the year 1654, Otto von Guericke, of Magdeburg, ſirst constructed a machine similar to the air pump, by inserting the barrel of a fire engine into a cask of water, so that when the water was drawn out by the operation of the piston, the cavity of the cask remained nearly void of all material substance. But finding that the air rushed in between or through the staves of the cask, he inclosed a smaller cask in a larger one, and made the vacuum in the internal one more complete, while the intervening space remained filled with water; yet still he ſound that the water was forced into the inner cask through the pores of the vood. He then procured a sphere of copper, about two feet in diameter, and was exhausting it in the same vay, vhen the pressure of the air erushed it, with a loud noise. This machine was more properly a vater pump, than an air pump, but the inventor soon after improved his apparatus, and made all the experiments which are to this day the most usually exhibited vith the air pump, such as the apparent cohesion of two exhausted hemispheres, the playing of a jet by means of the expansion of a quantity of air inclosed in a jar, the determination of the airs weight, and others of a similar nature. IHe also ohserved, that for very accurate experiments, the valve of the pump might be raised at each stroke by external foree; and he particularly noticed the perpetual production of air, from the water that he generally employed, which caused an imperfection in the vacuum. An account of his experiments was ſirst published in different works, by Caspar Schott, and afterwards by himself, in his book intitled Experimenta nova Magdeburgica, printed in 1672 at Amsterdam. In the year 1658, Hooke ſinished an air pump for Boyle, in whose la- boratory he was an assistant: it was more convenient than Guerickes, but the vacuum was not so perfect; yet Boyle's numerous and judicious experiments gave, to the exhausted receiver of the air pump, the name of the Boylean vacuum, by which it was long known in the greatest part of Europe. Hooke's air pump had two barrels, and with some improvements hy Hauksbee, it remained in common use, until the introduction of Smeaton's pump, which, however, has not wholly superseded it. The theory of pneumatics was also considerably indehted to Hooke's important experiments on the elasticity of the air, which were afterwards confirmed and extended by Mariotte and Amontons, in France, by Hales in this country, and by Richmann at Petersburę. About the same time the first steam engine was constructed, by the celebrated Marquis of Worcester. Hints of the possibility of such a machine had been given a hundred years beſore, by Matthesius, in a collection of sermons intitled Sarepta, and at a subsequent period by Brunau; but the Marquis of Worcester professes to have carried the project into full effect, as we are informed by his account of what he called a fire water work, which is one of his Century of Inventions, first published in 1663, and which is thus described:  I have taken a piece of a whole cannon, vhereof the end was burst, ànd filled it three quarters full of water, stopping and screwing up the broken end, as also the touch hole; and making a constant fire under it, within 24 hours it burst, and made a great crack: so that having a way to make my vessels, s0 that they are strengthened by the force within them, and the one to fill aſter the other, I have seen the water run like a constant fountain stream forty foot high. One vessel of water, rareſied by fire, driveth up forty of cold vater; and a man that tends the work is but to turn two cocks, that one vessel oſ water being consumed, another hegins to force and refill with cold vater, and 50 successively, the ſire being tended and kept constant, vhich the self same person may likewise abundantly perform in the interim between the necessity of turning the said cocks The machine was, however, not at that time practically introduced, and it was soon forgotten; Savery's engines were constructed in a manner precisely similar, some time before 1700; and it is uncertaiu whether he adopted the Marquis of Worcester's ideas, or reinvented a similar machine. About 1710, the piston 4 and cylinder were invented by Newcomen, and with Beightons apparatus for turning the cocks by its own motion, the engine remained nearly stationary for many years. As early as the year 1667, the pressure of fluids in motion, and the resistance opposed by fluids at rest to the motion of solid bodies, were experimentally examined by Huygens, and some other members of the Parisian Academy. Pardies, vhose works vere published in 1673, attempted to determine, although upon some inaccurate suppositions, the effects of the wind on a ships sails, under different circumstances. His principles were adopted by Renaud, who published a work on the subject in 1689; their imperfections were, however, soon after pointed out by Huygens, and by James Bernoulli; and in 1714, John Bernoulli published an extensive treatise on the manoeuvres of ships, which at last compelled Renaud to submit to 50 many united authorities. It must be confessed, that the labours of Newton added fewer improvements to the doctrines of hydraulics and pneumatics, than to many other departments of science; yet some praise is undeniably due both to his computations and 1o his experiments relating to these subjectss. No person before Newton had theoretically investigated the velocity with which fluids are discharged, and although his first attempt was unsuccessful, and the method vhich he substituted for it in his second edition is by no means ſree from objections, yet either of the determinations may be considered in some cases as a convenient approximation; and the observation of the contraction of a stream passing through a simple orifice, which was then new, serves to reconcile them in some measure with each other. His modes of considering the resistance of fluids are far from being perfectly just, yet they have led to results which, with proper corrections, are tolerably accurate; and his determination of the oscillations of fluids, in bent tubes, was a good beginning of the investigation of their alternate motions in general. The accurate experiments of Poleni were published in 1718: he has the merit of having first distinctly ohserved that the quantity of water, discharged by a short pipe, ĩs greater than by a simple oriſice of the same diameter; although there is some reason to suppose that Newton was before acquainted vith the circumstance. In 1797, Mr. Bouguer received a prize from the academy of Paris for his essay on the masts of ships, which is said to be ingenious, but by no means practically useful. He was probably tempted by this encouragement to continue his application to similar studies, and ubout twenty years aſterwards he published his valuable essay on the construetion and manocuvres of ships, which appears to have superseded all that had been done beſore respecting the subjects of his investigation. The fſirst researches oſ Daniel Bernoulli, concerning the properties and motions of ſluids, bear also the date of 1727. This justly celebrated man was as happy in his application of mathematics to natural philosophy, as he vas ready and skilful in his calculationss The greatest part oſ his hydraulic theorems are founded on the principle first assumed by Huygens, and called by Leibnitæ the law of living or ascending ſorce, which is confessedly only true where there is no loss of velocity, from the imperfection of the elasticity of the bodies concerned; for it is only with this limitation, that the motions of any system of bodies are always necessarily such, as to be capable of carrying the common centre of gravity to the height, from which iĩt has descended, while the bodies have been acquiring their motions This law of ascending force is oſ considerable utility in facilitating the solution of a great variety of problems; it is certain that mechanical power is always to be estimated by the product of the mass of a body into the height to which it is capable of arcending; and whatever objections may have been made to the employment of this product as the measure of the force of a body in motion, which is indeed an expression inconsistent with a correct deſinition of the term force, yet it must he confessed, on the other hand, that some of the hest English mathematicians have fallen into material errors for want of paying suſficient attention to the general principlee Bernoulli estimates very justly in this manner the mechanical power oſ a variety oſ natural and artiſicial agents, and among the rest, he examines that of gunpowder; but from an accidental combination of errors, he states the force of a pound of gunpowder, as equivalent to the daily labour of 100 men, while in fact the effect which is actually obtained from two tons oſ powder is no greater than that which is here attributed to a pound. His calculations of the motions of fluids, in some very intricate cases, are very ingenious and satisſactory, and they are in general suſficiently confirmed by vell imagined experiments. He examines the force of the wind acting on the sails of a vindmill, but by another mistake in calculation, vhich Maclaurin has detected, of two angles which answer the eonditions of the determination, he has taken the wrong one, and assigned that position of the sail as the most effectual, which produces absolutely no effect at all. It may be objected to Bernoullis calculations, that some of the circumstances which are necessarily neglected in them, produce a very material effect in the results of all experiments; but it must be allowed that the corrections required, on account of this unavoidable omission, may easily be deduced from simple experiments, and then applied to the most complicated cases. It is, however, a more material objection, that the fundamental law of the preservation of ascending force can only be adopted with certain limitations; thus, when a small stream passes through a large reservoir, Bernoulli is obliged to suppose the whole of its force consumed by the resistance which it meets. The immediate mode, in which the accelerating forces must be supposed to act, remains also wholly undetermined; and it was principally for this reason, that John Bernoulli attempted to substitute, for his son's calculations, a method of deducing the motions of ſluids more immediately from the gravitation of their different parts. The peculiarity of John Bernoullis mode of investigation consists in his imagining the weight of each individual particle to be transferred to the surface of the ſluid, causing there a pressure in the direction of gravity; and he examines the manner in which this foree must operate, in order to produce every acceleration which is required for the motion of ſluids, in vessels of all imaginable forms. Maclaurin, in his treatise of ſluxions, investigated several of the properties of ſluids in his usual concise and elegant manner. His remarks on the positions oſ the sails of windmills and of ships are peculiarly interesting: he added much to what had been done respecting the effects of the wind, and showed the possibility of arranging the sails oſ a ship in such a manner as to make her advance with a greater velocity than that of the wind ĩtselſ. At that time, however, the science of hydraulies had been too little assisted by experiments to be capable of affording determinations of all questions which ure of very frequent occurrence in practice:. An application was made to Maclaurin, and at the same time to Desaguliers, a man of considerable eminence in the mechanical sciences, respecting the quantity of water that might be brought, by a train of pipes of certain dimensions, to the city of Edinburgh. The project was executed with a confidence founded on their opinions, but the quantity actually obtained was only about one sixth of Desaguliers's calculation, and one eleventh of Maclaurin'ss At a still later period, the French Academicians vere consulted respecting a great undertaking of a similar nature; and their report was such as to dissuade the projectors from making the attempt, vhich was consequently at the point of being abandoned, tilla celebrated practical architect insisted, from a rough estimation, deduced from his general experience, that more than double the quantity assigned by the Academicians might be obtained; and the event justified his assertion. The experiments and calculations of Robins, respeeting the resistance of the air, and the operation of gunpowder, deserve to be mentioned with commendation on account of their practical utility; but he appears to have heen less successful in his theoretical investigations than Daniel Bernoulli had been a fev years before. Dalembert attempted, in his treatise on the motions of fluids, which vas published in 1744, to substitute, for the suppositions of John Bernoulli, a more general law, relating to all changes produced in the motions of a system of bodies, by their mutual actions on each other; but his calculations are more intricate, and less easily understood, than some others, vhich are capable of an application equally extensivee The late Professor Kaestner of Gottingen has defended Bernoulli against Dalembert's objections with some success, and has in many instances facilitated and extended Bernoullĩs theory; but there,is often a singular mixture of acuteness and prolixity in this author's workss. By the side of an intricate and diſſicult ſluxional caleulation, he inserſs a long striug of logarithms for performing a simple multiplication; and in a work which comprehends the whole range of the mathematical sciences, he does not venture to determine the square root of 10 vithout quoting an authority. About the same time, the profound Leonard Euler applied himself, with some success, to the examination of the motions of ſluids, particularly as they are connected with the subjects oſf seamanship and naval architecture; but the investigations of Euler are in general more remarkable for mathematical address, than for philosophical accuracy and practical application; although his calculation of the resistance of the air to the motions of ꝑrojectiles may be employed with eonsiderable advantage by the gunner. The beginning of the modern experimental improvements in hydraulics may perhaps be dated from the investigations of Smeaton respecting the effects of vind and vater, which vere published in the Philosophical Transactions for 1759. His observations are of material importance, as far as they are capable of immediate applioation to practice, but he has done little to illustrate their connexion with the general principles of mechanics. It vas Mr. Borda that first derived from a just theory, about I0 years after, the same results, respecting the effects of undershot water wheels, as Smeaton had obtained from his experiments. Before this time, the hest essay on the subject of water wheels was that of Elvius, published in 1742; his calculations are accuratæ and extensive; but they are founded, in great measure, on the imperſect suppositions respecting the impulse of a stream of water, vhich were then generally adopted. Our countryman Mr. Watt obtained, in 1769, a patent for his improvements of the steam engine, which includes almost every essential change that has been made since the time of Beightonn. On a subject so important, it cannot be superfluous to insert the words of the inventor, whose admirahle application of the sciences, to practical purposes, most justly entitles him to a rank among philosophical mechanics, not inferior to that of Ctesibius and Dr. Hooke.  My method of lessening the consumption of steam, and consequently fuel, in fire engines, says Mr. Watt, in his speciſication of his patent, consists of the following principles. First, that vessel in which the powers of steam are to be employed, to work the engine, which is called the cylinder in common fire engines, and which I call the steam vessel, must, during the whole time thæ engine is at work, be kept as hot as the steam that voL I. 3 enters it; first, by inclosing it in a case of wood, or any other materials that transmit heat slowly; secondly, by surrounding it with steam, or other heated bodies; and thirdly, by suffering neither water, nor any other substance colder than the steam, to enter or touch it during that time. Secondly, in engines that are to be worked wholly or partially by condensation of steam, the steam is to be condensed in vessels distinct from the steam vessels, or cylinders, although occasionally communicating with them; these vessels I call condensers; and, whilst the engines are working, these condensers ought at least to be kept as cold as the air in the neighbourhood of the engines, by application of water, or other cold bodiess. Thirdly, whatever air or other elastic vapour is not condensed by the cold of the condenser, and may impede the working oſ the engine, is to be drawn out oſ the steam vessels, or condensers, by means of pumps, vrought by the engines themselves, or otherwise. Fourthly, I intend, in many cases, to employ the expansive force of steam to press on the pistons, or whatever may be used instead of them, in the same manner as the pressure of the atmosphere is now employed in common ſire engines: in cases where cold water cannot be had in plenty, the engines may be wrought by this force of steam only, by discharging the steam into the open air after it has done its office. Fifthly, where motions round an axis are required, I make the steam vessels in form of holloW rings, or eircular channels, with proper inlets and outlets for the steam, mounted on horizontal axles, like the wheels of a water mill; within them are placed a number of valves, that suſer any body to go round the channel in one direction only; in these steam vessels are placed weights, so ſitted to them as entirely to fill up a part or portion of their channels, yet capable of moving freely in them hy the means hereſn atter mentioned or specified. When the steam is admitted in these engines, hetween the weights and the valves, it acts equally on both, so as to raise the weight to one side of the wheel, and, hy the reaction of thie valves, successively, to give a circular motion to the wheel, the valves opening in the direction in which the weights are pressed, but not in the contrary; as the stcam vessel moves round, it is supplied with steum from the hoiler, and that which has performed its oſfice may either be discharged hy means of eondensers, or into the open air. Sixthly, I intend, in some cases, to apply a degree of cold, not eapable of reducing the stenm to water, hut of contracting it considerably, so that the engines may he worked by the alternate expansion and con- ON THE HISTORY OF HYDRAULIGS AND PNEUMATICS. 363 traction of the steam Lastly, instead oſ using water to render the piston or other parts of the engines air and steam tight, I employ oils, wax, resinous bodies, fat of animals, quicksilver, and other metals, in their fluid state. It is probable that the rotatory engines described hy Mr. Watt, although they appear to produce some advantage in theory, vill never be generally introduced, on account of the difſiculty of construeting steam vessels so large, and of so complicated a form, as would be necessary, in order to give full effect to the machine. The term of this patent was prolonged by act of parliament until the year 1799; but although the legal privilege of the original manufacturers is expired, yet the superiority of their workmanship still gives their engines a decided preference. Much of the labour of the later writers on hydraulies has been employed on the determination of the resistance of ſluids to bodies of different forms, whieh move through them; a subject which derives great importance from its immediate application to the manocuvres of shipss. The most extensive experiments on these subjects were made by Bossut, and some other members of the Academy of Sciences. About the same time Don George Juan, a gentleman who had enjoyed the best possible opportunity for actual observation and practical study in serving with Ulloa, published at Madrid his Examen Maritimo, which appears to be the most ingenious and useful treatise on the theory and practice of seamanship that has yet appeared. But unfortunately his deductions, however refined and diversiſied, are principally founded on a mistaken theory respecting the eſſects oſ hydraulic pressure; since he tacitly assumes, in his fundamental proposition on the subject, that a double force, acting in a given small space, will produce a double velocity; while it is well known that in such circumstances a quadruple force would be requiredc Hence he derives some conelusions which indicate that the resistance must vary very materially at different depths below the surface of the water, and alleges in support of the assertion a few imperfect experiments of Mariotte and of his own, in which some accidental circumstances not noticed may easily have caused great irregularities. Mr. Prony, in his Architecture Hydraulique, appears to have folloved Juan; and Professor Robison very justly observes, in speaking of this work, that if the pressure oſ the water alters the magnitude oſ the resistance at different depths, that oſ the atmosphere ought by no means to be omitted in the calculation. But if a more correct mathematician and mechanic would take the pains to model Juans book anew, to correct his errors, and to adapt his modes of calculation to the laws of resistance previously deduced from aecurate experiments rather than from theory, there is no doubt but that the work thus modified might essentially improve the science of seamanship. He alleges indeed that the results of his calculations are in almost every inatance rigidly conformable to observation and experience, but ĩt is probable that where such a coincidence really exists, it must he owing to some combination of errors compensating each other; and it is indeed very possible that his calculations, with all their errors, may approach nearer to the truth than the imperfect approximations which had been before employed. Juan has generally made use of the English weights and measures, on account of their convenience in computations respecting the descent of falling bodies and the impulse of water. The works of Chapman and of Romme, upon various departments of seamanship, possess also considerable meritt. These authors appear to have uvoided the errors of Juan, but without entering so minutely into the detail of nautical operations as he has done. The accurate experiments of Dr. Hutton and of Count Rumford on the force of ſired gunpowder, and the resistance of the air, deserve to be mentioned as affording valuable materials to the speculative investigator, and useſul information to the practical gunner. Robins had very erroneously supposed that the whole of the eſfects of gunpowder might he derived from the expansive force of ſluids permanently elastic; but Vandelli soon after maintained a contrary opinion in the commentaries of Bologna, and Count Rumford has very satisfactorily shown the insufficiency of the agents considered by Robins, although he has been unsuccessful in attempting to deduce the whole force from the elasticity of aqueous vapour alone. The theory oſ practical hydmulics, as aſfected by friction, may be considered as having been begun and completed by the highly meritorious labours of the Chevalier du Buatt. He had some assistance in expressing the resul of his experiments by means oſ general rules or formulae, and these, al4 though they agree suſficiently well with the experiments, have not always been reduced to the simplest and most convenient forms; nor have they been much improved either by Langsdorf or Eytelwein in Germany, or by Robis0n in this country, who have gone over nearly the same ground with each other, and have shown the way in which the results of Buat's investigations may be applied to a variety of cases, which occur in hydraulic architecture. One of the latest inventions, which require to be mentioned in speaking of the history of pneumatics, is that of the aerostatic globe or air balloon. The suggestions of Lohmeier, of Albertus, and of Wilkins, respecting the various modes of passing through the air, had long remained disregarded as idle speculations; and Rusnier, vho, in the I7th century, descended ohliquely over some houses, by means of wings, was wholly unable to employ them in ascending. Dr. Black had exhibited in his lectures a bladder filled vith hydrogen gas, and floating in the air by means of its smaller specific gravity, many years before Montgolſier conceived the idea of applying a similar machine to the clevation of human beings into the aerial regions. It was in 1785 that this project was first executed, and persons of a warm imagination were disposed to believe that the discovery would be of great importance to the convenience of mankind. But if we coolly consider the magnitude of the force with which the wind unavoidably impels a surface so large as that of a balloon, we shall be convinced of the absolute impossibility of counteracting it, in such a manner, as to direct the halloon in any course, materially different from that of the wind which happens to blow. With this limitation, the invention may still in some cases he capable of utility, wherever we are only desirous of ascending to a great height, without regarding the place in which we are to descend: or where we wish to attain only a height so moderate that the machine may be kept by ropes in the situation which is desired. In France the balloon has lately been employed with considerable success as a meteorological observatory; Mr. Biot and Mr. Gay Lussac having ascended to a height of above four miles, for the laudable purpose of ascertaining some facts relating to the constitution of the atmosphere, and to the magnetic properties of the earth. HIE CHRONOLOGY OF AUTHORS ON HYDRODYNAMICS. 00 B. I CTES I BI US H E R O E Latã 1 UGUER. CEL LI CLAUR.IN WORCESTER. . BERNOULLI B OVY LL.E U L ER H UYG ROEBI N S. MARI DALEMBERT. H S5M E AT ON PA 1 U A N. N B O R D A lliãlillili LECTURE XXXI. ON THE PROPAGATION OF SOUND. Tur theory of sound, which constitutes the acience of acustics, is on many accounts deserving of particular altention, for it not only involves many interesting properties of the motions of elastic substances, but it also afſords us considerable assistance in our physiological inquiries respecting the nature and operation of the senses. The subject has usually been considered as exceedingly abstruse and intricate, but the difficulty has in some measure originated from the errors which were committed in the first inquiries respecting it; and many of the phenomena belonging to it are so remarkable, and 50 amusing, as amply to repay the labour of examining them by the entertainment that they afford. We shall consider first the nature and propagation of sound in general, secondly, the origin of particular sounds, and the eſfects of single sounds; thirdly, the consequences of the combinations of sounds variously related, constituting the doctrine of harmonics, and fourthly, the construction of musical instruments, and the history of the science of acusties. Sound is a motion capuble of aſfecting the ear with the sensation peculiar to the organ. It is not simply a vibration or undulation of the air, as it is sometimes called; ſor there are many sounds in which the air is not concerned, as when a tuning fork or any other sounding body is held hy the teeth: nor is sound always a vibration or alternation oſ any kind; for every noise is a sound, and a noise, as distinguished from a continued sound, consists oſ a single impulse in one direction only, sometimes without any alternation; while a continued sound is a succession of such impulses, which, in the organ of hearing at least, cannot but be alternate. IF these successive impulses form a connected series, following each other too rapidly to be separately distinguished, they constitute a continued sound, like that of the voice in speak- ing; and if they are equal among themselves in duration, they produce a musical or equable sound, as that of a vibrating chord or string, or of the voice in singing. Thus, a quill striking against a piece of wood causes a noise, but, striking against the teeth of a wheel or of a comb, a continued sound; and if the teeth of the wheel are at equal distances, and the velocity of the motion is constant, a musical note. j Sounds of all kinds are most usually conveyed through the medium of the air; and the necessity of the presence of this or of some other material substance for its transmission is easily shown by means of the air pump; for the sound of a bell struck in an exhausted receiver is scarcely perceptible. The experiment is most conveniently performed in a moveable receiver or transferrer, vhich may be shauken at pleasure, the frame which suspends the bell being supported by some very soſt substance, such as eork or wool. As the air is gradually admitted, the sound becomes stronger and stronger, although it is still much weakened by the interposition of the glass: not that glass is in itself a bad conductor of sound, but the change of the medium of communication from air to glass, and again from glass to air, occasions a great diminulion of its intensity. It is perhaps on account of the apparent facility with which sound is transmitted by air, that the doctrine of acustics has been usually considered as immediately dependent on pneumatics, although it helongs as much to the theory of the mechanics of solid bodies as to that of hydrodynamics. A certain time is always required for the transmission of an impulse through a material substance, even through such substances as appear to be the hardest and the least compressible. It is demonstrable that all minute impulses are conveyed through any homogeneous elastic medium, whether solid or fluid, with a uniform velocity, which is always equal to that which a heavy body would acquire by falling through half the height of the modulus of elasticity, that is, in the case of the air, half the height of the atmosphere, supposed to be of equal density; so that the velocity of sound passing through an atmosphere of a uniform elustic ſluid must be the same vith that of a wave moving on its surface In order to form a distinct idea of the manner in which sound is propagated through an elastic substance, we must ſirst consider the motion oſ a single particle, which, in the case of a noĩse, is pushed for- wards, and then either remains stationary, or returns hack to its original situation; but in the case of a musical sound, is continually moved backvards and forwards, with a velocity always varying, and varying hy diſferent degrees, according to the nature or quality oſ the tone; for instance, differently in the notes of a bell and of a trumpet. We may ſirst suppose for the sake oſ simplicity, a single series of particles to be placed only in the sume line with the direction of the motion. It is obvious that if these particles ere absolutely incompressible, or infinitely elastie, and were also retained in contact with each other by an inſinite force of cohesion or of compression, the whole series must move precisely at the same time, as well as in the sume manner. But in a substance which is both compressible and extensible or expansible, the motion must occupy a certain time in being propagated to the successive particles on either side, by means of the impulse of the first particle on those which are before it, and by means of the diminution of its pressure on those which are behind; so that when the sound consists of a series of alternations, the motion of some of the particles vill be alvays in a less advanceid state than that of others nearer to iĩts source; while at a greater distance forwards, the particles will be in the opposite stage of the undulation, and still further on, they vill again hbe moving in the same manner with the ſirst particle, in consequence of the effect of a former vibration. The situation of a particle at any time may be represented hy supposing it to mark its path, on a surface sliding uniformly along in a transverse direction. Thus, if we fix a small pencil in a vibrating rod, and draw a sheet of paper along, against the point of the pencil, an undulated line will he marked on the paper, and vill correctly represent the progress of the vibration. Whatever the nature of the sound transmitted through any medium may be, it may be shown that the path thus deseribed vill also indicate the situation of the different particles at any one time. The simplest case of the motion of the particles is that in which they observe the same law with the vibration of a pendulum, which is always found opposite to a point supposed to move uniformly in a cirele: in this case the path deseribed vill be the figure denominated a harmonic curve; and it inay be demonstrated that the force, impelling any particle backvards or forvards, vill always be represented by the distance of the particle before or behind its natural place; the greatest condensation and the greatest direct velocity, as voL. I. 3 5 vell as the greatest rarefaction and retrograde velocity, happening at the instant when it passes through its natural place. Ve are rendy to imagine that very hard bodies transmit motion instantaneously, because we have no easy means of measuring the interval of time that elapses hetween the action of pushing the end oſ a rod, and the protrusion of an obstacle at the other end, or hetween the instant of pulling a hell rope, and that oſ the ringing of the bel. But it is demonstrable that in order to transmit an impulse in a time inſinitely small, the hardness of the substance must be inſinitely great, and it must be absolutely ineompressible and inextensible by any force, which is a property not discoverable in any natural bodies: the hardest steel and the most brittle gliss being very susceptible both of extension and compression. The least elastic, substance that hus been examined, is perhaps earbonic acid gas, or fixed air, which is considerably denser than atmospherie air exposed to an equal degree of pressuree The height of the atmosphere, supposed to be homogeneous, is in ordinary circumstances, and at the sea sile, about 28 000 ſeet, and in ſulling through half this height a hieavy hody would acquire a velocity of 046 ſeet in a second. But from a compurison of the accurate experiments oſ Derham, made in the day time, with those oſ the French Aeadlemicians, made chiefly at night, ĩt appears that the true velocity oſ sound i ubout 1130 feet in a second, which agrees very nearly with some observation: made with great eare by Proſessor Pictet. This difſerenee between caleulation and experiment has long occupied the attention of natural philosophers, but the diſſiculty appears to have heen in great measure removeil by the happy suggestion of Laplace, who has attributed the efeet to the elevation of temperature, which ĩs always found to accompany the action of condensation, and to the depression produced hy rareſuetion. It is true that a greater change of temperature vould he required than Mr. Daltons experiments on the compression of air appenr to indicate; but those experiments do not perſectly agree among themselves; and the observation which has been made in France, that a heat, suſficient to set tow on ſire, may be produced by the operation of a condensing syringe, seems to show that Mbi. Daltons results are somewhat below the truth. In this manner the theory 5 may be completely reconciled with experiments; we may estimate the modulus of the air's effective elasticity, which is the measure of its immediate foree, from the velocity which is thus observed, and its height will appear to be 39 80O feet, instead of 27 800, which is the supposed height of the atmospheree. This velocity remains unchanged hy any alternation of pressure indicated by the barometer, but it may be aſfected by a change of temperature. For vhen an elastic ſluid is compressed, its elasticity is increased in the same ratio as its density; and the height of a homogeneous atmosphere equivaIent to the pressure, remains the same, consequently the velocity calculated from that height remains unaltered; but the identity of the acceleration, from the effect of heat which has been mentioned, can only be inferred from observation: this identity may, however, be satisfactorily shown, by means of experiments on the sounds of organ pipes, which are intimately connected with the velocity of the transmission of sound through the air, and which are found to remain precisely the same, hovever the air may be rarefied or condensedc. The Academicians del Cimento inclosed an organ pipe, with bellows worked by a spring, in the receiver of an air pump and oſ a condenser, and they found- that, as long as the sound vas audible, its pitch remained unchanged. Papin serewed a vhistle on the oriſice which admits the air into the receiver oſ the air pump, and I have ſixed an organ pipe in the same manner; and the result agreed with the experiment of the academicians. But iſ the density of the air is changed, while its elasticity remains unaltered, which happens when it is expanded by heat, or condensed by cold, the height of the eolumn, and consequently the velocity, vill also be altered; so that for each degree oſ Fahrenheit's thermometer the velocity will vary about one part in a thousand. Bianconi has actually olserved this difference of velocity according to the different heights oſ the thermometer, and it may he shown less direetly by means of the sounds of pipes; but it has not been accurately determined whether or no the correetion on account of the eſſect of compression in causing heat, remains unaltered, although Bianconi's experiments agree very well with the supposition that no material change takes place in this respeet. The velocity of sound must also be in some measure influenced hy the quantity of moisture contained in the atmosphere: it must be a little diminished by cold fogs, which add to the density, without augmenting the elasticity, and increased hy warm vapours, which tend to make the air lighter; and these two opposite states are probably oſten produced in succession in wind instruments blown hy the mouth, the air within them being at ſirst cold and damp, and aftervards varm and moist. . In pure hydrogen gas, the velocity of sound ought, from calculation, to he more than three times as great as in common air, but the difference does not appear to have been so great in any experiment hitherto made on the sounds of pipes in gasts of diſſerent kinds. For such experiments, the comparative speciſic gravity of the gas may be most conveniently ascertained by Mr. Leslies method of observing the time employed in emptying a vessel through a small oriſice, by means of the pressure of an equal column of vater; according to the simple theory, the velocities of the gas thus discharged ought to be in the same proportion as the respective velocities with which sounds vould be transmitted by them: and if any variation from this proportion vere discovered, it must be attributed to the diſerent degrees of heat produced by condensation in the different fluids. Steam, at the temperature oſ boiling water, is only one third as heavy as common air; consequently the velocity of sound in steam must be nearly three fourths greater than in air. It does not appear that any direet experiments have heen made on the velocity vith which an impulse is transmitted through a liquid, although it is well known that liquids are capable of conveying sound without diſſiculty; Proſessor Robison informs us, for example, that he heard the sound of a bell transmitted hy water at the distance of 1200 feet. It is, however, eusy to caleulate the velocity with which sound must he propagated in any liquid of which the compressihility has been measured. Mr. Canton has ascertained that the elasticity o? water is about 22 000 times as great as that oſ air; it ĩs, therefore, measured by the height of a column which is in the same proportion to 34 ſeet, that is 750 thousand feet, and the velocity corresponding to half this height is 4900 feet in a second. In mereury, also, it appears ſfrom Mr. Cantons experiments, that the velocity must he nearly the same as in water, in spirit of wine a little smalle. These experiments were made by ſilling the hulb of a thermometer with water, and observing the effeets of placing it in an exhausted receiver, and in condensed air; tuking care to avoid changes oſ temperature, and other sources of error: the fluid rose in the tube when the pressure was removed, and subsided vhen it was increasedlc A slight correction is, however, required on account of the expansion and contraction of the glass, which must have tended to make the elasticity of the fluids appear somewhat greater than it really was. It is ælso well known that solid bodies in general are good conductors of sound: thus, any agitation communicated to one end of a beam is readily conveyed to the ear applied to the other end of it. The motion of a troop of cavalry is said to be perceived at a greater distance by listening with the head in contact with the ground, than by attending to the sound conveyed through the air; and we may frequently observe that some parts of the furniture of a house are a little agitated by the approach of a wagon, before we hear the noise which it immediately occasions. The velocity, with which impulses are transmitted by solids, is in general considerably greater than that with vhich they are conveyed by the air: Mr. Wunsch has ascertained this hy direct observations on a series of deal rods closely united together, which appeared to transmit a sound instantaneously, vhile a sensible interval vas required for its passing through the air: I have also found that the blov of a hammer on a wall, at the upper part ofa high house, is heard as iſ double by a person standing near it on the ground, the ſirst sound descending through the wall, the second through the air. It appears from experiments on the ſlexure of solid bodies of all kinds, that their elasticity, compared with their density, is much greater than that of the air: thus, the height of the modulus of elasticity of ſir wvood, is found, by means oſf such experiments, to be about 9 500 000 feel, whence the velocity of an impulse conveyed through it must be 17400 feet, or more than three miles, in a second. It is obvious, therefore, that in all common experiments such a transmission must appear perfectly instantaneous. There are various methods of ascertaining this velocity from the sounds produced under diſſerent circumstances by the substances to be examined, and Professor Chladni has in this manner compared the properties of a variety of natural and artiſicial productions. We have hitherto considered the propagation of sound in a single right line, or in parallel lines only; but it usually happens, at least when a sound is transmitted through a ſuid, that the impulse spreads in every direction, s& as to occupy at any one time nearly the whole oſ a spherical surface. But it is impossible that the whole of this surface should be afſected in a similar manner by any sound, originating from a vibration confined to a certain direetion, since the particles behind the sounding hody must be moving tovars the centre, vhenever the partieles before it are retreating from the centre; s0 that in one half of the surſace, the motions may he caller retrograde or negative, while in the other they are direct or positive; consequently at the sides, vhere these portions join, the motions can be neither positive nor negative, and the particles must remain at rest; the motions must also hecome gradually less and less sensible as they approach to the limit between the two hemispheres. And this statement may be confirmed by an experiment on the vibration of a hody of which the motion is limited to a certain direction, the sound being scarcely audible when the ear is in a direction precisely perpendicular to that of the vibration. The sound thus diverging must always be spread through a part of a spherical surface, because its velocity must be equal in every direction, so that the impulse will always move forwards in a straight line passing through the centre of the sphere, or the vibrating body. But when a hemispherical pulse arrives at the surface of a plane solid obstacle, it is reſlected, precisely in the same mauner as we have already seen that a wave of water is reflected, and assumes the form of a pulse proceeding from a centre at an equal distance on the opposite side of the surface This reflection, when it returns back perpendiculurly, constitutes vhat is commonly called an echo: but in order that the echo may be heard distinetly, it is necessary that the reſlecting object be at a distance moderately great, otherwise the returning sound vill he confused with the original one; and it must either have a smooth surface, or consist of a number oſ surfaces arranged in a suitable form; thus there is an echo not only from a distant vall or rock, but frequently from the trees in a wood, and sometimes, as it is said, even from a cloud. If a sound or a vave he reſlected from a curved surface, the new direction which it will assume may be determined, either from the condition that the velocity with which the impulse is transmitied must remain unaltered, or from the lav of reſlection, which requires that the direction of the reflected pulee or wave be such as to form an angle with the surſace, equal to that which the incident pulse before formed with it. Thus, if a sound or vave proceed from one focus of an ellipsis, and be reflected at its circumſerence, it will be directed from every part of the circumference towards the other focus; since the distance which every portion of the pulse has to pass over in the same time, in following this path, is the same, the sum of the lines drawn from the foci to any part 6f the curve being the same; and it may also he demonstrated that these lines form alvays equal angles with the curve on each side. The truth of this proposition may be easily shown by means of the apparatus already described for exhibiting the motions of the waves of water; we may also conſirm it by a simple experiment on a dish of tea: the curvature oſ a circle differs so little from that of an ellipsis of small eccentricity, that if ve let a drop fall into the cup near its centre, the little wave which is excited ill be made to converge to a point at an equal distance on the other side of the centree (Plate XXV. Fig. 540, 341.) . i IF an ellipsis be prolonged without limit, it will become a parabola: hence a parabola is the proper form of the section of a tube, calculated for colle cting a sound which proceeds from a great distance, into a single point, or for carrying a sound nearly in parallel directions to a very distant place. It appeais, therefore, that a parabolic conoid is the best form for a hearing trumpet, and for a speaking trumpet; but for both purposes the parabola ought to be much elongated, and to consist of a portion of the conoĩd remote from the vertex; for it is requisite, in order to avoĩd confusion, that the sound should enter the ear in directions confined vithin certain limits: the voice proceeds also from the mouth without any very considerable divergence, 50 that the parts of the curve hehind the focus would in huth cases he vholly useless. Atrumpet of such a shape does not very materilly differ from a part of a cone; and conical instruments are found to answer suſſiciently vell for practice; it appears, however, unnecessary to suppose, as Mr. Lambert has done, that they differ essentially in principle from parabolic trumpets. It is not yet perfectly decided whether or no a speaking trumpet has any immediate eſfect in strengthening the voice, independently of the reflection of sound. (Plate XXV. Fig. 3420.) An umbrella, held in a proper position over the head, may serve to collect the force oſ a distant sound by reſlection, in the manner of a hearing trumpet; but ĩts substance is too slight to reflect any sound very perſectly, unless the sound fall on it in a very oblique direction. The whispering gallery at St. Paul's produces an effect nearly similar, by a continued repetition of reſlections. Mr. Charles's paradoxical exhibition of the Invisible Girl has also been said to depend on the reſlection of sound; but the deception is really performed by conveying the sound through pipes, artfully concealed, and opening opposite to the mouth of the trumpet, from which it seems to proceed. Whnhen a portion of ãà pulse of sound is separated by any means from the rest of the spherieal or hemispherical surface to which iĩt belongs, and proceeds though a vide space, without heing supported on either side, there is a certain degree oſ divergence, hy means of which it sometimes becomes audible in every part of the medium transmitting it: but the sound thus diverging is comparatively very faint; and more so indeed than the effect of a wave of vater, admitted under similar circumstances, into a wide reservoir, which ve have already examined. Hence, in order that a speaking trumpet may produce its full effect, it must be directed in a right line towards the heurer: and the sound collected into the focus of a concave mirror is far more powerful than at a little distance from it, which could not happen if, as some have erroneously supposed, sound in all cases tended to spread equally in all directions. The sounds that enter a room, in which there is an open vindow, are generally heard by a mixture of this faint divergence with the reſlection from various parts of the window and of the room, and vith the eſfeet of the impulse transmitted through the walls. This diverging portion, however faint, probably assists in preserving the rectilinear motion of the principal sound, and gradually gains a little additional strength at the expense of this portion. The decay of sound is the natural consequence oſ its distribution throughout a larger and larger quantity of matter, as it proceeds to diverge every way from its centree The actual velocity of the particles of the medium transmitting it appears to diminish simply in the same proportion as the distance from the æentre increases; consequently their energy, which is to be considered as the measure of the strength of sound, must vary as the square of the distance; so that, at the distance of ten feet from the sounding body, the velocity of the particles of the medium hecomes one tenth as great as at the distance of one foot, and their energy, or the strength of the sound, only one hundredth as great. VOL. I. Ell LECTURE XXXII. ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF SOUND. TuE examination of the origin of sound might naturally be deemed anterior to the inquiry respecting its propagation; but it will appear, that the properties of many of the most usual sources of sound depend immediately on the velocity, with which an impulse of any kind is transmitted through an elastic medium; it was therefore necessary to consider this velocity, before the production of sound in general could be discussed. The origin of a simple sound, without any alternation, requires very little investigation: it appears that the only condition necessary for its production is a sufficient degree of velocity in the motion or impulse which occasions it. A very moderate velocity must be suſficient for producing an impression on the ear; there is reason to helieve, that, when the sound is continued, it may remain audible with a velocity of no more than one hundredth of an inch in a second, and perhaps even with a velocity much smaller than this: but, at its origin, it is probable that the velocity of the motion, constituting a sound, must always be considerably greater. A continued sound may be produced by a repetition of separate impulses independent of each other, as when a wheel strikes in rapid succession the teeth of a pinion, s0 as to force out a portion of air from between them; when a pipe, through which air is passing, is alternately opened and shut, cither wholly or partially, by the revolution of a stopcock or valve; or when a number of parallel surfaces is placed at equal distances in a line nearly perpendicular to them, and a noise of any kind is reflected from each of them in succession; a circumstance vhich may often be ohserved when we are walking near an iron railing, an acute sound being heard, which is composed of such reſlections from the surfaces of the palisades. Musical sounds are, however, most frequently produced by the alternate motions of substances naturally capable of isochronous vibrations, and these substances may be either fluids or solids, or instruments composed of a combination of ſluids with solids. The resonance of a room or passage is one of the simplest sources of a musical sound; the walls being parallel, the impulse is reflected backwards and forwards continually, at equal intervals of time, 30 as to agree with the definition, and to produce the effect, of a musical sound. When we blow obliquely and uniformly into a cylindrical pipe closed at one end, it is probable that the impulse or condensation must travel to the bottom and back, before the resistance is increased; the current of our breath will then be diverted from the mouth of the pipe, for an equal time, which will be required for the diminution of the resistance by the discharge of the condensed air, so that the whole time of a vibration will be equal to the time occeupied by an impulse of any kind in passing through four times the length of the pipe. An open pipe may be considered nearly as i it consisted of two such pipes, united at their closed ends, the portions of air contained by them being agitated by contrary motions, 30 as always to afford each other a resistance similar to that which the bottom of the stopped pipe would have furnished. It is probable that when an open pipe is once filled with air a little condensed, the oblique current is diverted, until the effect of the discharge, begiming at the remoter end, has returned to the inflated orifice, and allowed the current to reenter the pipe. Where the diameter of the pipe is different at different parts of its length, the investigation of the sound becomes much more intricate; but it has been pursued by Daniel Bernoulli with considerable success, although upon suppositions not strictly consistent with the actual state of the motions concerned. In the same manner as an open pipe is divided by an imaginary basis, 80 às to produce the same sound with a stopped pipe of half the length, a pipe of any kind is capable of being subdivided into any number of such pipes, supposed to meet each other's corresponding ends only; and in general the more violently the pipe is inflated, the greater is the number of parts into which it subdivides itselſ, the frequency of the vibrations being always proportional to that number. Thus, an open pipe may be divided not only into two, but also into four, six, eight, or more portions, producing the same sounds as a pipe of one half, one third, one fourth, or any other aliquot part of the length; but a stopped pipe cannot be divided into any even number of similar parts; its secondary sounds being only those of a pipe of which the proportion is determined by the odd numbers, its length being, for example, one third, one ſifth, or one seventh of the original Iength. These secondary notes are sometimes called harmonics; they are not only produced in succession from the same pipe, but they are also oſten faintly heard together, vhile the fundamental note of the pipe continues to sound. When the pipe has a large cavity connected with it, or consists principally of such a cavity, with a small opening, its vibrations are usually much less frequent, and it is generally incapable of producing a regular series of harmonics. It is obvious from this statement of the analogy between the velocity of sound and the vibrations of the air in pipes, that they must be affected in a similar manner by all alterations of temperaturee Thus, the frequency of the vibrations of a pipe must be increased nearly in the ratio of 35 to 34 by an elevation of 30 degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer; and if this change be accompanied by a transition from dampness to simple moisture, the soundvill be still more altered. Dr. Chladni has discovered that solids of all kinds, when of a proper form,. are capable of longitudinal vibrations, exactly resembling in their nature those of the air in an organ pipe, having also their seconiary or harmonic notes: related to them in a similar manner. These vibrations are always far more frequent than those of a column of air of equal length, the velocity, with vhich an impulse is transmitted by a solid of any kind, being usually from 5 to I6 times as great as the velocity of sound in air; so that the longitudinalb sounds are always extremely acute, vhen they are produced hy substances of moderate length. These sounds aſford perhaps the most accurate mode of determining the velocity of the transmission of an. impulse through any elastic substance, and of obtaining from that velocity the exact measure of its elasticity: they may be easily exhibited by holding a long bar or wire of iron or brass in the middle, and striking it at one end with a small hammer, in the direction of its length. The vibrations by which solid bodies moust usually produce sound are, hovever, not longitudinal, but lateral, and they are governcd cither by a tension, derived from the operation of a weight, or of some other external force, or by the natural elasticity of the substance. The vibrations of extended substances resemble most in their properties those of elastic ſluids, and they occur the most frequently in practice, although the vibrations produced by the elasticity oſ the substance may he considered as the most natural. Vibrations derived from tension are either those of chords or musical strings, or those of membranes; but the vibrations of membranes afford little variety, and have not hitherto been very accurately investigated, the drum being almost the only instrument in which they are concerned; they alo not however appear to differ materially in their properties from the vibrations of strings. A musical string or. chord is supposed to be perfeetly flexible, and of uniform thickness, to be stretched between two fixed points by a force incomparably greater than its own weight, and to vibrate in a single plane through a minute space on each side of its natural position. Its motions may then be traced through all their stages, by comparing the chord to a portion of an elastic medium of the same length, contained between two. bodies capable of reſlecting any impulse at each end; for example, Io a portion of air situated between two walls, or inclosed in a pipe stopped at both ends; for the vibration of such a medium vill be performed in the time occupied by any impulse in travelling through twice its length; and the vibration of the chord will be performed in the same time, supposing the height or depth of the medium equal to the length of a portion of the chord, of which the weight is equivalent to the force applied to streteh it, and which may be called with propriety the modulus oſ the tension. If the chord be at first bent into a figure of any kind, and then set at liberty, the place of any part of it at every subsequent time vill be such, that it vill always bæ in a right line between two points moving along the ſigure each way with the appropriate velocity; but in order to pursue this determination, we must repeat the figure. of the chord on each side of the ſixed points in an inverted position, changing the ends as well as the sides. Hence it appears that, at the end of a single vibration, the whole chord vill assume a similar figure on the opposite side oſ its natural place, hut in an inverted position, and after a complete or double vibration, it will return precisely to the form which it had in the beginning. The truth of this result is easily shown by inflecting any long chord near one oſ its ends, having ſirst dravn a line under its natural position, and it will then be evident that the chord returns in each vibration nearly to the point of inſlection, and passes at that end but to a much shorter distance on the opposite side of the line, while at the other end its excursions are greatest on the opposite side of the line. The result of the calculation of the frequency of vibration agrees also perfectly vith experiment, nor is the eoincidence materially affected by the inſlexibility or elasticity of the string, by the resistance of the air, nor by the slight increase of the tension occasioned by the elongation of the string when it is inſlected: thus, if the weight or force causing the tension of a string vere equal or equivalent to the weight of 200 feet of the same string, that is, iſ the modulus of tension were 200 feet long, the velocity corresponding to half this height would be 80 feet in a second; and every impulse would be conveyed with this velocity from one end of the string to the other, so that if the string vere I foot long, it would vibrate 40 times in a second, if  inches, 80 times, and if it were 40 feet long, only once in a second. Ience, it is obvious that the time of vibration of any chord ĩs simply proportional to the length; and this may be shown either by means of such vibrations as are slow enough to be reckoned, or by a comparison with the sounds of pipes, or with other musical sounds. But if the tension of a chord of given length were changed, it would require to be quadrupled in order to double the frequency of vibration; and if the tension and length remained unaltered, and the weight of the chord were caused to vary, it would also be necessary to make the weight four times as great in order to reduce the frequeney of vibration to one half. It appears from the mode of tracing the progress of a vibration, which has already been laid down, that every chord vibrates in the same manner as if it were a part of a longer chord, composed of any number of such chords, continually repeated in positions alternately inverted; consequently iſ a long chord be initially divided into any number of such equal portions, its purts will continue to vibrate in the same manner as if they were separate chords; the points of division only remaining always at rest. Such subordinate sounds are called harmonies: they are often produced in violins by lightly touching one of the points of division with the finger, when the bow is upplied, and in all such cases it may be shown, by putting small feathers or pieces of paper on the string, that the remaining points of division are also quiescent, while the intervening portions are in motion. (Plate XXV. Fig. 343.) These harmonic sounds are also generally heard together with the fundamental sound of the chord, and it is, therefore, necessary, in such cases, to consider the subordinate vibrations as combined with a general one. It ĩs not, however, universally true that the fundamental sound must always be acompanied by all the harmonics of which the chord is susceptible; for I have found that by inflecting the chord exactly at any point in which the chord might be divided into a number of equal parts, and then suffering it to vibrate, we lose the effect of the corresponding harmonic. There is some difficulty in explaining the reason of the distinct production of these sounds, in cases where the theory appears to indicate a single and simple vibration only; but it appears to be most probable that they usually hecome audible in consequence of some imperceptible irregularity in the form or weight of the chord, which is just sufficient to derange the perfect coincidence of the actual motions with those which the theory indicates, without producing a discordance capable of offending the ear. That a chord irregularly loaded may have the relations of its harmonies disturbed, may ecasily be understood by considering the effect of a small weight placed at one of the points of division, which vill obviously retard the principal vibration, without materially affecting that of the portions terminated by it. Au abrupt and irregular agitation appears also in many cases to make the secondary notes more audible, while a gradual and delicate impulse, like that of the wind on the strings of an Aeolian harp, produces a sound almost entirely free from subordinate harmonics. It usually happens that the vibration of a chord deviates from the plane of its first direction, and hecomes æ rotation or revolution, which may be considered as composed of various vibrations in different planes, and which is often exceedingly complicated. These vibrations may be combined in the first instance in a manner similar to that which has been already explained respecting the vibrations of pendulums; and iſ the motion of the chord be supposed to follow the same law as that of a pendulum, the result of two entire vibrations thus united, may be either a vibration in an intermediate direction, or a revolution, in a cirele or in an ellipsis. But besides these compound vibrations oſ the whole chord, it is also frequently agitated by subordinate vibrations, which constitute harmonic notes of diſferent kinds, so that the vhole efſect becomes very intricate; as we may observe by a microscopic inspection of any luminous point on the surſace of the chord, for instance the reſleetion of a candle in the coil of a fine vire vound round it. The velocity of the motion is such that the path of the luminous point is marked hy a line of light, in the same manner as vhen a burning coal is whirled round; and the figures, thus described, are not only different at diſferent parts of the same chord, but they often pass through an amusing variety of forms during the progress of the vibration; they also vary considerably according to the mode in which that vibration is excitedl. (Plate XXV. Fig. 344, 345.) The vibrations immediately dependent on elasticity are those of rods, plates, rings,and vessels. These admit of much greater variety, and are of more dimcult investigation than the vibrations of chords A rod may be either wholly loose, or fixed at one end only, or at both; and it may either be loosely ſixed, in situation only, or firmly fixed, in direction as well as in situution; and these conditions may be variously combined with each other; the rod may also have a variety of secondary vibrations besides the principal or fundamental sound. All these cases have been examined by various mathematicians: the subject was begun by Daniel Bernoulli, and much extended by Euler, some of whose conclusions have been corrected by Riceati; and Chladni has compared them all with experiment. The sounds produced by the same rod, either under different circumstances, or as harmonics which may be heard at the same time, are scarcely ever related to each other in any simple proportion, except that when a rod ĩs loosely fixed at both ends, the frequency of the vibrations oſ the subordinate notes is expressed by the series of the squares of the natural numbers, as 1, 4,9, and 16. But the times occupied by any similar vibrations of rods, similarly circumstanced, are alvays direetly as the squares of their lengths, and inversely as their depthss When the rod is wholly at liberty, two at least of its points must be at rest, and these are at the distance of ahout one fifth of its length from either end: in the next sound of the same rod, the middle point ĩs at rest, with two others near the ends. There is by no means the same regularity in the progress of the ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF SOUND. 385 vibrations of rods of different kinds as in those of chords; it can only happen in particular cases that the rod will return aſter a complete vibration to its original state, and these cases are probably such as seldom occur in nature. The vibrations of plates differ from those of rods in the same manner as the vibrations of membranes differ from those of chords, the vibrations which cause the plate to bend in diſferent directions being combined vith each other, and sometimes occasioning singular modificationss These vibrations may be traced through vonderful varieties by Professor Chladni's method of strewing dry sand on the plates, which, when they are caused to vibrate by the operation of a bow, is collected into such lines as indicate those parts, which remain either perfectly or very nearly at rest during the vibrations. Dr. Hooke had employed a similar method, for showing the nature of the vibrations of a bell, and it has sometimes been usual, in military mining, to strew sand on a drum, and to judge, by the form in which it arranges itself, of the quarter from vhich the tremors produced by countermining proceed. (Plate XXV. Fig. 346.. 348) The vibrations of rings and of vessels are nearly connected with those of plates, but they are modified in a manner which has not yet been sufſiciently investigated. A glass, or a bell, divides in general into four portions vibrating separately, and sometimes into six or eight; they may readily be distinguished by means of the agitations excited by them in a fluid contained in the glass. It is almost unnecessary to observe, that the ſluid thus applied, by adding to the mass of matter to be moved, makes the vibration slover, and the sound more grave. In some cases the vibrations of ſluids and solids are jointly concerned in the production of sound: thus, in most of the pipes of an organ denominated reed pipes, the length of a tongue of metal is so adjusted, as to be capable oſ vibrating in the same time with the air contained in the pipe. Sometimes, hovever, the air only serves to excite the motion of the solid, as in some other organ pipes, which are usually much shorter than would be required for producing the proper note alone, and probably in the glottis, or organ of the voice, of animals. On the other hand, the alternate opening and shutvOL. I. 3D tiug of the lips, in blowing the trumpet or Frenclv horn, can scarcely be called a vibration, and the piteh of the sound is here determined by the properties of the air in the pipe only. The vibrations of a solid may be excited by an undulation propagated through a ſluid; thus, wvhen a loud sound strikes against a chord, capable of vibrating, either accurately, or very nearly, with the saume frequency, it causes a sympathetic tone, resembling that from vhich it originated; and the chord may produce such a sound either by vibrating as a whole, or by dividing itself into any number of equal parts. Thus, if the damper be raised from any of the strings of a harpsichord, it may be made to vibrate, by striking or singing any note, of which the sound corresponds either to that of the whole string, or to that of any of its aliquot parts. Sometimes also two chords that are very nearly alike, appear, when sounding together, to produce precisely the same note, vhich diſſers a little from each of those which the chords would produce separately; and a similar circumstance has been observed with respect to two organ pipes placed near each other. In these cases the vibrating substances must affect each other through the medium of the air; nearly in the same manner as two elocks, which rest on the same support, have been found to modiſy each other's motions, s0 as to exhibit a perfect eolncidence in all of them. It is uncertain whether any fibres in the ear are thus sympathetically agitated in the process of hearing, but if there are any such vibrating ſibres, their motions must necessarily be of short duration, otherwise there vould be a perpetual ringing in our ears, and ve should never be able to judge accurately of the termination of a sound. Besides, a sympathetic vibration may be excited not only by a sound producing vibrations of equal frequency, but also by a sound, of which every alternate, or every third or fourth vibration, coincides with its motions: it would, therefore, he diſicult to distinguish such sounds from each other, it hearing depended simply on the excitation of sympathetic vibrations. It is true that we generally distinguish, in listening to a loud and deep sound, precisely such notes as would be thus produced; but it is only when the sounding hody is capable of affording them from the nature of its vibrations; for ve may listen ſor them in vain in the sound of a bell or of a humming top. There is, however, no doubt that the muscles, with which the diſferent parts of the ear are furnished, are concerned in accommodating the tension of some of them to the better transmission of sound; and it is equally certain that their operation is not absolutely necessary in the process. . The external ear serves in some measure for collecting the undulations oſ sounds transmitted through the air, and reſlecting them into the auditory passage, at the hottom of which they strike against the membrane of the tympanum or drum, which, being larger and more moveable than some of the subsequent parts, is capable of transmitting a stronger impulse than they would immediately receive. In the sume manner ve may often feel the tremors produced in a sheet of thick paper, held in the hand, by the agitation of the air, derived from a loud sound, which vould not otherwise have affected the organ of touch. The impulse received by the membrane of the tympanum is conveyed by the hammer and anvil, two small bones, which together constitute a kind of bent lever, through a third minute ſlattened bone, to a fourth called the stirrup, which serves merely as a handle to its basis, a plate covering the oriſice of a cavity called the vestibule, and communicaling the impulse to the mucous fluid which fills this cavity. The ſluid of the vestibule, thus agitated, acts immediately on the terminations of the nerves, vhich form a loose membranous tissue, almost flouting in it, vhile another portion of them is distributed on the surface oſ three semicircular tubes or canals, opening at hoth ends into the cavity, and a third portion supplies the cochlea, a detached channel, which appears to be arranged vith singular art as a micrometer of sound. It resembles the spiral convolutions of a snail shell, and if uncoiled, vould constitute two long conical tubes connected at their summits, the buse of one opening into the vestibule, that of the other being covered by a membrane only, which sepurates the fluid from the air contained in the general cavity of the ear, or the tympanum. It is evident from the properties of ſluids moving in conical pipes, that the velocity of any impulse affecting the fluid at the hase of the cone must be extremely increased at its vertex, vhile the ſlexibility of the membrane at the base of the second chunnel allows this motion 10 be effected vithout diſiiculty. It has also been supposed that a series of fibres are arranged along the eochlea, vhich are susceptible of sympathetic vibrations of different frequeney according tn the nature of the sound, which acts on them; and, vith some limitations, the opinion does not appear to he wholly improbablee We must, however, renson ith great caution respert- ing the functions of every part of the ear, since its structure varies so much in different animals, that we cannot pronounce with certainty respecting the indispensable necessity of any one arrangement for the perfection of the sense. And even in the case of the human ear, many of these parts may be spared without great inconvenience; thus, we hear very perfectly, by means of impressions communicated to the teeth, and through them to the large bones of the head; and even when the membrane of the tympanum, and all the small bones of the ear have been destroyed by disease, the undulations of the air still continue to affect the organ in the usual manner. ſPlate xXXV. Fig. 319.. 351.) Such is the delicacy of the organs of hearing in their perfect state, that we readily distinguish not only the frequency of the vibrations of a sound, whether constant or variable, and its loudness or soſtness, but also the quality of tone, depending on the law which governs each separate vibration, and which constitutes the difference between instruments of different kinds, or different instruments of the same kind, or even the same instrument differently employed. Thus, we can distinguish very accurately the voices of our friends, even when they whisper, and those modiſications of the same voice which constitute the various vowels and semivowels, and which, with the initial and final noises denominated consonants, compose the words of a language. We judge also, vithout an error of many degrees, of the exact direction in which the sound approaches us; but respecting the manner in which the ear is enabled to make this discrimination, we cannot reason upon any satisfactory grounds. LECTURE XXXIII. ON HAERMONICS. THE pitiosophical theory of harmonics, or of the combinations of sounds, was considered by the ancients as affording one of the most refined employments of mathematical speculation; nor has it been neglected in modern times, but it has been in general either treated in a very abstruse and confused manner, or connected entirely with the practice of musie, and habitually associated with ideas of mere amusement. We shall, however, find the diſficulties by no means insuperable, and the subject will appear to be worthy of attention, not only on its own account, but also for the sake of its analogy with many other departments of science. It appears both from theory and from experience, that the transmission of one sound does not at all impede the passage of another through the same medium. The ear too is capable of distinguishing, without difficulty, not only two sounds at once, but also a much greater number. The motions produced by one series of undulations being wholly indifferent with respect to the effect of another series, and each particle of the medium being necessarily agitated by both sounds, its ultimate motion must always be the result of the motions which would have been produced in it by the separate sounds, combined according to the general laws of the composition of motion, which are the foundation of the principal doctrines of mechanicss, When the two sounds, thus propagated together, coincide very nearly in direction, the motions belonging to each sound may be resolved into two parts, the one in the common or intermediate direction, and the other transverse to ĩt; the latter portions will obviously be very small; they will sometimes destroy each other, and may always be neglected in determining the effect of the combination, since the ear is incapable of distinguishing a difference in the directions of sounds which amounts to a very few degrees only. Thus, when two equal undulations, of equal frequency, coincide in this manner, and when the particular motions are directed the same vay at the same time, the velocities in each direction are added together, and the joint effect is doubled, or perhaps quadrupled, since it appears that the strength oſ sound ought to be estimated from the squares of the velocities oſ the particles: but when the particular motions of the two sounds counteract each other, both their efſects are vholly destroyed. These combinations resemble the cſſeets of the waves of water in similar circumstances, vhich we have already examined, and they may be illustrated by drawing two curved lines representing the motions which constitute the sounds, in the same manner as we have already supposed them to be deseribed, by a vibrating particle, on a surface moving uniformly in a transverse direction; these ſigures being placed side by side, the joint effect may be represented by a third curve dravn in such a direction as to he alvays in the middle between the corresponding points of the first tvo. A similar result, but still more strongly marked, may he obtained mechanically, by cutting two boards or plates of any kind into the form of the curves, and then dividing one of them into a number of thin pieces or sliders, by lines perpendicular to the general direction of the curve, or to the termination of the plate which is parallel to it: the hottom of these sliders being then placed on the other curve, their general outline will represent the effect of the combination. We may assume for this purpose the form of the harmonic curve, which represents the motions of a body vibrating like a pendulum, and vhich probably agrees very nearly with the purest and simplest sounds. (Plate XXV. Fig. 552. If the two undulations difſer a little from each other in frequency, they alternately tend to destroy each other, and to acquire a double or perhaps a quadruple force, and the sound gradually increases and diminishes in continued succession at equal intervals. This intension and remission is called a beat, and furnishes us with a very accurate mode oſ determining the proportional frequency of the vibrations, when the absolute frequency of one of them is known, or the absolute frequency oſ both, when their proportion is known; since the beats are usually slow enough to be reckoned, although the vibrations themselves can never he distinguished. Thus, if one sound consisted of 100 vibrations in a second, and produced vith another acuter sound a single beat in every second, it is obvious that the second sound must consist of 101 vibrations in a second. Again, if we have two portions of a similar chord equally stretched, or two simple pipes, of which the lengths are in the proportion of I5 to I6, they vill produce a beat in I5 vibrations of the longer; and if we count the number of beats in 15 seconds, we shall ſind the number of vibrations in a single second. The easiest way of procuring two such strings or pipes, in practice, is to tune them by a third, so that they may be respectively à and; of its length; the vibrations of the third pipe in a second will also be equal to the number oſ beats oſ the first two in 12 seconds. (Plate XXV. Fig. 353.) When the beats of two sounds are too frequent to be heard as distinet augmentations of their force, they have the same effect as any other impulses which recur in regular succession, and produce a musical note, which has been denominated a grave harmonic. Thus, two sounds in the proportion of 4 to 5, produce, when they are both very low or grave, an audible succession of beats; but vhen they are higher or more acute, a grave harmonic, vhich may be separately distinguished as a third sound by an attentive ear. Those combinations of sounds, which produce beats distinctly audible, have in general a harsh and coarse effeet, and are called discords; but those oſ which the vibrations are so related, as to have a common period after a few alternations, and which may be observed to produce a third sound, constitute concords, vhich are in themselves the more perfect as the common periods are shorter. (Plate XXV. Fig. 353.) The natural association of the secondary sounds, which generally accompany alimost all musical notes, serves in some measure as a foundation for the science of harmonics, the same sounds, as are thus frequently connected in nature, being found to he agreeable vhen united by art. But iĩt appears to depend still more immediately on a love of order, and a predilec tion for a regular recurrence of sensations, primitively implanted in the human mind. Hence, vhen two sounds are heard together, those proportions are the most satisfactory to the ear, which exhibit a recurrence of a more or less perfect coincidence at the shortest intervals, expressed by the smallest numbers of the separate vibrations: for though we cannot immediately estimate the magnitude of the vibrations, yet the general effect oſ a regular or irregular succession necessarily produces the impression of sweetness or harshness. The same sounds, as form the best accompaniment for each other, are also in general the most agreeable for melodies, consisting of a succession of single notes; their intervals are, however, too large to be sufficient for the purposes of music, and they require to be mixed with other sounds which are related to them in a manner nearly similar. The same constitution of the human mind, which fits it for the perception of harmony, appears also to be the cause of the love of rhythm, or of a regular succession of any impressions whatever, at equal intervals of time. Even the attachment to the persons and places to which we are accustomed, and to habits of every kind, bears a considerable resemblance to the same principle. The most barbarous nations have a pleasure in dancing; and in this case, a great part of the amusement, as far as sentiment and grace are not concerned, is derived from the recurrence of sensations and actions at regular periods of time. Hence not only the elementary parts of music, or the single notes, are more pleasing than any irregular noise, but the whole of a composition is governed by a rhythm, or a recurrence of periods of greater or less extent, generally distinguished by hars, which are also the constituent parts of larger periods, and are themselves subdivided into smalle. An interruption of the rhythm is indeed occasionally introduced, but merely for the sake of contrast; nearly in the same manner as, in all modern pieces of music, discords are occasionally mixed with concords, in order to obtain an agreeable variety of expression. In a simple eomposition, all the intervals are referred to a single fundamental or key note. Thus, any air which can be played on a trumpet or on a bugle horn, must consist of the harmonics of a single sound only: andwhen an accompaniment is performed by a French horn, the length of the instrument is first adjusted to the principal note, and all the sounds which it is to produce are selected from this natural series. But the notes constituting the most natural scale are not, without exception, comprehended among the harmonics; they are, however, all immediately dependent on a similar relation. A sound of which the vibrations are of equal frequency with those of another, is called a unison; if two vibrations occur for every one of the fundamental note, the sound is called its superior octave, being the eighth of those which are commonly considered as filling up the scale; and on account of its great resemblance to the fundamental note, it is described by the same letter of the alphabet, or by the same syllable; so that all audible sounds are considered as repetitions of a series contained within the interval of an octave. One third part of the string or pipe gives the ſifth above the octave; one fourth the double octave, and one fifth of the string its third. Thus we obtain the common accord or chord, or the harmonic triad, consisting of the fundamental note, with its third and ſifth, which produces the most perfect harmony, and vhich also contains the constituent parts of the most simpie and natural melodies. ut we are still in want of intermediate steps for the scale; these are supplied by completing first, the triad of the ſifth, which gives us the second, and the seventh, of vhich 9 and I5 vibrations correspond respectively to 8 of the fundamental, and which may also be found in the ascending series of natural harmonies; and in the second place, by adding the fourth and sixth in such proportions as to make up another perfect triad with the octave; the respective notes consisting of 4 and 5 vibrations, while the fundamental note makes , and being no where found among the natural harmonics. The complete scale is, therefore, formed by these harmonic triads contiguous to and connected with each other; the middle one being the triad of the key note, the superior one that of its fifth, which is sometimes called the dominant or governing note, and the inferior one that of the fourth, or subdominant. This scale is derived from principles so simple, that it may properly be considered as a natural arrangement, and ĩt appears to be found vith little variation in barbarous as vell as in civilised countries. (Plate XXV. Fig. 354.) A long piece would, however, be too monotonòus, unless the fundamental note were sometimes changed; we may, therefore, take at pleasure one of the auxiliary triads for the principal harmony, and ve may continue the modulation or progression, until every note of the scale becomes in succession a key note. But, in order to fill up the intervals of these several scales in just proportion, it becomes necessary to add several new notes to the ſirst series, for instance, i ve tuke the seventh for a key note, we shall want five new sounds within the octave, making twelve in the vhole, which is the number usually employed in music The interval between any two adjoining sounds oſ the twelve is called a semitone or half note, two semitones VOL. I. 3 e muking a tone or note; these terms are, however, sometimes employed with various subordinate distinctions and limitations. The five additional sounds have no separate names, but they are denominated from the neighbouring notes on either side, with the addition of the term shar) or ſlat, accordingly as they are a semitone higher or lower than the notes of which they bear the names. For still further variety, we sometimes change the place of the middle note of each triad, placing the minor third, or the interval expressed by the ratio oſ 5 to 6, below the major, which is in the ratio of 4 to 5; and the scale thus formed is called the scale of the minor mode, in contradistinetion to the major, the three principal thirds being depressed a semitone. Sometimes, however, the alteration is made in the third of the key note only, especially in ascending, in order to retain the seventh of the major scale, which leads so naturally into the octave, as to be sometimes called the characteristic semitone of the key; and it is for this reason, that the triad, in which it is found, is called the accord of the dominant, which, in all regular compositions, immediately precedes the termination in the key note. The major and minor triads, with the diseord of the flat seventh, may be considered as constituting the ſoundation of all essential harmonies. The ſlat seventh is principally used vith the major triad, in transitions from the fundamental key into its fourth, to which that seventh naturally belongs as a concord; s0 that it serves to introduce the new key, by strongly murking the particular note in which ĩt differs from the old one; and in such cases the ſlat seventh always descends into, or is followed by, the third of the new key, and the third of the first triad ascends into the new key note. Other discords are also sometimes introduced, but they are in general either partial continuations of a preceding, or anticipations of a following accordd. Two different parts of a harmony are never allowed, in regular and serious compositions, to accompany ench other in successive oetaves or ſifths, since such a succession is found to produce a disagrecable monotony of effect, except when a series of octaves is continue for some time, so as to be considered as a | repetition of the same part. These a are almost the only principles, upon hich the art of accompaniment, 2s well as the general theoryof practical music, is founded. Many prolix treatises have been written on the subject, but they only contain particular illustrations of the application of these principles, together with a few refinements upon them. The art oſ composition, however, depends much more on a good taste, formed by habitual attention to the best models, and aided, perhaps, by some little natural predisposition, than upon all the precepts of science, which teach us only how to avoid what is faulty, without instructing us in the mode of attaining vhat is heautiſul or sublime. It is impossible to assign any such proportions for the twelve sounds thus employed, that they may be perfectly appropriate to all the capacities in vhich they are used; their number is, therefore, sometimes considerably increased; and in some instruments they may be varied without limit, at the performer's pleasure, as in the voice, in instruments with ſinger boards, and in some wind instruments; but in many cases this is impracticable, nor could any imaginable alteration make all the intervals perfect, unless every note were varied, whenever ve returned to it by steps different from those by which we had left it. The simplest mode of arranging the twelve sounds, is to divide the octave into twelve equal intervals, all the notes being in the same proportion to those which immediately follow them: this is called the equal temperament, because the imperfeetion is equal in all keys. In this system of temperament, the ſiſths, which consist of seven semitones, are a little too ſlat, that is, the interval is a little too small; the minor thirds, consisting of three semitones, are also too ſlat, and the major thirds too sharp. But it has generally heen esteemed best to preserve some keys more free from error; partly for variety, and partly because some are more frequently used than others: this cannot, however, be done vithout making some of the scales more imperfect than in the equal temperament. A good practical mode of performing it, is to make six perfect ſifths, in descending from the key note of the natural scale, and six ascending ſifths equally imperfect among themselves. We thus retain a slight imperfection in the scales most commonly used, and make the keys which are most remote from them considerably less perfeet. Another method, vhich is perhaps somewhat more easily executed, is to make the ſifth and third of the natural scale perfeetly correct, to interpose between their octaves, the second and sixih, so as to make three fifths equally tempered, and to de- scend from the key note by seven perfect fifths, which will complete the scnle. Any of these modes of temperament may be actually executed, either by the estimation of a good ear, or, still more accurately, by counting the frequency of the beats which the notes make with each other. Tor denoting precisely the absolute as well as the relative frequency of the sounds of the different octaves, we employ the ſirst seven letters of the alphabet; A being the key note of the minor mode, in the scale of natural notes, and C of the major. The peculiar characters used in music are generally disposed on five or more lines, with their intervening spaces, each implying a separate step in the scale, setting out from any line at pleasure which is marked with an ill formed G, a C, or an F; a shar) or a flat implying that all the notes written on the line, or in the space, to vhich it belongs, are to he raised or depressed a semitone, and a natural restoring the note to its original value. The actual frequency of the vibration of any note, according to the pitch most usually employed, may be found, if we recollect to call a noise, recurring every second, the first C, then the C denoted hy the mark oſ the tenor cliff will be the ninth, consisting of 256 vibrations in a second. The ſifth, consisting of sixteen vibrations, will be nearly the lowest audible note, and the fourteenth the highest note used in music, but the sixteenth, consisting of above 50 000 vibrations in a second, may perhaps be an audible sound. The frequency of the vibrations of the other notes may easily be calculated from the known relations which they bear to the note thus determined. (Plate XXV. TFig. 355.) - LECTURE XXXIV. ON MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. THE application of the theory of harmonies to practice depends on the construction of musical instruments of diſferent kinds: of these we shall only be able to take a cursory view, and we shall aſterwards attend to the historical order of the most remarkable steps, by which both the theory and practice of music have been advanced to a high degree of reſinement. Musical instruments may be most conveniently arranged, accordingly as they are principally caleulated for exciting sound by the vibrations of chords, o membranes, of elastic plates, or of the air; or by the joint effects of the air and a solid body vibrating together. The essential varieties of stringed instruments are found in the harp, the harpsichord, the pianoforte, the clavichord, the guitar, the violin, the vielle or monochord, and the aeolian harp. In all these, the immediate force of the sound of the strings is increased by means of a sounding board, which appears to be agitated by their motion, and to act more powerfully on the air than the strings could do alone. In the harp, the sound is produced by inflecting the string with the finger, and suffering it to return to its place. The lyre of the ancients differed from the harp only in its form and compass, except that the performer sometimes used a plectrum, which was a small instrument, made of ivory, or some other substance, for striking the strings. Each note in the harp has a separate string; and in the Weleh harp there are two strings to each note of the principal scale, with an intermediate row for the sem tones; but in the pedal harp, the half notes are formed by pressing pins against thè strings, so as to shorten their eſſective length. Instead of this method, an attempt has lately been made to produce the semitones by changing the tension of the stringss, which is said to have succeeded tolerably well although it appears at ſirst sight somevhat unpromising. In the harpsichord, and in the spinet, which is a small harpsichord, the quill acts like the finger in the harp, or the plectrum in the lyre, and it is fixed to the jack by a joint with a spring, alloving it without diſficulty to repass the string, which is here of metal. Sometimes leather is used instead of quills; and this serves to make the tone more mellow, but less poverful. esides two strings in unison, for each note, the harpsichord has generally a third which is an octave above them. Diſſerent modiſications oſ the tone are sometimes produced by striking the vire in diſerent parts, by bringing soſt leather loosely into contact with its fixed extremity, and by some other means. When the finger is removed from the key, a damper of cloth falls on the string, and destroys its motion. In all instruments of this kind, the perfeetion of the tone depends much on the construction and situation of the sounding board: it is usually made of thin deal wood, strengthened at different parts by thicker pieces ſixed belo it. . In the pianoforte, the sound is produced by a blow of a hammer, raised by a lever, which is as much detached from it as possiblee. The duleimer, or hackbrett of the Germans, is also made to sound by the percussion of hammers, hut they are simply held in the hand of the performer. The ęlavichord, the clavier of the Germans, diſſers from other keyed instruments in the manner in which the length of the string is determined; it is attached at one end to a hridge, and at the other to a pin or serew as usual; but the eficetive length ĩs terminated on une side by the bridge, and on the other hy a ſlat wire projeeting from the end of the key, which strikes the string, and at the same time serves as a lemporary hridge as long as the sound continues: the remaining portion of the string is prevented from sounding by being in contact with a strip of eloth, which also stops the vhole vibration as soon as the hammer falls. The instrument is eapable of great delicacy and neatness of expression, but ĩt is deficient in forcee The guitar is generally played with the ſingers, like a harp; but each string is made to serve for several notes, by means of frets, or cross wires, ſixed to the ſinger board, on which ĩt is pressed down by the other hand. But in the pianoforte guitar, hammens are interposed between the fingers and the strings, acting like those of the pianoforte. The mandoline and lute are species of the guitar: and the arch lute was a very powerful instrument of the same kind, formerly much used in full pieces. In the violin, and in other instruments resembling it, all the strings are capable of having their length altered at pleasure, by being pressed down on the finger board. The sound is produced by the friction of the bow, rubbed with resin: the string is carried forwards by its adhesion to the bow, and vhen its resistance has overcome this adhesion, it begins to return in opposition to the friction; for the friction of bodies in motion is generally less than their adhesion when they are at rest with respect to each other, besides that the contact of the string with the bow is usually in great measure interrupted by subordinate vibrations, which may be distinguished, by the assistance of a microscope, in the manner already deseribed; but when the string changes once more the direction of its motion, it adheres again to the bow, and is accelerated by it as beforee The original instrument appears to have heen the viola or tenor, ĩts diminutive the violino, its intensitive, expressing a greater bulk, the violone or double hass, and the diminutive of this, the violoncello, or common hass. The viola di gamba had one or more long strings separate from the ſinger hoard, serving as an occasional accompaniment. The vielle, or monochord, commonly called the hurdy gurdy, has frets which are raised hy the action of the ſingers on a row of keys; and instead of a bow, the string is made to vibrate by the motion of a vooden wheel: there is a second string serving as a drone, producing alvays the same sound; this is furnished vith a bridge loosely ſixed, vhich strikes continually against the sounding board, and produces a peculiar nasal effect. The trumpet marine, or trumpet Marigni, vas a string of the same kind, which was lightly touched at proper points, so as to produce harmonic notes only; HE impelled by a how. The aeolian harp, when agitated by the wind, afſords a very smooth and delicate tone, frequently changing from one to another of the harmonies of the string, accordingly as the foree of the wind varies, and as it acts more or less unequally on different parts of the string. (Plate XXV. Fig. 556.) The human voice depends principally on the vibrations oſ the membranes of the glottis, excited by a current of air, which they alternately intercept and suſfer to pass; the sounds being also modiſied in their subsequent progress through the mouth. Perhaps the interception of the air by these membranes is only partial; or it may he more or less completely intercepted in sounds of different kinds: the operation of the organs concerned is not indeed perſectly undersiood, but from a knovledge of their structure, we may judge in some measure of the manner in which they are employed. The trachea, or windpipe, conveys the air from the chest, which serves for bellows: hence, it enters the larynx, which is principally composed oſ five elastic cartilages. The lowest of these is the ericoĩd cartilage, a strong ring, which forms the basis of the rest: to this are ſixed, before, the thyreoĩd cartilage, and behind, the two arytaenoid cartilages, composing together the cavity of the glottis, over which the epiglottis inelines backwards, as it ascends from its origin at the upper part of the thyreoĩd cartilage. Within the glottis are extended its liguments, contiguous to each other before, vhere they are inserted into the thyreoid cartilage, but capable of diverging considerably behind whenever the arytacnoid cartilages separate. These ligaments, as they vary their tension, in consequence of the motions of the arytaenoid cartilages, are susceptible of vibrations of various ſrequency, and as they vibrate, produce a continuous sound. Properly speaking, there are to ligaments on each side; but it is not fully understood how they operate; probably one pair only performs the vibrations, and the other assists, by means of the litile cavity interposed, in enabling the air to act readily on them, and in communicating the vibrations again to the air. (Plate XXVI. Fig. 357, 358.) vels and semivovels are continuous sounds, chieſly formed by this appiratus in the glottis, and modiſied eithes in their origin or in their progress by the various arrangements of the different parts of the mouth. Of simple vovels sixteen or eighteen may be enumerated in different languages: in the French nasal vovels the sound is in part transmitted through the nostrils, by means of the depression oſ the soft palate: the perfect semivowels difter from the vowels only in the greater resistance which the air undergoes in its passage through the mouth; there are also nasal and sen inasal semiThe vo vowels. The perfect consonants may he either explosive, susurrant, or mute; the explosive consonants begin or end with a sound formed in the larynx, the others are either whispers, or mere noises, without any vocal sound. By attending to the various positions of the organ, and by making experiments on the effects of pipes of different forms, it is possible to construct a machine which shall imitate very accurately many of the sounds of the human voice; and this has indeed been actually performed by Kratzenstein and by Kempelen. (Plate XXVI. Fig. 359.) Although the vibrating ligaments of the glottis may be anatomically denominated membranes, yet their tension is probably confined to the direction of their length, and their action is, therefore, the same with that of a simple string or chord. But in the case of a tamhourine and a drum, the membrane is stretched in every direction, and the force of tension consequently acts in a different manner. The principal character of such instruments is their loudness, derived from the magnitude of the surface which strikes the air, and the short duration of the sound, on account of the great resistance necessarily produced by the airs reaction. Musical instruments which produce sounds, by means of vibrations depending on the elasticity of solid hodies, are less frequently employed than others; they have a peculiar character of tone, which is by no means unpleasant, but which renders them less ſit to be mixed with other instruments, since their secondary harmonics are in different proportions. Such is the stacada, a series of cylinders of glass, or of metal, struck either immediately with hammers, or by means of keys; the tuning fork, the gong, the cymbal, and the bell. Bells and other similar instruments are usually made of a mixture of copper, and tin, with a little brass or Zinc, which is more highly elastic than either of the component parts taken separately. The harmonica consists of a series of vessels of glass, either placed side by side, or ſixed on a common axis, and made to sound hy the friction of the fingers, and sometimes by that of rubbers of cork. The vibrations of an elastic plate, agitated by a current of air, vhich it continually admits and excludes, constitute the sound of the vox humana and regal organ pipes, resembling the human voice as much in their effects as in the mechunism on which they depend. (Plate XXVI. Fig 360.. 562.) vOoL I. F Of simple wind instruments, in which the quality o? the sound is determined hy the vibrations of the air, the principal are the syrinx, the ſlute, the ſlageolet, the diapason organ pipe, whether open, stopped, or with a chimney, the humming top, and the cavity of the mouth in whistling, or in playing on the jews harp. The pipes of the syrinx are adjusted to their respective notes by cutting them, or ſilling them up, until they are reduced to a proper length; and the eſſective length of the ſlute and ſlageolet is altered at pleasure by opening or shutting the holes made at proper distances in them; the opening a hole at any part having the same effect as if the pipe were cut off a little beyond it, and the elevation of the tone being somewhat greater as the hole is larger. The instruments differ little except in the mechanism, by vhich the breath is directed, in such a manner as to excite a sound; and the ſlageolet, when furnished with bellows, becomes a baxpipe. The tongue of the jews hurp is an elastic plate, but the sound, which iĩt immedia ely produces, serves only as a drone; its vibration, however, appears to act like the motion of the bow of a violin in exciting another sound: this sound, although faint, ĩs still suſficiently musical, and appears to be determined hy the magnitude of the cavity of the mouth, nearly in the saume manner as that oſ the humming top, or as the sound of the sume cavity produced in whistling, by a current of air which is forced through it. (Plate XXVI. Tig. 363.. 567.) In mixed wind instruments, the vibrations or alternations of solid bodies are made to eooperate with the vibrations of a given portion of air. Thus, in the trumpet, and in horns oſ various kinds, the force of inſlation, and perhaps the degree of tension oſ the lips, determines the number of parts into which the tube is divided, and the harmonic which is produced. In the serpent, the lips cooperate with a tube, of vhich the eſieetive length may he varied hy opening or shutting holes, and the instrument which has been called an organized trumpet appears to act in a similur manner; the trombone has a tube vhich slides in and out at pleasure, and changes the actual length of the vhole instrument. The hauthoy, and clarinet have mouth pieces oſ diſſerent forms, made of reeds or canes, and the reed pipes of an organ, of various constructions, are furnished with an clastic plate of metal, which vibrates in unison vith the column of air that they contuin. An organ gencerally consists of a number of difſerent series of such pipes, so n æ arranged, that by means of registers, the air proceeding from the bellows may be admitted to supply each series, or exeluded from it, at pleasure, and a valve is opened, vhen the proper key is touched, which causes all the pipes belonging to the note, in those series of which the registers are open, to sound at once. These pipes are not only such as are in unison, but frequently also one or more octaves above and below the principal note, and sometimes also twelfths and seventeenths, imitating the series oſ natural harmonies. But these subordinate sounds ought to be comparatively faint, otherwise their irregular interference would oſten occasion an intolerable discord, instead of the grand and sublime effect which this instrument is capable of producing, when it is judiciously constructed and skilfully employed. (?Plate XXVI. Fig. 568.) The practice of music appears to be of earlier origin than either its theory, or any attention to the nature and general phenomena of sound. The first Iyre, with three strings, is said to have been invented in Egypt by lermes, under Osiris, between the years 1800 and 1500 hefore Christ; hut a tradition so remote, concerning a personage so enveloped in fable, can scarcely be considered as constituting historical evidence: we cannot, therefore, expect to ascertain with any certainty the proportions of these strings to each other; some suppose that they vere successive notes of the natural seale, others that they contained the most perfect concords; perhaps in reality each performer adjusted them in the manner which best suited his own fancy. The trumpet is said to have been employed about the same time; its natural harmonics might easily have furnished notes for the ex tension of the scale of the lyre, but it does not appear that the ancients ever adopted this method of regulating the scalee. The lyre with seven strings is attributed to Terpunder, about 700 years before our era, and two centuries aftervards, either Py thagoras, or Simonides, completed the octave, which cunsisted of intervals diſſering very little from the modern scale, the key note being nearly in the middle of the series. In subsequent times the number oſ the strings was much increased; the modulations, and the relations of the intervals, became very intricate, and were greatly diversified in a variety of modes or scales, vhich must have aſſorded an inexhaustible supply of original and striking melodies, but which could scarcely admit so many pleasing combinations, as our more modern systems Although it is certain that the ancients had frequent accompaniments in perfect harmony - ith the principal part, yet they had no regular art of counterpoint, or of performing different melodies together; nor does it appear that they ever employed discords. The tibia of the ancients resembled a hauthoy or clarinet, for it had a reed mouth piece, about three inches long; the same performer generally played on two of these instruments at once. There vere, however, several varieties of the tibia; and it is not improbable that some of them may have had the simple mouth piece oſf the flageolet. The first philosophical ohserver of the phenomena of sound, aſter Pythagoras, appears to have been Aristotle; he notices a great variety of curious facts in harmonics among his mechanical problems; and he entertained a very correct idea of the true nature of the motions of the air constituting sound. He knew that a pipe or a chord of a double length produced a sound of which the vibrations occupied a double time; and that the properties of concords depended on the proportions of the times occupied by the vibrations of the separate sounds. It is not indeed improbable that at least as much as this was known to Pythagoras, since he established correctly the numerical ratios between various sounds; but so little justice has heen done to his discoveries by the imperfect accounts of them which have been preserved, that we cannot expect to be able to ascertain his opinions on any subject with accuracy. The invention of the organ, by Ctesibius of Alexandria, about 2000 years ago, forms a remarkable epoch in harmonies. The larger instruments of this Kind were furnished with hydraulic bellows, the smaller with bellows of Ieather only; and they had keys which were depressed, like those of the modern organs, by the ſingers of the performer, and which opened valves communicating with the pipes. The modern system of music is onè of the few sciences, if such it can he called, vhich owe their improvement to the middle ages. The old ecclesiastical music was probably founded in great measure on that of the Greeks; its peculiar character consisted in the adoption of any note of the scale at pleasure for a key note, without altering materially the other intervals; and in this manner they obtained a variety much resembling that of the modes or kinds of music in use among the ancients. Pope Gregory, about the year 600, distinguished the notes by literal characters; the rules of counterpoint were formed by degrees from the experience of the ecclesiastical musicians; and early in the eleventh century, Guido of Arezzo, otherwise called Aretin the monk, introduced, together with some improvements in the theory and practice of music, a new method of naming the notes by syllables. Some curious experiments on sound may be found in the works of Bacon, but they added very little to the true theory of acustics, and some of them are not perfectly accurate. Galileo rediscovered what was well known to Aristotle, respeeting the nature of sound; for the words of Aristotle had heen 80 much misunderstood and misinterpreted, that he could have profited but little by them. His cotemporaries Mersenne and Kircher made a variety of very ingenious experiments and observations, on sound and on sounding bodies, many of them unknown to authors of Iater datee The theory of the ancient music was very accurately investigated, in the middle of the I7th century, by Meibomius: our countryman Wallis, also, besides employing much learning and penetration in the illustration of the ancient music, observed some insulated facts in harmonies which were new and interesting. i Sir Isuac Newtons propositions respecting the velocity of the propagation of sound were the begiuning of all the more accurate investigations relating to acustics. It must not be denied that these propositions contain some very inconclusive reasoning respecting the nature of the motions constituting sound, by which the determination of a particular case is erroneously extended into a general solution of the problem. The velocity is, however, truly calculated, hecause it is in fact independent of the particular nature of the vibration, and all that is wanting to generalise the proposition is the remark, that if the velocity of sound is the same in all cases, it must be such as the calculation indicates. An error nearly similar was committed by Brook Taylor, who in the year 1714 investigated the time occupied by the vibration of a string or chord upon a particular supposition, which he considered as a necessary condition, but which in fact confined the inquiry to a limited case. It happens, however, that the same determination of the frequency of vibration is equally true in all possible cases. Sauveur obtained, about the same time a similar conclusion from reasoning still less aceurate: his merits with respect to the theory of acusties in general are, however, by no means contemptibleLagrange and Euler have corrected and much extended the investigations of Newton, and of ſaylor; and Bernoulli and Dalembert have also materially contributed to the complete examination and discussion of the subject. About the year 1750, Daniel Bernoulli succeeded in obtaining a solution of a problem still more diſficult than those which relate to the motions of chords: he determined the frequency of the vibrations of an elastic rod fixed at one end, as well as the relations of ĩts subordinate sounds. Thesolution is not indeed absolutely general, but it may perhaps he adapted to all possible cases, by considering the eſſect of a combination of various sounds produced at the same time. Euler has also great merit in extending and facilitating the mathematical part of this investigation, although he has committed several mistakes respeeting the mechanical application of it, some of which he has himselſ corrected, and others have been noticed by Riccati and Chladni. The grave harmonies produced by the combination of two acute sounds were noticed about the same time hy Romieu and by Tartini, but ſirst by Romieu: their existence is not only remarkable in itself, but particularly as it leads to sume interesting consequences respecting the nature of sound and hearing in general. Bernoulli has also investigated, in a very ingenious manner, the sounds produced by the air in pipes of various forms, although confessedly on suppositions deviating in some measure from the truth: the results oſ his computations have, however, been amply conſirmed hy the experiments of Lambert on the sounds of ſlutes. Dr. Chladnĩ's method of examining the sounds of plates has aſſforded a very interesting addition to our knowledge of the nature of vibrations; his discovery of the longitudinal sounds of solids is of considerable importance, and he is said to be engaged in an extensive vork on the subjeet oſ acustics in general. Some remarks which I have made in the Philosophical Trans- actions may perhaps also be considered as tending to illustrate the viLrations of chords. The latest improvement which deserves to be mentioned, with respeet to the theory of sound, is Laplace's explanation of the increase of its velocity on account of the effect of heat, vhich appears to afford a satisſactory explanation of a diſficulty so much the more importunt, as it tended to lessen our confidence in every part of a theory, which diſered so videly from the most accurate and best established observations. CHRONOLOGY OF ACUSTICS. LECTURE XXXV. ON THE THEORY OF OPTICS. THE science of optics is one of the most elegant, and the most important branches of natural and mechanical philosophy. It presents us with experiments attractive by their beauty and variety, with investigations affording an ample scope for mathematical refinements, and with instruments of extensive utility both in the pursuit of other sciences, and in the common employments of life; nor is there any department of the study of nature in vhich an unprejudiced observer is more convincingly impressed with the characteristic marks of the perfect works of a supremely intelligent Artist. We shall first consider the essential properties which we discover in light, and which are the basis of our calculations, together with the conclusions immediately deducible from those properties; and next, the application of these laws to practical purposes, in the construction of optical instruments. We shall afterwards proceed to examine the more complicated phenomena, which are derived from the same laws, and which are observed as well in natural as in artificial circumstances, constituting the subdivision of physical optics., The description of the eye, and the explanation of the sense of vision, by means of which all these effects are connected with the human mind, is properly a continuation of the subject of physical optics: the intimate nature of light will be the next subject oſ investigation, and a historical sketeh of the progress of the science of opties will conclude the second part of this course of lectures. In order to avoid all hypothesis in the beginning, it will be necessary to define light from its sensible qualities. The sensation of light is sometimes produced by external pressure on the eye; we must exclude this sensation from the deſinitionof light, and must therefore call light an inſluence capable oſ entering 3 eye, and of afſecting it with a sense of visionn. A body, from which this inſluence appears to originate, is called a luminous body. We do not include i n this definition of the term light the invisible influences which occasion heat only, or blacken the salts of silver, although they both appear to differ from light in no other respects than as one kind of light differs from another; and they might probably have served the purpose of light, if our organs had been differently constituted. I A ray of light is considered as an inſinitely narrow portion of a stream of light, and a pencil as a small detached stream, composed of a collection of such rays accompanying each other. As a mathematical line is sometimes conceived to be described by the motion of a mathematical point, so a ray of light may be imagined to be described by the motion of a point of light. We cannot exhibit to the senses a single mathematical line, except as the boundary of two surfaces; in the same manner, ve cannot exhibit a single ray of light, except as the conſine between light and darkness, or as the lateral limit of a pencil of light. When light passes through a space free from all material substances, it moves, with great velocity, in a direction perfectly rectilinear; when also it passes through a material sũbstance ꝑ erfectly uniform in its structure, it probably always moves in a similar manner. But in many cases its motions are much interrupted. Those substances through which light passes the most freely, and in straight lines, are called homogeneous transparent mediums. Perhaps no medium is, strictly speaking, absolutely transparent; for even in the air, a considerable portion of light is intercepted. It has Leen estimated that of the horizontãl sunbeams, passing through about 200 miles of air, one two thousandth part only reaches us; and that no sensible light can penetrate more than 700 feet deep into the sea; a length of seven feet of water having been found to intercept one half of the light which enters it. : It is possible that mediums, not in other respects identical, may be homogeneous with respect to the transmission of light; for example, a glass may be filled, with a ſluid of such a density, that the light may pass uninterruptediy through their common surface; but it generally happens, that whenever the VOL. I. l i 56 nature of the medium is changed, the path of light deviates from a straight line: thus, the apparent places of the sun and stars are changed by the effect of the atmosphere, because the light, by which we judge of their situations, is deflected, in its passage out of the empty space heyond the atmosphere, first into the rarer and then into the denser air. In the same manner, when ve view a distant object over a fire or a chimney, it appears to dance and quiver, because the rays of light, by which it is seen, are perpetually thrown into new situations, by the different changes of the density of the air in consequence of the action of heat. When rays of light arrive at a surface, which ĩs the boundary of two mediums not homogeneous, they continue their progress without deviating from those planes, in which their former paths lay, and which are perpendicular to the surface of the mediums; but they no longer retain the same direction, a part of them, and sometimes nearly the whole, is reſlected hack from the surface, while the remaining part is transmitted and reſracted, or bent. The name refraction is derived from the distortion which it occasions in the appearance of an object viewed in part only by refracted light: thus an oar, partially immersed in water, appears to be hent, on account of the refraction of the light by which its lover part is seen, in its passage out of the water into the air. There is no instance of an abrupt change of the density of a medium, without a partial reſlection of the light, passing either into the denser or into the rarer medium; and the more obliquely the light falls on the surface, the greater, in general, is the reſlected portion. No body is 30 black as to reflect no light at all, and to be perfectly invisible in a strong light; although at the surface separating two very rare hodies, as two kinds of gas, the reflection ĩs too faint to be perceptible; but in this case the separation is seldom perfectly abrupt. The angles of incidence and reſlection are the angles made by a ray of light, before and after its reſlection, with a line perpendicular to the reflecting surſace; and these angles are always equal to each other; consequently the inclination of the rays to the surface remains also the same. The quantity of light reſlected, when other circumstances are equal, appears to be always greatest when the difference oſ the optical or refractive density of the two substances is greatest Thus the reſlection from the common surrace of glass and water is much weaker, than from a surface of glass exposed to the ai. Metals in general reſlect a great proportion of the light falling on them, and even the reſlection from the common surface of glass and mercury appears to he but little weaker than the reſlection from the surface oſ mercury immeiliately exposed to the air, so that the optical density of the metals must be exceedingly great. It appears also that a portion of the light falling on a reſlecting surface is always transmitted, at least to a certain depth, notwithstanding the apparent opacity of any large masses of the substance. Thus, if we cover a small hole of a window shutter with the thinnest leaf gold, ve shall find that it transmits a greenish light, vhich must have passed the reſlecting surface, but which, if the gold had heen but one ten thousandth of an inch in thickness, vould have heen wholly intercepted, and probably almost in the same manner as by passing through 700 feet of water. In transparent substances, hovever, the greater part of the light penetrates to all distances with little interruption, and all rays of the same kind, thus transmitted by the same surface, form with the perpendicular an angle of refraction which is ultimately in a certain constant proportion to the angle of incidence; that is, for instance, one half, three fourths, or two thirds, according to the nature of the surface. Thus, if the refractive properties of the substance vere such, that an incident ray, making an angle of one degree with the perpendicular, would be so refracted as to make an angle of only half a degree with the same line, another ray, incidlent at an angle of two degrees, would he refracted, vithout sensible error, into an angle of one degree But when the angles are larger, they vary from this ratio, their sines only preserving the proportion with accuracy: for example, if the angle of incidence at the supposed surface were increased to 90°, the angle of refraction would be 30° only, instead of 45°. Rays of the same kind are in general distinguished by the same colour, although some rays, which differ from each other in refrangibility, have scarcely a discernible difference of colour; and iĩt is possible, on the other hand, to find a surface at which the ratio of the angles is the same for rays of all kinds. (Plate XXVI. Fig. 569, 570.) In order to obtain the effects of regular reſleetion and transmission, we must have perfſectly smooth and polished substances; for all rough bodies, and sometimes even such as to the touch seem tolerably smooth, have their surfaces divided into innumerable eminences and depressions, constituting, in reality, as many separate surfaces, disposed in all imaginable directions, so that from the equality of the angles of incidence and reſlection, with respect to each of these surfaces, the light must be scattered every way, and no regularity can be observed in its direction. It is true that by continuing the mechanical operation of polishing, ve only render these surfaces more minute and more numerous; but when they are so much reduced in magnitude as not to be elevated or depressed more than about the millionth part of an inch, they appear to become, for some physical reason, incapable of actiug separately, und only to conspire in the general efect. In all cases of refraction, as well as of reſleetion, if the ray of light returned directly backwards in the same line to the surface, it would proceed, aſter a second refraction or reflection, in the direction precisely opposite to that in which it first was incident, so that the same lines vould mark its path in both cases. Thus, if we stand before a looking glass, with one eye shut, and cover its place on the glass with a finger, the same finger will hide the other eye as soon as it is shut, and the first is opened in its place; and a similar effect might be observeq, if the glass were under vater, or behind any other refracting substance. (Plate XXVI. Fig. 571.) The medium, in which the rays of light are caused to approach nearest to the line perpendicular to its surface, is said to have the greatest reſractive density. In general there is a considerable analogy between this refractive density and the specific gravity of the substance: thus water is more refractive than air, and glass than water. But inſlammable bodies are usually more refractive than bodies of the same speciſic gravity, which are not influammable; and it is well known that from the high refractive power of the diamund, in proportion to its actnal density, Sir Isuac Newton most ingeniously conjectured that it was combustible, as more modern experiments have actually shown it to be. Tt ĩs still more singular that he also imagined, from the same analogy, that vater consists of a combination of oily or inflammable particles, with others earthy or not inflammable. In the order of refractive density, beginning from the lowest, or a vacuum, we have airs and gases of different rarities, water, vhich is the least refractive of all liquids, and vhich is still less refractive when frozen into ice: aleohol, oils, glass, and lastly the diamond; but probably some metallic substances are much more refractive than even the diamond. The refractive powers of different substances, are usually estimated by a comparison of the refractions produced at their surfaces in contact with the air, which, in all common experiments, has the same sensible effect as a vacuum or an empty space; the ratio of the angles of refraction and incidence, vhen small, and that of their sines, in all cases, being expressed by the ratio of I to a certain number, which is called the index of the refractive density of the medium. Thus, vhen a ray of light ſpasses out of air into vater, the sines of the angles are in the ratio of 3 to 4, or of I toã. which is, therefore, the index of the refractive density of vater. In the same manner, for crown glass, the ratio is that of 2 to J, and the index I; but for ſlint glass it is somewhat greater, the ratio being nearly that of 5 to B. It may easily be shown that a refractive substance, limited by parallel surfaces, must transmit a ray of light, aſter a second refraction at ĩts posterior surface, in a direction parallel to that in which it first passed through the air. It is also found by experiment that such a substance, interposed between any two mediums of different kinds, produces no alteration in the whole angular deviation of a ray passing from one of them into the other. Hence it may be inferred, that the index of refraction at the common surface of any two mediums is the quotient of their respective indices. For instance, a plate of c rown glass being interposed between vater on one side and air on the other, it produces no change in the direction of a ray of light entering the water; aud the index of refraction at the common surface oſ glass and vater is 32. (Plate XXVI. Tig. 97ę, 578) There is one remarkable consaquence of, the general lav, by which the angles of incidence and refraction are related, that whenthe angle of incidence exceeds a certain magnitude, the refraction maybecome impossible; and in this case the ray of light is holly reſlected, in an angle equal to the angle of incidence. Thus, if the law oſ refraction required the sine of the angle oſ refraction to be twice as great as that of incidence, this condition could not take place iſ the angle of incidence were greater than 30°, s0 that vhen a ray passing vithin a dense medium falls very obliquely on its surface, it must be wholly reſlected; and the greater the density of the medium, the more frequently vill the light be totally reflectedl. This reſlection is more perfect than any other; the diamond nwes much of its brillianey to it: the great refractive density of this substance not only giving a lustre to its anterior surface, b ut also facilitating the total reſlection of such rays as fall obliquely on its posterior surface. IF we hold a prism, near a vindow, in a proper position, ve may observe that ĩts lower surface appears to he divided into two parts, the one much hrighter than the other; the common partial reflection taking place in one, and the total reſlection in the other. The two surfaces are separated by a coloured arch: it is coloured, becuuse the total refſlection commences at difſferent angles for the rays of different eolours; and iĩt is curved, hecause the points, at vhich the light passing to the eye forms a given angle with the surface, do not lie in a straight line; and if we throw a light on a vall by a reflection of this kind, ve may easily observe, as we turn the prism, the point at which the brightness of the image is very conspicuously inereased. (Plate XXVI. Fig. 574.) Such are the principal properties which we discover in light. Before we consider their immediate application to optical instruments, ve must examine the general theory of refraction and reſlection, at surfaces of different Kinds, or the doctrines of dioptrics and catoptrics. ] The rays, which constitute a pencil of light, are sometimes parallel to each other, sometimes divergent from a point, and sometimes convergent to a point. The intersection of the directions of any two or more rays of light Is called their focus; and the focus is either actual or virtual, accordingly as they cither meet in it, or only tend to or from it. Thus, a small luminous vbjeet may represent an actual focus of diverging rays, since the light spreads from it in all direetions; and the small surface, into which the image of such an ohject, or of the sun, is collected by a lens or mirror, may represent the actual focus of converging rays It was to such an image of the sun that the term focus, meaning a fire place, was first appliedl. But if the rays tending to this focus be intercepted, and made to diverge, the point vill then be their virtual focus, since they will never actually arrive at it, heing made to diverge as if they proceeded from a new point, which will also be a virtual focuss. When the divergence or convergence of rays of light is altered by refraction or reflection at any surface, the foci of the incident and refracted or reflected rays are called conjugate to each other: the new focus is also called the image of the former focus. Thus, in the case already mentioned, where the convergence of the rays to one focus is converted into divergence from another, the two virtual foci are conjugate to each other; and the original focus of the lens or mirror is conjugate to the place of the sun, or of the luminous ohject. IF the objeet had been put in the place of its image, the image would then have occupied that of the object; a property which follows from the direct return of every ray of light through the path by which it has arrived, and which may easily be illustrated by experimental confirmationn. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 575.) Whenever light is refleeted by a plane surface, the conjugate foci are at equal distances from it, and in the same perpendicular. Thus, every point of an image in a looking glass is. perpendicularly opposite to the corresponding point of the object, and is at the same distance behind the looking glass, as the point of the object is before it. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 376.) The focus into which parallel rays are collected, or from which they are made to diverge, is called the principal focus of a surface or substance. The sun is so distant, that the rays, proceeding from any point of his surface, aſfect our senses as if they vere perſectly parallel, and the principal focal distance of a surface or substance may often be practically determined by measuring the distance of the image of the sun, or of any other remote object, which is formed by it. In order that the rays of light, proceeding from or towards any one point, may he made to converge by reſlection towards another, the form of the surface must be elliptical, parabolic, or hyperbolic; there are also curves of still more intricate forms, which possess the same property with respect to refrac- tionn. A small portion, however, of any of these curves, differs very little from a cirele; and a spherical surface is almost universally substituted in practice for all of them, except that the mirrors of large reflecting tele50pes are sometimes made parabolical. The principal focus of a spherical refſlecting surface, whether convex or concave, is half way between the surface and its centre. If a luminous point Dbe placed in the centre of a concave mirror, the rays vill all return to the same point; iſ the point he beyond the centre, the image will be between the centre and the principal focus, its distance from that focus being always inversely as that of the radiant point. Such a focus is never absolutely perfect, for the rays are never collected from the vhole surface of the mirror into the sanie point, except when both the point and its image are in the centre: but, provided that the surface be only a small portion of that of the whole sphere, the aberration will be too small to be easily observed: and the same is true of the foci produced by refracting surfacess. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 977, 578.) When a ray of light passes through two surfaces forming an angle with each other, including a denser medium, as in the case oſ a prism of glass, jt is always defſlected from the angle in which the two surfaces meet. A greater number of surfaces, placed in different directions, constitute vhat ĩs sometimes called a multiplying glass, each of them bending the rays of light into a different direction. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 979, 380.) A lens is a detached portion of a transparent substance, of which the opposite sides are regular polished surfaces, of such forms as may be described by lines revolving round a common uxis. These lines may be portions of cireles, of ellipses, hyperholas, or of any other curves, or they may be right lines. But in general, one of the sides is a portion of a spherical surface, and the other either a portion of a spherical surface or a plane; vhence we have douhle convex, double concave, planoconvex, planoconcave, and meniscus lenses. The ſigures of all these are sufſficiently described by their names, except that the term meniseus, which properly implies a little m oon or crescent, is applied in general to all lenses which are convex on the one side, and concave on the other, although they may be thicker at the edges than in the middlee Sometimes, however, a lens of this kind is distinguished by the term concavoconvex. A lens is generally supposed, in simple calculations, to be inſinitely thin, and to be denser than the surrounding medium. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 351.) The general effect of a lens may be understood, from conceiving its surſace to coincide at any given point with that of a prism; for if the angle of the prism be external, as it must be when the lens is convex, the rays will be inſlected tovards the axis; but if the base of the prism be external, and the lens concave, the rays will be deſlected from the axis: so that a convex lens cither causes all rays to converge, or lessens their divergence, and a concavo lens either causes them to diverge, or lessens their convergence. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 582.) The principal focus of a double convex or double concave lens, of crown glass, is at the distance of the common radius of its surfaces; and the focal length of a planoconvex lens is equal to the diumeter of the convex surface. IF the radii of the surfaces are unequal, their eſſfect will be the same as if they were each equal to the harmonic mean between them, vhich is found by dividing the produet by half the sum; or, in the meniscus, by hal? the diſference. Thus, if one oſ the radii vere two inches, and the other six, the efſect would be the same as that of a lens of three inches radius; and if it vere a meniscus, the same as that of a lens of six inches. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 383, 984) The focal length of a lens of ſlint glass, of water, or of any other substance, may be found, by dividing that of an equal lens of crown glass by twice the excess of the index of refraction above unity. Thus, the index for vater being 13, ve must divide the radius by;, or inerease it one half, for the principal focal distance of a double convex or double concave lens of water. When a radiant point is at twice the distance of the principal focus from a convex lens, the image is at an equal distance on the other side; when the VOL. I. S3 u radiant poĩut is nearer than this, the image is more remote, the distance of the image from the principal focus nearest to it heing always inversely as the distance of the ohject from the principal focus on the oppusite side. ſPlate XXVII. Fig. 385.) The joint focus of two lenses, in contact with each other, is also found hy multiplying together iheir separate focal lengths, and dividing the product by their sum or diſference, accordingly as they agree or differ with respect to convexity and concavity. We have hitherto considered the place of the focus only in relation to a single point, placed in the axis of the lens or mirror; but it ĩs equally necessary to attend to othcr points, out of the principal axis; for, in order to form a picture, the ravs from a great number of sueh points must be eolIected into as many distinet points of the image. Some oſ the rays proceeding from every radiant poĩnt must be considerably bent, in order to be collected into a common focus; others remain nearly straight; and if ve can discover which of the rays are ultimately either in the same line with their original direction, or in a direction parallel to it, we may determine the line in which the image of the point in question is to he found. For this purpose, we employ the property of the optical centre, which is a point so sſtuated, that all rays which pass through it, or tend towards ĩt, while they are within the lens, must ultimately acquire a direction parallel to their original direction. In some cases, the optical eentre may he without the lens, hut no practi eal inconvenience results from supposing ĩt to he alvays situated within the Iens, especially vhen ĩits thickness is inconsiderable; so that all rays which pass through the middle point of the lens must proceed, without sensible error, in the sume straight line, and the image oſ any radiant point must consequently he found somevhere in this line: hut in the case oſ a mirror, the centre oſ its ſigure is also the optical centree Now when any radiant point is removed a little from the axis of a lens or mirror, the distance oſ its image is in general a little diminished, but the difference is too smull to he observable in common casess. We may, thereſore, suppose it to be at the same distance as iſ the point remained in the axis, or even to be in a plane crossing the axis perpendicularly at that distance, so as to form part of a flat image, of which the magnitude is determined by straight lines drawn from the extremities of the object through the centre of the lens. This is, however, an approximation which is only admitted for the greater convenience of computation and representation, the image being almost always in reality considerably curved. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 386.) : LECIURE XXXVI. ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS. AXMONG the great variety oſ instruments depending on optical principles, it is more consistent with our plan to attend ſirst to those which may be denominated optical measures, which are calculated either for the determination of the quantity or intensity oſ light itself, or for the examination of the properties oſ various material substances with res pect to light. Reſlecting quadrants and cireles, which are often used in astronomical and nautical observations, although they derive their utility in some measure from optical laws, may most properly be considered as belonging to the subject of practical astronomy. It is a problem of frequent occurrence in economical investigations, to compare the intensity of the light aforded by any two luminous objects. For this purpose, it is necessary to assume as a principle, that the same quantity of light, diverging in all directions from a luminous body, remains undiminished at all distances from the centre of divergence. Thus, we must suppose that the quantity of light falling on every body is the same as vould have fallen on the place occupied by its shadow: and if there were any doubt of the truth oſ the supposition, it might be confirmed by some simple experiments. It follows that since the shadow of a square ineh of any surface, occupies, at twice the distance of the surface from the luminous point, the space of four square inches, the intensity of the light diminishes as the square of the distance increases We can judge with, tolerable accuracy of the equality of two lights by the estimation of the eye, but we cannnt form any idea of the proportions of lights of different intensities: if, hovever, we remove two sources of light to such distances from an object, that they may illuminate it in equal degrees, ve may conclude that their original intensities are inversely as the squares of their distancess. Count Rumford's photometer performs this very conveniently, by casting two shadows of a given object near each other, on the same surface, the lights heing removed to such distances that the shadows appear equally dark. (Plate XXVII Fig. 387, 388.) For determining the refractive density of solids, it has been usual to form them into a prism, and to measure the angular deviations vhich they produce; and for ſluids, to inclose them either in a hollow prism, or between two meniscus lenses, and to measure the angular deviations produced by the prisms, and the focal distances of the lenses. But in most cases, Dr. Wollaston's apparatus is far preferable to both these methods: it is arranged for ascertaining the angle at which light, moving within a certain dense transparent substance, begins to be totally reflected from the common surface of that substance and the solid or fluid vhich is to be examined. Thus, if ve ſirst measure the angle, at which light begins to be totally reſlected from the posterior surface of a prism of glass, in contact with air, ve may readily determine its refractive power; and then, having caused a drop of a fluid to adhere to that surface, or fixed a solid to it by a small portion of some fluid denser than itself, we may observe, us we turn the prism round its axis, at what angle the drop or spot hegins to disappear, and may thence calculate the refractive density oſ the substance; and even without actual measurement of the angle, ve may readily compare the disappearance of the drop or spot with that of others placed near it, of which the properties are known. Dr. Wollaston has, however, rendered the process still easier and more simple, by employing a rectangular prism of glass, with sights ſixed to a jointed frame, of such a construetion as to enable him to read off, by a vernier, without any calculation, the index of the refractive power of any substance less dense than glasss. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 339.) All instruments strictly optical are employed for forming an image of an external object: the simplest are mirrors and lenses, which form a single image only, either actual or virtual, and sometimes depict it on a surface caleulated for receiving and exhibiting it. Other instruments repeat the image once or more under several forms, in general enlarging it continu- ally; and these are either microscopes or telescopes, which present us with great diversity in their arrangements, and in the appurtenances subservient to their uses. . It is a general rule, that when an image of an actual ohject is formed y any lens or speculum, if the rays converge to an actual focus, the image is inverted; but erect, if they diverge ſfrom a virtual focus, and the object and image subtend equal angles at the centre of the lens or speculum. Hence, a convex lens and a concave mirror form an inverted image, smaller than the object, whenever the object is at a greater distance than twice the principal focal length; but larger, when the object is within this distance; and when it is within the principal focal distance, the magniſied image is virtual and erect, and may be seen by looking into the concave mirror, or by looking through the lens towards the object. But a concave lens and a convex mirror always form a virtual image of a real ohject, which is erect, and smaller than the object. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 390.. 304.) When the object is precisely in the principal focus oſ a convex lens or a concave mirror, the virtual image becomes inſinitely distant; so that from vhatever point in the neighbourhood of the lens it may be viewed, it must subtend the same angle, which is alvays equal to that which the object subtends at the centre of the lens: and since this angle may casily be much greater than that under which the object can he conveniently viewed by the naked eye, such a lens or mirror is often used as a simple microscope; and its magniſying powver may be ascertained from a comparison of the angles whieh the object and image subtend. Thus, if a person cannot see a minute object with the naked eye at a distance less than eight inches, a lens of half an inch focal length will represent it to him in an angle 16 times as great: but if he can see it without the lens at the distance oſ four inches, the lens vill magniſy it to his eye but eight times. Supposing, hovever, the eye to be applied close to the lens, the object may he viewed a little within the focal distance, and ĩts apparent angular magnitude may be increased 17 times instead of I6, and ꝗ times instead of 8. Plate XXVII. Tig. 5395, 596.) Since the magniſying pover oſ a lens ĩs the greater, the smaller its focus, it is usual ot employ the minutest lenses that can be ground, and sometimes a small globule is formed by fusion in a lamp. Even a drop of water, placed in the perforation of a plate, makes a tolerable magniſier; and ĩt has been proposed to substitute for water a transparent varnish, vhich is less liable to evaporate. Suppusing the whole light that proceeds from a distant object, and falls on, lens or speculum, to be collected in the image, its intensity must be inereased in the ratio of the surfaceoſ the lens or speculum to that of the image. The image is greater in proportion as the object is greater; consequently the degree of condensation produced by any lens is the greater as the object is smaller, thus iſ the diameter of a lens were an inch, and the image of the sun formed by it ere also an inch in diameter, the density of the light would he unaltered; but the image of a star would be infinitely brighter than the direct light of the star falling on the lenss. The illumination of any image formed by a lens or mirror, supposing no light to be lost, ĩs always the same as vould be produced by the direct light of the surface of the lens or mirror, if it were equally luminous with the surface of the ohject which emits the light. It may also be shown, that when two lenses are of similar forms, their focal lengths being proportional to their diameters, they must produce the sa me degree of illumination in the image: but as far as the heat excited may be supposed to be a measure of the quantity of light, this conclusion is not confirmed hy experiment: it is probable, however, that the greater heat. produced by a larger lens, is only derived from the greater extent of surface exposed at once to the solar rays. Lenses are most commonly made of gluss, but sometimes of rock erystal, or of other transparent substances. It is difficult to findglass, especially flint glass, for large lenses, sulliciently free from veins: it has been proposed to suffer the melted glass to cool without agitation, and to, cut the lens out of any of its strata taken in a horizontal direction; hut this method appears to be liable to several practieal objections. Mirrors are made either of glass, coated vith an amalgam of mereury and tin, or of metal, as of platina, of silver, or of an alloy of copper and tin, to which a little arsenic and silver are sometimes added. Mirrors oſ metal are more perſect than those of glass, because they are free from the inconvenience of a double reſlection; but they are more expensive, and are liable to tarnish. Where a large mirror is required, vith a weak reſlection only, ve may employ a single surface of glass, the back of the piece being covered with a black coating oſ some substunce diſſcring little ſfrom glass in its refractive density, by means oſ which the second reſeetion ĩs avoided. When the image formed by a lens or mirror is received on a smooth hut unpolished surface, vhich ĩs capable of irregular reſlection, it is visible in every direction. Sueh an image is exhibited in the camera obscura, the solar microscope, and the magic lantern, or lucernal microscope. The general eſſect of the camera ohscura is the same as may oſten be observed in a dark room, where there is a small hole in the window shutter: the great masses of light and shade, before the windows, being represented m an inverted position, in the parts of the room diametrically opposite to them, which are illuminated in different degrees, according to the quantity of light which can reach them in straight lines from the external ohjects. A lens, of a focal length somewhat smaller than the distance of the surface on which the picture is projected, renders the images much more distinet; but some of them are unavoidably imperfect and ill defined, unless the objects happen to be situated at the same distance from the aperture; for the focus of the lens can never be adjusted at once to nearer and more remote objects; nor would the picture be rendered more natural by sueh an adjustment, for it would present to the eye at one viev, vith equal distinetness, objects which never can be seen at once vithout some degree of confusion. Sometimes the picture is intereepted, by a speculum placed obliquely, and is throvn upwards on the surface of a plate oſ ground glass, upon which its outline may be traced with a black lead pencil, and an impression may be taken from it on moist paper, which will represent the natural situation of the objects without inversionn. Another arrangement is, to place the lens horizontally, vith the speculum above it, which throws the image through the lens, upon a ſlat surface placed below, on which the objects may be delineated in their natural position, but not without some impediment from the interception of the light by the hand and the instrument employed. Such a surſace, however, ought not to be perfeetly ſlat, in order to afſord the most distinct image, although by means of a meniscus lens, with a cover admitting the light only through a small aperture near its centre, on the principle of Dr. Wollaston's periscopie spectacles, an image nearly ſlat might be obtained; but in this case too much of the light vould be excluded. It has been usual to consider the image of a very distant object, formed by a convex lens, as a portion of a spherical surface, of which every part is equally distant from the centre of the lens; but this estimate is extremely erroncous, for the effect of the obliquity of the different pencils of ray, materially increases the curvature of the image. In fact no pencil of rays, falling obliquely on a spherical surface, can be collected any where to a perfect focus: the image of a cirele would become most distinct at one distance, and that of its diameter at another; but for both these images, the surface ought to he much more curved than that vhich has been usually considered, and the mean of the curvatures required for them, which must he the best form for the ground or bottom of a camera obscura, is equal to that of a sphere of vhich the radius is three eighths of the focal distance, when a double convex lens of crown glass is employed. (late XXVII. Fig. 3597.. 399.) In the solar microscope, an image is formed on a wall or screen, by means of a lens of small focal length, near to which the object is placed, so that the image is very much magniſied. For this purpose the room must be darkened, and the object strongly illuminated by the suns light, which is condensed hy means of a large lens, and sometimes by two or more lenses placed at a distance from each other; but care must be taken tò avoid burn ing the ohject by bringing it exactly into the focus; and, on the other hand, if it be much beyond the focus, the light will be thrown upon a small ſpart of the image only; the best arrangement appears to be, to bring the ſocus of the condensing lenses very near to the small lens; and in order to adjust the instrument in the most convenient manner, the distances of all the lenses ought to he moveahle at pleasure: the want of this precaution is a material defect in the usual construetion of the instrument. The speculum vhich first receives the light must be capable of motion in all angular direetions, in order to allow us to accommodate its position to the elungeable place of the sun; and the adjustment has sometimes been performed by means of a heliostate, an instrument calculated for turning the speculum vVOoL I. 3I by clockwork, into such a position as always to reſlect the suns light in the required directionn. An easier method would he to employ two speculums, the one moveable round an axis parallel to that of the earth, and reſlecting the suns light into the direction of iĩts axis, the other ſixed, and changing this direction into any other that might be required. When an opaque object is to be examined, the light may be thrown on it either by a plane mirror placed ohliquely, or hy a perforated concave mirror; and if the object is small, the concave mirror appears to be the more eligiblee. (Plate XXVIII. Tig. 400.) DBy night, a lamp, with a large lens before it, may supply the place of the sun's light, and the instrument vill hecome a lucernal microscope, which, vhen painted glass sliders are employed as objects for the amusement of children, is called a magic lantern: and this, exhibited on a larger scale, and projecting an image on a semitransparent screen of taſſetas, instead of a wall, has of late heen the source of much entertainment under the name of the phantasma goria, a term which implies the raising of spectress. In order to favour the deception, the sliders are maie perfectly opaque, except where the ſigures are introduced, the glass being covered, in the light parts, with a more or less transparent tint, according to the eſfect requiredl. Several picces of glass may also be occasionally placed behind each nther, and may be made capable of such motions as vill nearly imitate the natural motions of the ohjects which they represent. The ſigures mav also be drawn vith water eolours on thin paper, and afterwards varnished. By removing the Iuntern to diſſerent distances, and altering at the same time more or less the position of the lens, the image may be made to increase or diminish, and to become more or less distinet at pleasure, so that to a person unaccustomed to the eſfects oſf optical instruments, the ſigures may appear actually to advance and retire. In reality, hovever, these figures become much brighter as they are rendered smaller, while in nature the imperfect transparency of the air causes them to appear fainter vhen they are remote than when they are near: this imperfection might be easily remedied by the interposition of some semiopaque substance, which might gradually be caused to admit more light as the ſigure became larger, or hy uncovering a larger or a smaller portion of the lamp, or of its lens. Sometimes, by throw- ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS. 427 mg a strong light upon an actual opaque object, or on a living person, its image is formed on the curtain, retaining its natural motions: but in this case the ohject must be considerably distant, otherwise the images oſ its nearer and remoter parts will never be suſſiciently distinct at once, the refraction being either too great for the remoter, or too small for the nearer parts: and there must also be a second lens, placed at a sufficient distance from the first to allov an inverted image to be formed hetween them, and to throw a second picture oſ this image on the screen, in its natural erect position, unless the ęhject be of such a nature that it can be inverted without inconvenience This eſſect was very well exhibited at Paris by Itobertson; he also combined with his pictures the shadows of living objects, which imitate tolerably vell the appearance of such objects in a dark night, or by moonshine: and while the room was in complete darknes, concealed screens were probably let down in various parts of it, on which some oſ the images were projected; for they were sometimes actually situated over the heads of the audience (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 40L.) In almost all telescopes and compound mieroscopes, the image formed by one lens or mirror stands in the place of a new ohject for another. The operation of sueh instruments may be illustrated by placing a sereen of ſine gauze at the place of the image, which receives enough light to make the image visible in all directions, and yet transmits enough to form the subsequent image. The simplest of such instruments is the astronomical telescope. Here the object glass ſirst forms an actual inverted image, nearly in the principal focus of the eye glass, through which this image is vieved as by a simple microseope, and therefore still remains apparently inverted. In order to ſind the angular magniſying power, ve must divide the focal length of the object glass by that of the eye glass: this quotient is consequently the greater as the focal length of the object glass is greater, and as that of the eye glass is smaller; but the power oſ the instrument cannot be inereased at pleasure by lessening the focal length oſ the eye glass, hecaus: the ohjeet glass would not furnish light enough to render the view distinet, if the magniſying power vere too great. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 402.) The double or compound microscope resembles in ĩts construction the as' - tronomical telescope, except that the distance of the lenses much exceeds their joint focal length; and the angular magnitude is greater than when the same object is vieved through the eye glass alone, in proportion as the first image is further from the object glass than the object itselfl. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 403.) In the Galilean telescope, or opera glass, a concave eye glass is placed so near the olject glass, that the first image would be formed beyond it, and near its principal focus; and the second image, formed by the eye glass, which is the virtual image viewed by the eye, being on the opposite side of the centre, ĩs inverted vith respect to the ſirst image, and erect with respect to the object. In this case also the magnifying power is indicated by the quotient of the numbers expressing the focal lengths of the glasses. (Plate XXVIII. Pig. 404.) The inverted image oſ the astronomical telescope may be made erect by means of an additional eye glass. In the common day telescope of Rheita, two such eye glasses are employed, of nearly equal focus, which have the advantage of procuring a greater extent in the field of view; they are usually 50 placed as to huve little or no eſfect on the magnifying pover. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 405.) Dr. Herschel's reſlecting telescopes resemble, in their eſfects, the simple astronomical telescope; a concave speculum, or mirror, being substituted for the object glass, and the eye glass being so placed as to magnify the image formed by the speculum. But since the speculum, if it received the principal rays perpendicularly, would send them back in the same direction, it is necessary, in this construction, to have them reflected somewhat obliquely, the speculum being a little inclined to the axis of the telescope, in order that the light may have free access to itt. An arrangement of this kind was proposed long agn by Maire, but it has been very little employed before Dr. Herschel's time. This excellent philosopher and mechanic has carried the perſcetion oſ his telescopes to a degree far exceeding all that could have been expected from the labours of former opticianss. His instruments allow him to extend the linear dimensions of his objects several thousand times: 5 but he commonly finds it more eligible to employ only povers of 5 or 600, which afford a much stronger illumination. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 406.) The Newtonian reflector has a plane speculum placed in iĩts axis, at the inclination of half a right angle, which intercepts the rays ahout to form the image, and throws them into the focus of an eye glass ſixed in the side of the tube. The plane speculum which he employed was the posterior surface of a rectangular prism of glass, vhich produces a total refſlection: but Dr. Herschel has found that the sources of error are diminished by wholly omit ting this speculum. (Platè XXVIII. Fig. 407.) In the Gregorian telescope, the object speculum is perforated, and the image formed by it is received into the focus of a smaller concave speculum, which returns it to be vieved through the aperture by the eye glasses. It has been ohjected to this form of the reflecting telescope, which is the first that was invented, that the best part of the speculum is sacrificed by the perforation. But Dr. Herschel has found that the image formed by the external part of a speculum is in general more perfect than that which is formed by the central part. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 408.) For the smaller concave speculum of Gregory, Mr. Cassegrain substituted a convex one, placing it within the focal distance of the large speculum, so as to form the first actual image nearly in the same place as the second image of the Gregorian telescope; but this image is inverted. The instrument has some advantage in theory, with respect to the perfection of the focus; but it ĩs little usedl. (Plate XXVIII Fig. 209.) Dr. Smith's reſlecting, microscope resembles Cassegrains telescope, but the rays of light are first admitted through a perforation in the small speculum, that part of them vhich tends to fall immediately on the eye being intercepted by a screen. The convexity of the one mirror is nearly equal to the eoncavity of the other; and the instrument, although seldom employed, is said to succeed extremely well. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 410.) The image of a very distant ohject, ſormed by a spe culum of any kind, is - considerably less curved than that which is depicted by a lens of equal focal length. There is a similar imperſection in the nature of the focus of oblique pencils, but it is conſined within narrower limits, the remotest purt oſ the image in which uny radiating lines would be most distinetly represented, being a ſlat surface, and the nearest, in which cireles would become most distinet, being a part of a sphere touching the speculum: so that the radius of the mean eurvature is equal to the focal distanee (late XXVIII. Fig. 41) The magniſying pover of a reſracting telescope may often be measured, hy comparing the diameter oſ the ohject glass with that of the narrowest space, into which the beam oſf light is contracted beyond the eye glass, provided that none of the light has heen intereepted in its passage through the telescope: for the ohjeet will hbe viewed through the telescope in an angle as much greater than that which it naturally subtends, as the diaumeter of the object glass is greater than that of this contracted pencil, which may he considered as an image of the ohject glass. But in the Galilean telescope, this method cannot be employed, since no such image is formed. The field of view, in a simple telescope, or the angular magnitude of that part of an object which can be seen through it at once, is neurly equal to the magnitude of the eye glass as scen from the ohject glass. If a lens be added to any refracting telescope at the place of the ſirst image, it will huve no eſitet either on the place or on the magnitude of any subsequent image, but ĩit will enlarge the ſield oſ view, by throwing more pencils of light on the original eye glass. If, however, the image fell exactly on such a lens, it would be liable to be impaired by any accidental impurities oſ its substance or on ĩts surface, every opaque particle intercepting the vhole oſ the light helonging to one of its points, which would not happen i the image vere at a smull distance from the lenss. A field glhss is, therefore, usually placed, both in telescopes, and in the common compound mieroseope, a little nearer to the ohject glass than the place oſ the ſirst image. The best places ſor the various lenses, in an eye piece, are partly determined from similar considerations, but they require also in general to he adjusted by experiment, for scveral circumstances are concerned in the perform- ance of a telescope, which are almost too intricate for practical calculation, although some assistance may certainly be obtained from theory with regard to the most important of them. The curvature of the image produced by any lens has already been mentioned: it may be in some measure remedied by Mr. Ramsden's method of placing a planoconvex lens a little beyond the image, with its ſlat side turned towards it. Mr. Rumsden also employs an eye piece constructed on this principle instead oſ a simple microscope, under the name of a double magnifier. The aberration of the diſferent parts of any single pencil of rays, from the corresponding point of the image, requires also to be considered in the construction of telescopes: its magnitude is sueh, in the case of a double convex lens of crown glass, that those parts oſ a pencil of parallel rays which fall on it near the circumference meet each other in a point, which is within the true focus, by a distance a little more than half as great again as the thickness of the lens. In an image formed by a concave speculum, of equal focal length, this aberration vould he only ; as great; it may, however, be almost entirely correeted, in refracting telescopes, by employing proper proportions in the dimensions of the various lenses. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 412, 413.) A still more important aberration, from which reflecting teleseopes are also wholly free, is that which arises from the different refrangibilities of the rays of light of diferent eolours, vhich form an inſinite number of images, neither ngreeing perſeetly in situation nor in magnitude, so that the objecis are rendered indistinct hy an appearance of eolours at their edges: this imperſection, however, Mr. Dollond has in great measure obviated, by his achromatic ohject glasses: the construction of which depends on the important discovery, that some kinds of glass separate the rays oſ diſſerent colours from each other mueh more than others, while the whole deviation produced in the pencil of light is the same. Mr. Dollond combined, therefore, a concave lens of ſint glass with a convex lens of erown glass, and sometimes with two such lenses; the concave lens of ſſint glass heing suſficiently poverſul to correct the whole dispersion of colourei light produced by the crown glass, hut not enough to destroy the eſſect of its refraction, which was still sufficient to eollect the rays of light into a distant ſocus. For this purpose, it is necessary that the focal lengths of the two lenses should he in the same proportion as the dispersive powers oſ the respective substances, when the mean deviations of the pencils are equal; that is, in the case of the kinds of glass commonly used, nearly in the ratio of 7 to 10. Sometimes also the chromatic aberration, that is, the error arising from the different refrangibilities of the different rays, is partially corrected in an eye piece, by placing a ſield glass in such a manner, as considerably to contract the dimensions of the image formed by the least refrangible rays, which is nearest to the eye glass, and to cause it to subtend an equal angle with the image formed by the most refrangible rays, this image being little affected by the glasss. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 414, 415.) : The apparent magnitude of an object, viewed through a telescope, may be measured, vith great accuracy, by a scale or by wires, introduced at the place oſ the last image, reducing afterwards the angle thus ascertained according to the magnifying power. Care must, however, be taken to avoid as much as possible the distortion which usually accompanies any curvature of the image; and the vires, one of which is sometimes made moveable by means of a micrometer screw, must be sufficiently illuminated to be distinetly visible Sometimes a scale is introduced, vhich, from the apparent magnitude of a known ohject, such as that of a man of ordinary height, or of a portion of a wall built with bricks of the usual size, enables us at once to read off its actual distance, which is expressed on the scale in hundreds of yardss. The angular magnitude of an object, seen through a telescope, may also be found, hy viewing al the same time, with the other eye, either a scale, or any other ohjeet of known dimensions, placed at a given distance: the lucid dise micrometer of Dr. Herschel is employed in this manner for judging of the magnitude of the celestial bodiess The divided object glass micrometer affords another mode of measurement: the object glass heing rdivided into two semicireular portions, one of vhich slides on the other; each portion acts as a separate lens, and two images of every part of the ohject being formed, the angular distance of any two points is determined by bringing their images together, and measuring the displacement of the moveable portion of the object glass, which is required for procuring the coincidence. Sometimes also a similar purpose is answered by inserting a divided glass in the eye piece, which acts nearly on the same principle, and which seems to be somevhat less liable to error. In a reſlecting telescope oſ Cassegrain's construetion, Mr. Ramsden has also produced the same effect by dividing the convex speculum, and causing a part of it to turn round an axisz. All these arrangements particularly deserve the attention of those who are employed in practical astronomy and in geography, since the advancement of these sciences much depends on the accuracy of the telescopic and microscopic measures, which are performed by means of optical instruments. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 416, 417.) VOIL. I. l b E LECTURE XXXVII. ON PHVYSICAL OPTICS. HAVING examined the general theory of opties, and the construction of optical instruments, we are now to consider those properties and affectiots of light, which rather belong to its natural history, than to its mechanical effects; to trace its relations to the particular phenomena of nature; to investigate the manner in which it is connected with our sensations, and to inquire on what intimate mode of action the various effects of light depend. All these subjects may be properly comprehended under the denomination of physical optics, but we shall find it convenient to reserve each of the two last for a separate examinationn. The sources of light, the velocity of its motion, its interception and extinction, its dispersion into diſferent colours; the manner in which iĩt is aſfected by the variable density of the atmosphere, the meteorological appearances in which it is concerned, and the singular properties of particular substances with regard to it, vill be the first subjects of our investigation. The sources, from which light is commonly derived, are either the sun or stars, orsuch terrestrial bodies as are undergoing those changes which constitute combustion. The process of combustion implies a change in which a considerable emission of light and heat is produced; but it is not capable of a very correct deſinition: in general ĩt requires an absorption, or at least a transſer, o? a portion of oxygen; but there appear to be some exceptions to the universality oſ this distinction; and it has been observed that both heat and light are often produced vhere no transfer of oxygen takes place, and sometimes by the effect of a mixture which cannot be called combustion. l : Light is also aſforded, without any sensible heat, by a number of vegetable and animal substances, which appear to be undergoing a slow decomposition, not vholly unlike combustion. Thus decayed wood, and animal substances slightly salted, oſten afford spontaneously a faint light, without any elevation of temperature; and it ĩs not improbable that the light of the ignis fatuus may proceed from a vapour of a similar nature. The effects, which are commonly attributed to the motions of the electrical fluid, are often attended by the production of light; and violent or rapid frietion ſrequently seems to be the immediate cause of its appearance. But it is difficult to ascertain whether friction may not be partly concerned in the luminous phenomena attributedto electricity, or electricity in the apparent effects of friction. Light is sumetimes produced by frietion with a much lower degree of heat than is required for combustion, and even when it is accompanied by combustion, the heat produced by the union of these causes may he very moderate: thus it is usual in, some coal mines, to obtain a train of light by the continual collision of flint and steel, effected hy the machine called a fire wheel, in order to avoĩl setting fire to the inflammable gas emitted by the coal, vhich would be made to explode if it came near the flame of a candle. There is a remarkable property, which some substances possess in an eminent degree, and of which few, except metals and water, are entirely destitute. These substances are denominated solar phosphori; besides the light which they reflect and refract, they appear to retain a certain portion, and to emit it again by degrees till it is exhausted, or till its emission is interrupted by cold. The Bolognan phosphorus was one oſ the first of these substances that attracted nolice; it is a sulſate of barytes, found in the state of a stone; iĩt is prepared by exposure to heat, and is aſterwards made up into cakes: these, when ſirst placed in a beam of the sun's light, and vieved aſterwards in a dark room, have nearly the appearance of a burning coal, or a red hot iron. Burnt oyster shells,and muriate of lime have also the same property, and some specimens of the diamond possess it in a considerable degree. From the different results of experiments appurently accurate, made by diſerent persons, there is reason to conclude that some oſ these phosphori emit only the same kind of light as they have received, while others exhibit the same appearances, to whatever kind of light they may have been exposed. Sometimes it has even been ſound that light of a particular colour has been most ettica- cious in exciting in a diamond the appearance of another kind of light, which it was naturally most disposed to exhibit. The application of heat to solar phosphori in general expedites the extrication of the light which they have borrowed, and hastens its exhaustion; it also produces, in many substances, vhich are not remarkable for their power of imbibing light, a temporary scintillation, or flashing, at a heat much below ignition: the most remarkable oſ these are ſluor spar in powder, and some other crystallized substances. It appears that luminous bodies in general emit light equally in every direction, not from each point oſ any of their surfaces, as some have supposed, but from the whole surface taken together, so that the surface, when viewed obliquely, appears neither more nor less bright than when viewed directly. However light of any kind may have at first originated, there is reason to believe that the velocity with which it passes through a given medium is always the same. It has been ascertained hy the astronomical observations of Roemer and of Bradley, that each ray of light, emitted by the sun, arrives at the earth in eight minutes and one eighth, when the earth is at its mean distance of about 95 millions of miles Roemer deduced this velocity from observations on the eclipses of the satellites of Jupiter, and Bradley conſirmed it by his discovery of the cause of the apparent aberration of the fixed stars. This aberration is produced by the efſect of the revolution of the earth in its orbit, combined vith that of the progressive motion of light. Since light proceeds always in right lines, vhen its motion is perfectly undisturbed, if a ſine tube vere placed so as to receive a ray of light, passing exactly through its axis when at rest, and then, remaining in the same direction, vere moved transversely with great velocity, it is evident that the side of the tube would strike against the ray of light in its passage, and that in order to retain ĩt in the axis, the tube must be inclined, in the same manner as if the light, instend of coming in its actual direction, had also a transverse motion in a contrary direction to that of the tube. The axis of a telescope, or even of the eye, may be considered as resembling such a tube, the passage of the light through the refracting substances not altering the necessary inclination of the axis. In various parts of the earth's orbit, the aberration of any one star must be different in quantity and in direction; it never exceeds 20 seconds each way, and must, therefore, in common observations, be vwholly insensiblee. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 418.) The quantity of light, which is reflected by a substance of any kind, depends not only on the nature of the substance, but also on the obliquity of its incidence: and it sometimes happens, that a surface, which reflects a smaller portion of direct light than another, reflects a greater portion when the light falls very obliquely on its surfacee Bouguer found that the surface of vater reſlected only one fifty ſifth part of the light falling perpendicularly on it, that of glass one fortieth, and that of quicksilver more than two thirds: but when the obliquity was as great as possible, the vater reflected nearly three fourths of the incident light, and the glass about two thirds only. OF the light which passes by a dense substance of any kind, the greatest part pursues its course undisturbed, but there is alays a certain divergence, which has been called by Grimaldi diffraction, and by Newton inflection. This effect is usually attended by the production of colours, and vill therefore require to be more particularly considered hereafter. The separation of colours by refraction is one of the most striking of ali optical phenomena. It was discovered by Newton that white light is a compound of rays of different kinds, mixed in a certain proportion, that these rays differ in colour and in refrangibility, that they constitute a series, which proceeds by gradual changes from red to violet, and that those substances which appear coloured when placed in white light, derive their colours only from the property of reflecting some kind of rays most abundantly, and of transmitting or extinguishing the rest. Dr. Herschel has added to this series rays of heat less refrangible than the red, and Ritter and Dr. Wollaston have discovered, beyond the violet, other still more refrangible rays, which blacken the salts of silver. It has generally been supposed, since the time of Newton, that when the rays of light are separated as completely as possible by means of refraction, they exhibit seven varieties of colour, related to each other with respect o the extent that they occupy, in ratios nearly analogous to those of the ascending scale oſ the minor mode in music. The observations vere, however, imperſect, and the analogy was wholly imaginary. Dr. Wollaston has determined the division of the coloured image or spectrum, in a much more accurate manner than had been done heſore: y looking through a prism, at a narrow line oſ light, he produces a more effectual separation of the colours, than can be obtained by the common method of throwing the sun's image on a wall. The spectrum formed in this manner consists oſ four colours only, red, green, blue, and violet, which occupy spaces in the proportion of I6, 23, 36, and 25, respectively, making together 100 for the whole length; the red being nearly one sixth, the green and the vinlet each about one fourth, and the blue more than one third of the length. The colours diſfer scarcely at all in quality within their respective limits. but they vary in brightness; the greatest intensity of light being in that part of the green which is nearest to the redl. A narrow line of yellow is generally visible at the limit oſ the red and green, hut its breadth scarcely exceeds that of the aperture by which the light is admitted, and Dr. Wollaston attributes it to the mixture oſ the red with the green lightt. There are also several dark lines crossing the spectrum within the blue portion and in its neighbourhond, in which the continuity of the light seems to be interrupted. This distribution of the speetrum Dr. Wollaston has found to be the same, whatever refracting substance may have heen employed for its formation; and he attributes the diſſerence, which has sometimes been observed in the proportions, to accidental variations of the obliquity of the rays. The angular extent of the speetrum formed by a prism of crown glass is one 27th of the deviation of the red rays; hy a prism of ſlint glass, one 19th. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 419O. In light produced by the combustion of terrestrial substances, the spectrum is sometimes still more interrupted; thus, the bluish light of the lower part of the ſlume of a candle is separated by reſraction into five parcels of various colours; the light of hurning spirits, which appears perſectly blue, is chieſly composed of green and violet rays; and the light of a candle into which salt is thrown abounds with a pure yellov, inclining to green, but not separable by refraction. The electrical spark ſurnishes also a light which is diſierently divided in diffetent cireumstancess (Plate XXIX. Fig. 400) . IF the breadth of the aperture viewed through a prism is somewhat increased, the space occupied by each variety of light in the spectrum is augmented in the same proportion, and each portion encroaches on the neighhouring colours, and is mixed with them: s0 that the red is suceeeded hy orange, yellow, and yellowish green, and the blue is mixed on the one side with the green, and on the other with the violet; and it is in this stute that the prismatic spectrum is commonly exhibited. (Plate XXIX. Vig. 421.) 3it When the beam of light is so much enlarged as to exceed the angular magnitude of the spectrum, it retains its whiteness in the centre, and is terminated by two difſerent series of colours at the difſerent ends. These series are still divided by vell marked lines: on the one hand the red remains unmixed; the space belonging to the green and blue becomes a greenish yellow, nearly uniform throughout, and here the appearance of colour ends, ſhe place of the violet being scarcely distinguishable from the neighbouring white light: on the other hand, the space belonging to the red, green, and blue, of the simple spectrum appears of a bluish green, becoming more and more blue till it meets the violet, which retains its place without alterationn. This second series is also the same that accompanies the limit of total reſlection at the posterior surface of a prism. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 422.) Sir Isaac Newton observed that the effect of white light on the sense of sight might be imitated by a mixture of colours taken from different parts of the spectrum, notwithstanding the omission of some of the rays naturally belonging to white light. Thus, if we intercept one half of each of the four principal portions into which the spectrum is divided, the remaining halves will still preserve, vhen mixed together, the appearance of whiteness; so that it is probable, that the different parts of those portions of the spectrum, vwhich appear of one colour, have precisely the same effect on the eye. It is certain that the perfect sensations of yellow and of blue are produced respectively, by mixtures oſ red and green, and of green and violet light, and there is rgason to suspect that those sensations are alvays compounded of the separate sensations combined: at least this supposition simpliſies the theory of colours: it may, therefore, be adopted with advantage, until it be found inconsistent with any of the phenomena; and we may consider white light as composed of a mixture of red, green, and violet, only, in the proportion of about two parts red, four green, and one violet, with respect to the quantity or intensity of the sensations produced. If ve mix together, in proper proportions, any substances exhibiting these colours in their greatest purity, and place the mixture in a light suſficiently strong, ve obtain the appearance of perfect whiteness; but in a ſainter light the mixture is grey, or of that hue which arises from a combination of vhite and black; black bodies being such as reſleet white light but in a very scanty proportion. For the same reason, green and red substances mixed together usually make rather a brown than a yellow colour, and many yellow colours, when laid on very thickly, or mixed with black, become brown. The sensations of various kinds of light may also be combined in a still more satisfactory manner by painting the surface ofa cirele with different colours, in any vay that may be desired, and causing it to revolve with sueh rapidity, that the whole may assume the appearance of a single tint, or of a combination of tints, resulting from the mixture of the colourss (Plate XXIX. Fig. 4253.. 496.) From three simple sensations, with their combinations, we obtain seven primitive distinctions of colours; but the different proportions, in which they may be combined, afford a variety of tints beyond all ealculationn. The three simple sensations being red, green, and violet, the three binary combinations are yellow, consisting of red and green; crimson, of red and violet; and blue, of green and violet; and the seventh in order is white light, composed by all the three united. But the blue thus produced, by combining the whole of the green and violet rays, is not the blue of the spectrum, for four parts of green and one of violet make a blue differing very little from green; while the blue of the spectrum appears to contain as much violet as green: and it is for this reason that red and blue usually make a purple, deriving its hue from the predominance of the violet. It vould be possible to exhibit at once to the eye the combinations of any three colours in all imaginable varietiess Two of them might be laid down on a revolving surface, in the form of triangles placed in opposite directions, and the third on projections perpendicular to the surface, whieh, vhile the eye remained at rest in any one point, obliquely situated, vould 2 exhibit more or less of their painted sides, as they passed through their diſferent angular positions: and the only further alteration, that could be produced in any of the tints, vould be derived from the difſerent degrees oſ light only. The same effect may also be exhibited by mixing the colours in different proportions, by means of the pencil, beginning from three equidistant points as the centres oſ the respective colo nrs, (Plate XXIX. Fig. 427.) The ordinary atmospherical refraction cannot he determined in the usual manner from the knowledge of its density, and of the angular direction of the incident or refracted light, since the constitution of the atmosphere is such, that its density varies every where with its height, and the curvature of the carth's surface causes the inclination oſ the strata through which the ray passes to be perpetually changed; the difference oſ temperature at diſferent elevations increases also the difficulty of an exact calculation, and it is only very lately that Mr. Laplace, by a comparison of astronomical with meteorological observations, has given a satisfactory solution of the problem in all its extent But for practical uses, the refraction may be determined with sufficient accuracy by an approximation which is easily remembered; the deviation being at all altitudes one sixth part as great as the refracted ray would undergo, at the horizontal surface of a medium six times as dense as the air. When a celestial object appears exactly in the horizon, it is actually more than half a degree below it, since the refraction amounts to 33 minutes, vhen the barometer stands at 29,% inches, and Fahrenheit's thermometer nt 500. The accidental variations of the temperature of the air, at diſferent parts, produce, however, great irregularities in its refraction, especially near the horizon. The most remarkable of these is occasioned by the rarefaction of the air in the neighbourhood of the surface of water, of a building] or of the earth itself, in consequence of vhich a distant object appears to be depressed instead of being elevated, and is sometimes seen at once hoth depressed and elevated, so as to appear double, one of the images being generally in an inverted position, as if the surface possessed a reſlective power; and there seems indeed to be a considerable analogy between this kind of refraction and the total refleetion vhich happens within a denser medium. These effects are known by the appellations looming, mirage, and Fata Morgana: VOL. I. 5L they may be very completely imitated, as Dr. Wollaston has shown, by looking at a distant object along a red hot poker, or through a saline or succharine solution with water and spirit of vine floating on it. The effect oſ refraction on the apparent places of terrestrial objects must be frequently disturbed by circumstances of this kind; but its magnitude is usually about one tenth of the angular distance of the object, considered as a part of the earth's circumſerence. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 428, 429.) The atmospherical phenomena of rainbows and halos present us with examples oſ the spontaneous separation of colours by refraction. The rainbow is universally attributed to the refraction and reſlection of the sun's rays in the minute drops of falling rain or dew, and the halos, usually appearing in frosty atmospheres, are in all probability produced by the refraction of small triangular or hexagonal crystals of snow. It is only necessary, for the formation of a rainbov, that the sun should shine on a dense cloud, or a shover oſ rain, in a proper situation, or even on a number of minute drops of vater, scattered by a brush or by a syringe, so that the light may reach the eye aſter having undergone a certain angular deviation, by means of various refractions and reſlections; and the drops so situated must necessarily be found somevhere in a conical surface, of which the eye is the vertex, and must present the appearance of an arch. The light, which is reflected by the external surface of a sphere, is scattered almost equally in all directions, setting aside the difference arising from the greater eſſicacy of oblique refleetion; but when it first enters the drop, and ĩs there reflected hy its posterior surface, its deviation never exceeds a certain angle, which depends on the degree of refrangibility, and is, therefore, different for light of different colours: and the density of the light being the greatest at the angle of greatest deviation, the appearance of a luminous arch is produced by the rays of each colour at its appropriate distance. The rays which never enter the drops produce noother effect, than to cause a bright ness, or haziness round the sun, where the reſlection is the most oblique: those which are once reſlected within the drop exhibit the common internal or primary rainbow, at the distance of about 41 degrees from the point opposite to the sun: those which are twice reſleeted, the external or secondary rainbov, of 59°: and if the effect of the light, three times reſlected, vere sufficiently powerful, it would appear at the distance of about 49 degrees trom the sun. The colours of both rainbows encroach considerably on each other; for each point of the sun may be considered as affording a distinct arch of each colour, and the whole dise as producing an arch about half a degree in breadth for each kind of light; so that the arrangement nearly resembles that of the common mixed spectrum. There is, however, another cause of a further mixture of the colours: the arch of any single colour, which belongs to any point of the sun, is accurately defined on one side only, while on the other it becomes gradually fainter, the breadth of the first minute containing about five times as much light as a minute at the distance of a quarter of a degree: the abrupt termination is on the side of the red, that is, without the inner bow, and within the outer, so that, for this reason, the order of colours partakes, in some degree, of the nature of the red termination of a broad beam of light seen through a prism; but it is more or less affected hy this cause, on account of some circumstances, which will he explained when we examine the supernumerary rainbows, which sometimes accompany the bows more commonly observedl. A lunar rainhow is much more rarely seen than a solar one, but its colours differ little, except in intensity, from those of the common rainbow. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 450.) In the highest northern latitudes, where the air is commonly loaded vith frozen particles, the sun and moon usually appear surrounded by halos or coloured circles, at the distances of about 22 and 46 degrees from their centres; this appearance is also frequently observed in other olimates, especially in the colder months, and in the light clouds which ſloat in the highest regions of the ai. The halos are usually attended by a horizontal vhite cirele, with brighter spots, or parhelia, near their intersections with this circle, and vith portions of inverted arches of various curvatures: the horizontal circle has also sometimes anthelia, or bright spots nearly opposite to the sun. These phenomena have usually been attributed to the effect of spherical particles of hail, each having a central opaque portion of a certain magnitude, mixed with oblong particles, of a determinate form, and floating vith a certain constant obliquity to the horizon. BRut all these arbitrary suppositions, which were imagined by Huygens, are in themselves extremely complicated and improbable, and are wholly unauthorised by observationn. A much simpler, and more natural, as well as more accurate explanation, vhich vas suggested at an earlier period by Mariotte, had lung been wholly forgotten, until the same idea occurred to me, vithout any previous knovledge of what Mariotte had done. The natural tendency of vater to erystallize, in freezing, at an angle of 60 degrees, is suſficiently established, to allow us to assume this as the constant angle oſ the elementary crystals of snov, which are prohably either triangular or hexagonal prisms: the deviation produced by such a prism differs very little from the observed angle at vhich the ſirst circle is usually seen; and all the principal phenomena, which attend this circle, may be explained, by supposing the axis of the erystals to assume a vertical or a horizontal position, in consequence of the operation of gravity: thus the parhelia, which are sometimes a little more distant from the sun than the halo, are attributed by Mariotte to the refraction of the prisms which are situated vertically, and produce a greater deviation, on account oſ the obliquity of the rays of light with respect to their axess. The horizontal cirele may be deduced from the reſlection, or even the repeated refractions of the vertical facets; the anthelia from two refractions with an intermediate reſlection, and the inverted arch from the increase of the deviation, in the light passing obliquely, through prisms lying in a horizontal position. The external circle may be attributed either to two successive refractions through different prisms, or with greater probability, as Mr. Cavendish has suggested to me, to the effect of the rectangular terminations of the single erystals. The appearance of colours, in halos, is nearly the same as in rainbows, but less distinct; the red being nearest to the luminary, and the whole halo being externally very ill deſined. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 431, 452.) From the observed magnitude oſ these halns, I had concluded that the refractive power of ice must be materially less than that of water, although some authors had asserted that it was greater: and Dr. Wollaston afterwards fully confirmed this conclusion by means of the very accurate instrument which has already been described: his measurement agreeing precisely with the mean of the best observations on these halos; so that ice must be considered as the least refractive of any known substances not aeriform. Sometimes the figures of halos and parhelia are so extremely complicated, as to defy all attempts to account for the formation of their diſferent parts: but if we examine the representations which have been given, by various authors, of the multiplicity of capricious forms frequently assumed by the flakes of snow, we shall see no reason to think them inarequate to the production of all these appearancess (Plate XXIX. Fig. 433, 434) n The most singular of all the phenomena of refraction is perhaps the property of some natural substances, vhich have a double effect on the light transmitted through them, as if two mediums of different densities freely pervaded each other, the one only acting on some of the rays of light, the other on the remaining portion. These substances are usually erystallized stones, and their refractions have sometimes no further peculiarity; but the rhomboidal erystals of calcarious spar, commonly called Iceland erystals, possess the remarkable property of separating such pencils oſ light, as fall perpendicularly on them, into two parts, one of them only being transmitted in the usual manner, the other being deſlected towards the greater angle of the erystal. It appears from the experiments of Huygens, conſirmed and extended by Dr. Wollaston, that the medium, vhich causes the unusual refraction, has a different refractive power, according to the direction in which the light passes through it, and that if an oblate or ſlattened spheroid be described within a erystal, its axis being in the middle of one of the obtuse solid angles, and its principal diameters in the proportion of ꝗ to I0, the refractive power, vith respect to light passing in any direction, will always be inversely as the diameter of the spheroid which iĩs parallel to it; and where it is greatest, will be equal to that of the medium which produces the usual refraction, of which the index is 2. A ray of light, falling perpendicularly on any surface of the spar, its point of incidence being considered as the centre of the spheroid, ill meet the surface of the spheroid at the point where it is parallel to that of the spar; and a ray incident on the same surface in any other direction, will preserve a relation to the perpendicular ray, which is nearly the same as in ordinary refractionn. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 435.) It is also remarkable, that the two portions of light, thus separated, vill not be further subdivided by a transmission through a second piece, provided that this piece be in a position parallel to that of the first; but if it be placed in a transverse direction, each of the two pencils will be divided into two others; a circumstanee vhich appears to be the most unintelligible of any that has been discovered respeeting the phenomena oſ double refraction. The appearances oſ colours, which are produced by transparent plates of different thicknesses, and of those which are seen in light variously diffracted or inflected, will be more conveniently examined, when we investigate the intimate nature of light, since the general explanation of these colours, which vill then be given, will enable us to follow them through all their varieties, with much more ease than could he done at present, without the help of some theory respecting their origin. LECTURE XXXVIII. ON VISION. THE medium of communication, by which we hecome acquainted with all the objects that we have been lately considering, is the eye; an organ that exhibits, to an attentive observer, an arrangement of various substances, so correctly and delicately adapted to the purposes of the sense of vision, that ve cannot help admiring, at every step, the wisdom by which each part is adjusted to the rest, and made to conspire in effects, so remote from what the mere external appearance promises, that we have only been able to understand, by means of a laborious investigation, the nature and operations of this vonderful structure, while its whole mechanism still remains far heyond all rivalship of human art. The eye is an irregular spheroid, not very widely differing from a sphere; it is principally composed of transparent substances, of various refractive densities, calculated to collect the rays of light, which diverge from each point of an object, to a focus on its posterior surface, which is capable of transmitting to the mind the impression of the colour and intensity of the light, together with a distinetion of the situation of the focal pmoint, as determined by the angular place of the objeet. (Plate XXX. Fig. 436.) The ſirst refraction happens at the surface of the cornea, or that transparent coat which projects forwards from the ball of the eye; but the cornea, being very nearly of equable thickness, has little effect by its own refractive power, and serves only to give a proper form to the aqueous humour, which ſills its concavity, and distends it. This humour is partially divided by the uvea or iris, which is of different colours in different persons, having a perforation in iĩts centre, called the pupil. Immediately behind the uvea, and closely connected to its base, are the ciliary processes, the summits of which hang, like a short fringe, before the crystalline lens, a substance much more refractive than the aqueous humour, and increasing in density towards its centree. The remaining cavity is ſilled by an aqueous fluid, lodged in a celr Iular texture of extremely fine membrane, and called the vitreous humour. The retina lines the whole posterior part of this cavity; it is semitransparent, and is supported by the choroid or chorioid coat, a very opaque black or brown membrane, continued from the uvea and ciliary processes: but immediately where the retina is connected with the optic nerve, thechoroid is necessarily perſorated; and at this part a small portion of the retina is nearly insensiblee. The whole is surrounded by an opaque continuation of the cornea, called the sclerotica. The rays of light, which have entered the cornea, and passed through the pupil, being rendered still more convergent by the erystalline lens, are collected into foci on the retina, and form there an image, which, according to the common laws of refraction, is inverted, since the central rays of each pencil cross each other a little behind the pupil; and the image may easily be seen in a dead eye, by laying bare the posterior surface of the retina. Plate XXX. Fig. 457.) By means of this arrangement of the various refracting substances, many peculiar advantages are procured. The surface of the cornea only, if it had been more convex, could not have collected the lateral rays of a direct pencil to a perfect focus, without a different curvature near its edges; and then the oblique pencils would have been subjected to greater aberration, nor could they have been made to converge to any focus on the retina. A second reſraction performs both these oſices much more completely, and has also the advantage oſ admitting a greater quantity of light. If also the surfaces of the erystalline lens, thus interposed, had heen abrupt, there would have been a rellection at each, and an apparent haziness would have interfered with the distinct view of every luminous object; but this inconvenience is avoided by the gradual inerease of density in approaching the centre, which also makes the erystalline equivalent to a much more refractive substance of equal magnitude; while, at the same time, the smaller density of the lateral parts prevents the usual aberration of spherical surfaces, occasioned by the too great refraction of the lateral rays of direct pencils, and causes also the focus of each oblique pencil to fall either accurately or very nearly on the concave surface of the retina, throughout its extent. Opticians have often puzzled themselves, without the least necessity, in order to account for our seeing objects in their natural erect position, while the image on the retina is in reality inverted: but surely the situation of a focal point at the upper part of the eye could be no reason for supposing the object corresponding to it to be actually elevatedl. We call that the lower end of an ohject which is next the ground; and the image of the trunk of a tree being in contact with the image of the ground on the retina, ve may naturally suppose the trunk itself to he in contact vith the actual ground: the image of the branches being more remote from that of the ground, we necessarily infer that the branches are higher and the trunk lower: and it is much simpler that wve should compare the image of the ſloor with the image of our feet, with which it is in contact, than with the actual situation of our forehead, to which the image of the floor on the retina is only accidentally near, and with which indeed it would perhaps be impossible to compare it, as far as we judge by the immediate sensations only. We might indeed call in experience to our assistance, and habitually correct the errors of one sense by a comparison with the perceptions oſ another. But it appears that some philosophers have heen too hasty in supposing, that the use of all our senses is derived from experience alone, and in disbelieving the existence of instinct independent of itt. Without any other authority than that of their own imaginations, they have denied the observation recorded by Galen, on the instincts of a kid, which is suſficiently credible to counterbalance much more than bare assertion. The instant after its birth, accompanied by the loss of its mother, the little animal ran to some green vegetables, and having ſirst smelt them, chewed and swallowed them. The kid could have been taught by no experience to be tempted by the sight, to act with the proper muscles of locomotion, to go near and smell, and to be induced by the smell to masticate, and by the taste to swallow and digest its food, had it not been provided with some fundamental instinet, by the same intelligence, which so calculated the adjustments of the eye, that the lens should be able to produce a perfect image oſ every object, and that the vVOL. I. 3 u retina should be of that precise form, which is exactly suited to the reception of the image to be depicted on itt. The vhole surface of the retina appears to he usually occupied by such an image, but it is not all of equal sensibility; a certain portion only, near the axis, is capable of conveying distinct impressions of minute ohjects. But the perfection of this limited distinctness is a far greater ad vantage to us, than a more extensive field of moderately accurate vision would have heen; for by means of the external museles, ve ean easily so change the position of the eye, that the image of any object before us may he made to fall on the most sensible part of the retina. We may readily observe the vant of sensation at the entrance of the optic nerve, by placing two candles so that the distance of each from the eye may be about four times their distance from each other: then if we direct our right eye to to the leſt hand candle, rhe right hand candle vill be lost in a confused mass of ſaint light, ĩts image on the retina falling on the point at which its sensibility is deficient. When the attention is not directed to any particular ohject of sight, the refractive powers of the eye are adapted to the formation of an image of objects at a certain distance only, which is different in different individuals, and also generally increases with increasing age. Thus, if ve open our eyelids suddenly, ithout particular preparation, we find that distant objects only appear as distinct as we are able to make them; but by an exertion of the vill, the eye may be accommodated to the distinet perception of nearer ohjects, yet not of ohjects vithin certain limits. Between the ages of 40 and and 50, the refractive powers of the eye usually begin to diminish, but it sometimes happens that vhere they are already too great, the defeet continues unaltered to an advanced age. It appears also that after 50 or 60, the pover of chunging the focus of the eye is always mueh impaired, and sometimes wholly lost. The mode, in which the accommodation of the eye to different distances is eſſeted, has long been a subject of investigation and dispute among opticians and physiologists, but I apprehend that at present there is little further room for doubting, that the change is produced hy an increase of the con- vexity of the erystalline lens, arising from an internal cause. The arguments in favour of this conclusion are of two kinds; some of them are negative, derived from the impossibility of imagining any other mode of performing the accommodation, without exceeding the limits of the actual dimensions of the eye, and from the examination of the eye in ĩts different states by several tests, capable of detecting any other changes i they hud existed: for example, by the application of vater to the cornea, which complẽtely removes the effect of its convexity, without impairing the pover of aſtering the focus, and hy holding the whole eye, when turned inwards, in such a manner as to render any material alteration of its length utterly impossible. Other arguments are deduced from positive evidence of the change oſ form of the crystalline, furnished by the particular effects of refraction and aberration which are observable in the different states of the eye; eſfects which furnish a direct proof that the figure of the lens must vary; its surfaces, which are nearly spherical in the quiescent form of the lens, assuming a different determinable curvature vhen it is called into exertion. The objections which have been made to this conclusion are founded only on the appearance of a slight alteration of focal length in an eye from which the crystalline had been extracted; but the fact is neither suſſiciently ascertained, nor vas the apparent change at all considerable: and even if it were proved that an eye without the lens is capable of a certain small alteration, ĩit would by no means follow that it could undergo a change ſive times or ten times as great. The iris serves, by its variable mugnitude, to exclude more or less of the light falling on the cornea, when its intensity would otherwise be too great; hence the pupil is usually smallest by day, aænd its increased magnitude at night sometimes gives the eye a greater apparent lustre. The iris also intercepts such rays as would fall on parts incapable of refracting them regnlarly; and by its contraction vhen a nearer ohject is viewed, it lessens the confusion which would arise, in snuch eyes us cannot accommodate themselves suſficiently, from the magnitude of the imperfect focal points on the retina. Such a contraction almost alvays aceompanies the diminution of the focal length, even in a perſect eye, and it may easily he rendercd visible by walking gradually up to a looking glass, and observing the magnitude of the pupil as we approach nearer and nearer to our image. It vould he diſficult to assign a reason for this change of the state oſ the pupil within the limits of perfect vision, unless we allowed the irregularity of the form assumed by the marginal parts of the erystalline lens. The iris is also peculiarly useful in excluding such parts of lateral pencils of light as fall very obliquely on the cornea, and are too much reſracted, while a smaller pencil only, which enters the eye more directly, is admitted into the pupil. The refractive powers and properties of the eye may be very conveniently ascertained by means of an instrument to vhich I have given the name optometer, a term first employed in a sense nearly similar by Dr. Porterſield. If two or more separate parcels of the rays of the same pencil be admitted at distant parts of the pupil, they will only be reunited on the retina when the focus is perfect, so that if we look through two small perforations, or slits, ata minute object, to the distance of which the eye is not accommodated, it vill appear as if double; and when the object is a line directed nearly towards the eye, each point of it will appear double, except that which is at the distance of perfect vision, and an image of two lines will he seen, crossing each other in this point; so that the measurement of the focal length of the eye is immediately performed by inspection of the optometer only. The scale may be extended by the addition of a lens, vhich enables us to produce the eſfect oſ a longer line, while the instrument still remains portable. When the eye is possessed of too great a refractive power for the distinet perception of distant ohjects, the pupil is generally large, so that the confusion of the image is somewhat lessened by partially closing the eyelids; and from this habit an eye so formed is called myopic. In such cases, hy the help of a concave lens, the divergence of the rays of light may be increased, and a virtual image may be formed, at a distance so much smaller than that of the ohject as to aſford perfeet vision. For a long sighted or presbyopic eye, on the contrary, a convex lens is required, in order to obtain a virtual image at a greater distance than the object; and it often happens that the rays must be made not only to diverge less than before, but even to converge towards a focus behind such an eye, in order to make its vision distinct. Presbyopic persons have in general a small pupil, and, therefore, seldom acquire the habit of covering any part of it with their eyelids. When the images of the same ohject fall on certain corresponding points of the retina in each eye, they appear to the sense only as one; but if they ſall on parts not corresponding, the object appears double; and in general, all objects at the same distance, in any one position of the eyes, appear alike either double or single. The optical axes, or the directions of the rays falling on the points of most perfect vision, naturally meet at a great distance; that is, they are nearly parallel to each other, and in looking at a nearer object we make them converge towards it, vherever it may be situated, by means of the external muscles of the eye; while in perſect eyes the refractive powers are altered, at the same time, by an involuntary sympathy, so as to form a distinet image of an object at the given distancee This correspondence of the situation of the axes with the focal length is in most cases unalterable; hut some have perhaps a power of deranging it in a slight degree, and in others the adjustment is imperfect: but the eyes seem to be in most persons inseparably connected together with respect to the changes that their refractive powers undergo, although it sometimes happens that those powers are originally very different in the opposite eyes. Those motions enable us to judge pretty accurately, within certain limits, of the distance of an object; and beyond these limits, the degree of distinetness or confusion of the image still continues to assist the judgment. We estimate distances much less accurately with one eye than with both, since we are deprived of the assistance usually afforded by the relative situation of the optical axes; thus we seldom succeed at once in attempting to pass a finger or a hooked rod sideways through a ring, vith one eye shut. Qur idea of distance is also usually regulated by a knovledge of the real magnitude of an object, while we observe its angular magnitude; and on the other hand a knovledge of the real or imaginary distance of the object often directs our judgment of its actual magnitude. The quantity of light intercepted by the air interposed, and the intensity of the blue tint which it occasions, are also elements of our involuntary calculation: hence, in a mist, the obscurity increases the apparent distance, and consequently the supposed magnitude, of an unknown ohject. We naturally observe, in estimating a distance, the number and extent of the intervening ohjects; so that a distant church in a woody and hilly country appears more remote than if it were situated in a plain; and for a similar reason, the apparent distance-of an object seen at sea, is smaller than ĩts true distance. The city oſ London is unquestionably larger than Paris; but the difference appears at ſirst sight much greater than it really ĩs; and the smoke, produced by the coal fires of London, is probubly the principal cause of the deception. The sun, moon, and stars, are much less luminous when they are near the horizon, than when they are more elevated, on account of the greater quantity oſ their light that is intercepted, in its longer passage through the atmosphere: we also observe a much greater variety of nearer ohiects almost in the same direction: ve cannot, thereſore, help imagining them to be nore distant, vhen they rise or set, than at other times; and since they subtend the same angle, they appear to he actually larger. For similar reasons the apparent ſigure of the starry heavens, even vhen free from clouds, ĩs that of a flattened vault, its summit appearing to be much nearer to us than its horizontal parts, and any of the constellations seems to he considerably larger when iĩt ĩs near the horizon than vhen in the zenith. (Plate XXX. Fig. 438.) The faculty of julging of the actual distance of ohjects is an impediment to the deception, which it is partly the business of a painter to produce. Some of the efeets of ohjects at different distances may, however, be imitated in painting on a plane surface. Thus, supposing the eye to be accommodated to a given distance, ohjeets at all other distances may be represented with a certain indistinctness of outline, vhich would accompany the images of the ohjects themselves on the retina: and this indistinetness is so generally necessary, that its absence has the disugreeable effeet called hardnesss. The apparent magnitude of the suhjects of our design, and the relative situations of the intervening ohjects, may be so imitated by the rules of geometrical perspective us to agree perfectly with nature, and we may still further improve the representation of distance by attending to the art of aerial perspective, which consists in a due observation of the loss of light, and the bluish tinge, occasioncd hy the interposition of a greater or less depth of air between us and the dilerent parts of the seenery. We cannot indeed so arrange the picture, that either the ſocal length oſf he ee, or the position of the optieal axes, may be such as would be requirer by the actual ohjects: but we may place the picture at such a distance that neither of these criterions can have much power in detecting the fallacy; or, by the interposition of a large lens, ve may produce nearly the same effects in the rays of light, as if they proceeded from a picture at any required distance. In the panorama, vhich has. lately been exhibited in many paris of Europe, the effects oſ natural seenery are. very closely imitated: the deception is favoured by the absence of all other visible objects, and by the faintness of the light, vhich assists in concealing the defeets of the representation, and for which the eye is usually prepared, by being long detained in the dark winding passages, which lead to the place of exhihition. The impressions of light on the retina appear to be alvays in a certain degree permanent, and the more so as the light is stronger; but it is uncertain whether the retina possesses this property merely as a solar phosphorus, or in consequence of its peculiar organization. The duration of the impression is generally from one hundredth of a second to half a second, or more; hence a luminous object revolving in a cirele makes a lucid ring; and a shooting star leaves a train of light behind it, which is not alvays real. If the object is painfully bright, it generally produces a permanent spot, which continues to pass through various changes of colour for some time, vithout much regularity, and gradually vanishes: this may, however, be considered as a morbid efſect. When the eye has been fixed on a small object of a bright colour, and is then turned avay to a vhite surface, a faint spot, resembling in form and magnitude the object first viewed, appears on the surface, oſ a colour opposite to the first, that is, of such a colour as would be produced by withdraving it from white light; thus a red object produces a bluish green spot; and a bluish green object a red spot. The reason of this appearance is probably that the portion of the retina, or of the sensorium, that is aſſected, has lost a part of its sensibility to the light of that colour, with which it has been impressed, and is more strongly affected by the other constituent parts of the white lightt. A similar effect is also often produced, when a vhite, or grey object is vieed on a coloured ground, even vithout altering the position of the eye: the vhole retina being afſected by sympathy nearly in the same manner as a part oſ it was aſfeeted in the former casee. These appearances are most conveniently exhibited by means of the shadows of objects placed in coloured light: the shadow appearing oſ a colour opposite to that of the stronger light, even when it is in reality illuminated by a fainter light of the same colour. It seems that the eye cannot perfectly distinguish the intensity of a colour, either when the light is extremely faint, as that of many of the fixed stars, which Dr. Herschel has found to be strongly coloured, or when the light is excessively vivid; and that when a considerable part of the field of vision is occupied hy coloured light, it appears to the eye either white, or less coloured than it is in reality: so that when a room is illuminated either by ®he yellow light of a candle, or by the red light of a fire, a sheet oſ writing paper still appears to retain its whiteness; and if from the light of the candle wve tuke avay some of the abundant yellow light, and leave or substitute a portion actually white, the effect is nearly the same as if we took away the yellow light from white, and substituted the indieo whieh would be left: and we observe accordingly, that in comparison with the light of a candle, the common daylight appears of a purplish hue. (Plate XXX. Fig. 4359.. 441.) ON THE NATURE OF LIGHT AND COLOURS. TuE nature of light is a subject of no material importance to the concerns oſ life or to the practice of the arts, but it ĩs in many other respects extremely interesting, especially as iĩt tends to assist our views both of the nature of our sensations, ani of the constitution oſ the universe at large. The examination of the produetion of colours, in a variety of circumstances, is intimately connected vith the theory of their essential properties, and theĩr causes; and we shall ſind that many of these phenomena vill afſord us considerable assistance in forming our opinion respeeting the nature and origin of light in general. It is allowed on all sides, that light either consists in the emission of very minute particles from luminous substances, which are actually projected, and continue to move, with the velocity commonly attributed to light, or in the excitation. of an undulatory motion, analogous to that which constitutes sound, in a highly light and elastic medium pervading the universe; but the judgments of philosophers of all ages have heen much divided vith respect to the preference of one or the other of these opinions. There are also some circumstances which induce those, who entertain the ſirst hypothesis, either to believe, with Newton, that the emanation of the particles oſ light is alvays attended hy the undulations oſ an etherial medium, accompanying it in ĩts passage, or to suppose, with Boscoviel, that the minute particles of light themselves receive, at the time oſ their emission, certain rotatory and vibratory motions, which they retain as long as their projectile motion continues. These additional suppositions, however necessary they may have been thought for explaining some particular phenomena, have never been very generally understood or admitted, although no attempt has been made to accommodate the theory iu any other manner to those phenomena. l voL. I. 3 We shall proceed to examine in detail the manner in which the two principal hypotheses respecting light may be applied to its various properties and affections; and in the first place to the simple propagation oſ light in right lines through a vacuum, or a very rare homogeneous medium. In this cireumstance there is nothing inconsistent with either hy pothesis; but it undergoes some modiſications, hich require to be noticed, when a portion of light is admitted through an aperture, and spreads itself in a slight degree in every direction. In this case it is muintained by Newton that the margin of the aperture possesses an attractive force, which is capable of inflecting the rays: but there is some improbability in supposing that bodies oſ diſſerent forms and of various refractive powers should possess an equal foree of inſeetion, as they appear to do in the production of these eſſects; and there is reason to conclude from experiments, that such a force, if it existed, must extend to a very considerable distance from the surfaces concerned, at least a quarter of an inch, and perhaps much more, which is a condition not easily reconciled vith other phenomena. In the luygenian system of undulation, this divergence or difſraction ĩs ĩllustrated by a comparison with the motions of waves oſ vater and of sound, both of which diverge when they are ailmitted into a wide space through an aperture, so much indeed that it has usually been considered as an ohjection to this opinion, that the rays of light do not diverge in the degree that would be expected if they were analogous to the vaves of vater. But as it has been remarked by Newton, that the pulses of sound diverge less than the vaves oſ water, so it may ſairly be inferred, that in a still more highly elastic medium, the undulations, constituting light, must diverge much less considerably than either. (Plate XX. Fig. 266.) With respect, however, to the transmission of light through perſeetly transparent mediums of consĩilerable density, the system of emanation labours under some difiiculties. It ĩs not to be supposed that the purticles of ligh can perforate with ſreedom the ultimate atoms of matter, which compose a substance oſ any kind; they must, therefore, he admitted in all directions through the pores or interstices of those atoms: for if we allow sueh suppositions as Duscoviel's, that matter itselſis penetrable, that is, immaterial, it is almost uscless to argue the question further. It ĩs certain that some substances retain all their properties when they are reduced to the thickness of the ten millionth of an ineh at most, aml we cannot thereſore suppose the distances of the atoms of matter in general to be so great as the hundred millionth of an inch. Nov if ten feet of the most transparent water transmits, without interruption, one half oſ the light that enters it, each section or stratum of the thickness of one of these pores of matter must intercept only about one tventy thousand millionth, and so much must the space or area occupied by the particles be smaller than the interstices hetween them, and the diameter of each atom must be less than the hundred and forty thousandth part of its distance from the neighbouring particles: so that the whole space occupied by the substance must he as little ſilled, as the whole of England would be ſilled by a hundred men, placed at the distance of about thirty miles from each other. This astonishing degree of porosity ĩs not indeed absolutely inadmissible, and there are many reasons for believing the statement to agree in some measure vith the actual constitution of material substances; but the Iluygenian hypothesis does not require the disproportion to be by any means so great, since the general direction and even the intensity of an undulation wvould be very little affected by the interposition of the atoms of matter, while these atoms may at the same time be supposed to assist in the transmission of the impulse, by propagating it through their own substance. Euler indeed imagined that the undulations of light might be transmitted through the gross substance of material bodies alone, precisely in the same manner as sound is propagated; but this supposition is for many reasons inadmissible. A very striking circumstance, respecting the propagation of light, is the uniformity of its velocity in the same medium, According to the projectile hypothesis, the force employed in the free emission of light must be about a million million times as great as the force of gravity at the earth's surface; and it must either act with equal intensity on all the particles of light, or must impel some of them through a greater space than others, iſ its action be less powerful, since the velocity is the same in all cases; for example, if the projectile force is weaker with respect to red light than vith respeet to violet light, it must continue its action on the red rays to a greater distance tham on the violet rays. There is no instance in nature besides of a simple projectile moving with a velocity unitorm in all cases, whatever may be its cause, and it ĩs extremely diſiicult to imagine that so immense a force of repulsion can reside in all substances capable of becoming luminous, so that the light of decaying wood, or of two pebbles rubbed together, may he projected precisely with the same velocity, as the light emitted by iron burning in oxygen gus, or by the reservoir of liquid ſire on the surface of the sun. Another cause vould also naturally interfere with the uniformity oſ the velocity of light, if it consisted merely in the motion of projected corpuscles of matter; Mr. Laplace has calculated, that if any of the stars vere 250 times as great in diameter as the sun, its attraction vould be s0 stron” as to destroy the whole momentum of the corpuscles of light proceeding from it, and to render the star invisible at a great distance; and although there is no reason to imagine that any of the stars are actually of this magnitude, yet some oſ them are probably many times greater than our sun, and therefure large enough to produce such a retardation in the motion of their light as vould materially alter its effects. It is almost unnecessary to observe that the uniformity of the velocity oſlight, in those spaces which are free from all material substances, ĩs a necessary consequence of the Huygenian hypothesis, since the undulations of every homogencous elastic medium are alvays propagated, like those oſ sound, with the same velocity, as long as the medium remains unaltered. On eſther supposition, there is no diſſiculty in explaining the equality of the angles oſ incidence and reſlection; for these angles are equal as well in the collision of common elastic hodies ith others incomparably larger, as in the reſleetions of the vaves of vater and of the undulations of sound. And it ĩs equally easy to demonstrate, that the sines of the angles oſ incidence and refraction must be alvays in the same proportion at the same surface, whether it be supposed to possess an attractive force, capuble of neting on the particles oſ light, or to be the limit of a medium through which the undulations are propagated vith a diminished velocity. There are, however, some cases oſ the production of eolours, which lead us to suppose that the velocity of light must be smaller in a denser than in a rarer medium; and supposing this fact to be fully established, the existence of such an attiactive oree eould no longer he allowed, nor could the system of emanation be maintuined by any one. The partial reſlection from all reſracting surfaces is supposed by Newton t0 urise from eertain periodical retardations oſ the particles of light, caused by undulations, propagated in all cases through an ethereal medium. The mechanism of these supposed undulations is so complicated, and attended by s0 many difſiculties, that the ſew who have examined them have been in general entirely dissatisſied with them: and the internal vibrations of the particles of light themselves, vhich Boscovieh has imagined, appear scarcely to require a serious discussion. It may, thereſore, safely be asserted, that in the projectile hypothesis this separation of the rays of light oſ the same kind by a partial reſlection at every reſracting surface, remains vhollv unexplained. In the undulatory system, on the contrary, this separati n follows us a necessury consequence. It ĩs simplest to consider the ethereal medium vhich pervades any transparent substance, together vith the material atoms of the substance, as constituting together a compound medium denser than the pure ether, but not more elastic; and by comparing the contiguous particles of the rarer and the denser medium vith common elastie bodies of different dimensions, ve may easily determine not only in what manner, hut almost in wvhat degree, this reſlection must take place in different circumstances. Thus, if one of two equal boilies strikes the other, it communicates to it its whole motion without any reflection; but a smaller body striking a larger one is reſlected, with the more force as the diſference of their magnitude is greater; and a larger body, striking a smaller one, still proceeds with a diminished velocity; the remaining motion constituting, in the case of an undulation ſalling on a rarer medium, a part oſ a new series of motions vhich necessarily returns backwards with the appropriate velocity: anid ve may observe a circumstance nearly similar to this last in a portion of mereury spread out on a horizontal table; iſ a vave be excited at any part, it will be reflected from the termination of the mercury almost in the same manner as from a solid obstacle. 3llt i The total reſlection of light, falling, with a certain obliquity, on the surface of a rarer medium, becomes, on hoth suppositions, a particular case of refraction. In the undulatory system, it is convenient to suppose the two mediums to he separated by a short space in which their densities approach by degrees to each other, in order that the undulation may be turned gradually round, s0 as to he reſlected in an equal angle: but this supposition is not absolutely necessary, and the same effcets may be expected at the surface of two mediums separated by an abrupt termination. The chemical process of combustion may easily be imagined either to disengage the particles of light from their various combinations, or to agitate the elastic medium by the intestine motions attending it: hut the operation of ſriction upon substances incapable of undergoing ehemical changes, as vell as the motions oſ the electric fluid through imperfect conductors, aſford instances oſ the production of light in which there scems to be no easy vay of supposing a decomposition of any kind. The phenomena of solar phosphori appear to resemble greatly the sympathetic sounds of musical instruments, which are agitated by other sounds conveyed to them through the air: it is diſticult to understand in vhat state the corpuseles of light could be retained by these substances so as to be reemitted aſter a short space or time; and iſ ĩt is true that diamonds are often found, vhich exhibit a red light aſter having received a violet light only, it seems impossible to explain this property, on the supposition of the retention and subsequent emission of the sume corpuscles. The phenomena of the aberration of light agree perfectly well with the system of emanation; and if the ethereal medium, supposed to pervade the earth and its atmosphere, vere carried along before it, and partook materially in its motions, these phenomena could not easily be reconciled with the theory of undulation. But there is no kind of necessity for such a supposition: ĩt will not he denied by the advocates oſf the Newtonian opinion that all material bodies are suſiiciently porous to leave a medium pervading them almost absolutely at rest; and if this be granted, the effects of aberration vill appear to he precisely the same in either hy pothesis. The unusual refraction of the Iceland spar has heen most accurately and satisfactorily explained by Iluygens, on the simple supposition that this crystal possesses the property oſ transmitting an impulse more rapidly in one direction than in another; vhence he infers that the undulations consti uting light must assume a spheroĩdical instead of a spherical form, and lays down such laws for the direction of its motion, as are incomparably more consistent vith experiment than any attempts which have hiren made to ac commndate the phenomena to other principles. It is true that nothing has yet heen done to assist us in understunding the eſſeets of a subsequent refraction by a sccond crystal, unless any person ean be satisſied vith the name of polarity assigned by Newton to a property which he attributes to the particles of light, and which he supposes to direct them in the species of refraction vhich they are to undergo: but on any hypothesis, until we discover the reason why a part of the light is at ſirst refracted in the usual manner, and another purt in the unusual manner, we have no right to expect that we should understand how these dispositions are continued or modiſied, vhen the process is repeated. In order to explain, in the system of emanation, the dispersion of the rays of different colours by means of refraction, iĩt is necessary to suppose that all rèfractive mediums have an eleetive attraction, acting more poverſully on the violet rays, in proportion to their mass, than on the red. But an eleetive attraction of this kind is a property foreign to mechanical philosophy, and when we use the term in chemistry, we only confess our incapacity to assign a mechanical cause for the effect, and refer to an analogy vith other facts, of which the intimate nature is perfectly unknown to us. It is not indeed very easy to give a demonstrative theory of the dispersion of coloured light upon the supposition of undulatory motion: but ve may derive a very satisſactory illustration from the vell known eſfects of waves of different breadths. The simple calculation of the velocity of vaves, propagated in a liquid perfectly elastie, or incompressible, and free from frietion, assigns to them all precisely the same velocity, whatever their breadth may be: the compressibility of the fluids actually existing introduces, however, a necessity ſor a correction according to the breadth of the wave, and it is very ecasy to observe, in a river or a pond of considerable depth, that the wider waves proceed mueh more rapidly than the narrower. We may, therefore, consider the pure ethereal medium as anulogous to an infinitely elastic ſluid, in which undulations of all kinds move with equal velocity, and material transparent substances, on the contrary, us resembling those fluids, in which we see the large waves advance beyond the smaller; and by supposing the red light to consist of larger or wider undulations and the violet of smaller, ve may suſficiently elucidate the greater refrangibility of the red than oſ the violet light. It is not, however, merely on the ground of this analogy that ve may he induced to suppose the undulations constituting red light to be larger than those of violet light: a very extensive class of phenomena leads us still more directly to the same conclusion; they consist chieſlv of the produetion oſ colours by means of transparent plates, and by diſiraction or inllection, none of which have been explained, upon the supposition of emanation, in a manner sufiiciently minute or comprehensive to satisfy the most candid even of the advocates for the projectile system; while on the other hand all of them may he at once understood, from the effect of the interferenco of double lights, in a manner nearly similar to that which constitutes in sound the sensition oſ a hbeat, vhen two strings, forming an imperſfect unison, are heard to vibrate together. Supposing the light of any given colour to consist of undulations, of a given breadth, or of a given fſrequency, it follows that these undulations must be liable to those eſſeets which we have already examined in the case of the vaves of water, and the pulses of sound. It has been shown that two equal series oſf waves, proceeding from eentres near each other, may be sCen to destroy each other's eſfects at certain points, and other points at to redouble them; and the beating of two sounds has heen explained from a similar interference. We are now to apply the same principles to the alternate union and extinetion of colourss. (Plate XX. Fig. 267.) In order that the effects of two portions oſ light may be thus combined, it is neeessary that they be derived from the same origin, and that they arrive at the same point by different puths, in directions not much deviating from each other. This deviation may be produced in one or both of the portions hy diſſraction, by reflection, by refraction, or by any of these eſſects comhined; but the simplest case appears to be, when a bean of homogeneous light ſalls on a screen in which there are two very small holes or slits, vhich may be considered as centres of divergence, from vhence the light ĩs diſſactei in every direction. In this ease, when the two newly formed beams are received on a surface placed so as to intercept them, their light is dividèd by dark stripes into portions nearly equal, but becoming wider as the surface is more remote from the apertures, s0 as to subten very nearly equal angles from the aperiures at all distances, and wider also in the same proportion as the apertures are closer to each other. ſThe middle of he two portions is always light, and the biight stripes on each side are at such distances, that the light, coming to them from une oſ the apertures, must have passed through a longer space than that which comes from the other, by an interval which is equal to the breadth of one, two, three, or more of the supposed undulations, while the intervening dark spaces correspond to a diſference of half a supposed undulation, of one and a half, of two and a half, or more. From a comparison of various experiments, it appears that the breadth of the undulations constituting the extreme red light must be supposed to be, in air, about one 36 thousandth of an inch, and those of the extreme violet about one 6o thousandth; the mean of the whole spectrum, with respect to the intensity of light, being about one 45 thousandth. From these dimensions it follows, caleulating upon the known velocity of light, that almost 500 millions of millions of the slowest of such undulations must enter the eye in a single second. The combination of two portions of white or mixed light, vhen vieved at a great distance, exhibits a few white and black stripes, corresponding to this interval; although, upon closer inspection, the distinct effects of an infinite number of stripes of different breadths appear to be compounded together, so as to produce a beautiful diversity of tints, passing by degrees into each other. The central whiteness is first changed to a yellowish, and then to a tawny colour, succeeded by crimson, and by violet and blue, which together appear, when seen at a distance, as a dark stripe; after this a green light appears, and the dark space beyond it has a erimson hue; the subsequent lights are all more or less green, the dark spaces purple and reddish; and the red light appears so far to predominate in all these effects, that the red or purple stripes occupy nearly the same place in the mixed fringes as if their light vere received separately. The comparison of the results of this theory with experiments fully establishes their general coincidence; it indicates, however, a slight correction in some of the measures, on account of some unknown cause, perhaps connected with the intimate nature of diffraction, which uniformly occasions the portions of light, proceeding in a direction very nearly rectilinear, to be divided into stripes or fringes a little wider than the external stripes, formed by the light which is more bent. (Plate XXX. Fig. 449, 443.) When the parallel slits are enlarged, and leave only the intervening substance to cast its shadow, the divergence from its opposite margins still conVOL. I. S o tinues to produce the same fringes as before, but they are not easily visible, except within the extent of its shadow, being overpowered in other parts by a stronger light; but if the light thus diffracted be allowed to fall on the eye, either within the shadow, or in its neighbourhood, the stripes will still appear; and in this manner the colours oſ small ſibres are probably formed. Hence if a collection of equal fibres, for example a lock of wool, he held before the eye when ve look at a luminous objeet, the series of stripes belonging to each ſibre combine their effects, in such a manner, as to be converted into cireular fringes or coronae. This is probably the origin of the coloured circles or coronae sometimes seen round the sun and moon, two or three oſ them appearing together, nearly at equal distances from each other and from the luminary, the internal ones being, however, like the stripes, a little dilated. It is only necessary that the air should be loaded with globules oſ moisture, nearly of equal size among themselves, not much exeeeding one two thousandth of an inch in diameter, in order that a series of such coronae, at the distance of two or three degrees from each other, may be exhibited. Plate XXX. Fig. 444.) If, on the other hand, we remove the portion of the screen which separates the parallel slits from each other, their external margins will still continue to exhibit the effects of difſracted light in the shadow on each side; and the experiment will assume the form of those which were made by Newton on the light passing between the edges of tvo knives, brought very nearly into contact; although some of these experiments appear to show the inſluence of a portion of light reſlected by a remoter part of the polished edge of the Enives, which indeed must unavoidably constitute a part of the light concerned in the appearance of fringes, wherever their whole breadth exceeds that of the aperture, or of the s hadow of the fibre. The edges of two knives, placed very near each other, may represent the opposite margins of a minute furrow, cut in the surface of a polished substance of any kind, which, when viewed with different degrees of obliquity, present a series of colours nearly resembling those which are exhibited within the shadows of the knives: in this case, however, the paths of the two portions of light before their incidence are also to be considered, and the whole difſerence of these paths will be found to determine the appearance of a. l colour in the usual manner; thus when the surface is so situated, that the image of the luminous point would be seen in it by regular reſlection, the difference will vanish, and the light will remain perfectly white, but in other cases various colours will appear, according to the degree of obliuuity. These colours may easily be seen, in an irregular form, by looking at any metal, coarsely polished, in the sunshine; but they become more distinet and conspicuous, when a number of fine lines of equal strength are dravn parallel to each other, 50 as to conspire in their effects. It sometimes happens that an ohject, of which a shadow is formed in a beam of light, admitted through a small aperture, is not terminated by parallel sides; thus the tvo portions oſ light, which are diſſracted from two sides oſ an object, at right angles with each other, frequently form a short series of curved fringes within the shadow, situated on each side of the diagonal, which were first observed by Grimaldi, and vhich are completely explicable from the general principle, of the interſerence of the two portions encroaching perpendicularly on the shadow. (Plate XXX. Fig. 445.) But the most obvious of all the appearances of this kind is that of the fringes, vhich are usually seen beyond the termination of any shadow, formed in a beam of light, admitted through a small aperture: in white light three of these fringes are usually visible, and sometimes four; but in light of one colour only, their number is greater; and they are always much narrower as they are remoter from the shadow. Their origin is easily deduced from the interference of the direct light with a portion of light reſlected from the margin of the ohject which produces them, the obliquity of its incidence causing a reflection so copious as to exhibit a visible effect, however narrow that margin may be; the fringes are, however, rendered more obvious as the quantity of this reſlected light is greate. Upon this theory it follows that the distance of the first dark fringe from the shadow should be half as great as that of the fourth, the difference of the lengths of the different paths of the light being as the squares of those distances; and the experiment precisely conſirms this calculation, with the same slight correction only as is required in all other cases; the distances of the first fringes being always a little increased. ITt may also be observed, that the extent of the shadov itself is always augmented, and nearly in an equal degree vith that of the fringes: the reason of this circumstance appears to be the gradual loss of light at the edges of every sepurate beam, which is so strongly analogous to the phenomena visible in waves of vater. The same cause may also perhaps have some effect in producing the general modiſication or correction of the place of the ſirst fringes, although it appears to be scarcely suſficient for explaining the vhole of itt. (Plate XXX. Vig. 446.) A still more common and convenient method, of exhibiting the effects of the mutual interference of light, is afforded us by the colours oſf the thin plates of transparent substances. The lights are here derived from the successive partial reſlections produced by the upper and under surſace of the plate, or when the plate is viewed by transmitted light, from the direct beam which is simply refracted, and that portion of it which is twice reflected vithin the plate. The appearance in the latter case is much less striking than in the former, hecause the light thus affected is only a small portion of the whole beam, with which it is mixed; while in the former the two reſlected portions are nearly of equal intensity, and may be separated from all other light tending to overpower them. In both cases, vhen the plate is gradually reduced in thickness to an extremely thin edge, the order of colours may be precisely the same as in the stripes and coronae already deseribed; their distance only varying when the surfaces of the plate, instead of being plane, are concave, as it frequently happens in such experiments. The scale of an oxid, which is oſten formed by the effect of heat on the surface of a metal, in particular of iron, afiords us an example of such a series formed in reſlected light: this scale is at ſirst inconceivably thin, and destroys none oſ the light reflected, it soon, however, begins to be of a dull yellow, which changes to red, and then to erimson and blue, after which the effect is destroyed by the opacity which the oxid acquiress Usually, however, the series of colours produced in reſlected light follows an order somewhat diſferent: the scale of oxid is denser than the air, and the iron helow than the oxid; but vhere the mediums above and below the plate are either both rarer or both denser than itself, the difſerent natures of the reſlections at its different surſaces appear to produce a modification in the state of the undulations, and the inſinitely thin edge oſ the plate becomes black instead of vhite, une of the portions of light at once destroying the other, instead of cooperating with it. Thus when a ſilm of soapy water is stretched over a wine glass, and placed in a vertical position, its upper edge becomes extremely thin, and appears nearly black, while the parts below are divided by horizontal lines into a series of coloured bands; and when two glasses, one of which is slightly convex, are pressed together with some force, the plate of air between them exhibits the appearance oſ coloured rings, heginning from a black spot at the centre, and becoming narrower and narrower, as the curved figure of the glass causes the thickness of the plate of air to increase more and more rapidly. The black is succeeded by a violet, so faint as to be scarcely perceptible; next to this is an orange yellow, and then crimson and blue When water, or any other fluid, is substituted for the air between the glasses, the rings appear where the thickness is as much less than that of the plate of air, as the refractive density of the fluid is greater; a circumstance which necessarily follows from the proportion of the velocities with which light must, upon the Huygenian hypothesis, be supposed to move in different mediums. It is also a consequence equally necessary in this theory, and equally inconsistent with all others, that when the direction of the light is oblique, the effect of a thicker plate must be the same as that of a thinner plate, when the light falls perpendicularly upon it; the difference of the paths described by the different portions of light precisely corresponding vith the observed phenomena. (Plate XXX. Fig. 447.. 449.) Sir Isaac Newton supposes the colours oſ natural hodiẽs in general to be similar to these colours of thin plates, and to be governed by the magnitude of their particles. If this opinion were universally true, ve might alvays separate the colours of natural bodies by refraction into a number of different portions, with dark spaces intervening; for every part of a thin plate, which exhibits the appearance of colour, affords such a divided spectrum, when viewed through a prism. There are accordingly / many natural colours in which such a separation may be observed; one of the most remarkable of them is that of blue glass, probably coloured with cobalt, which becomes divided into seven distinet portions. It seems, however, impossible to suppose the production of natural colours perfectly identical vith those of thin plates, on account of the known minuteness of the particles of colouring bodies, unless the refractive density of these particles be at least 20 or 30 times as great as that of glass or vater; which is indeed not at all improbable with respect to the ultimate atoms of bodies, but dificult to believe with respect to any of their arrangements constituting the diversities oſ material substances. The colours of mixed plates constitute a distinct variety of the colours oſ thin plates, which has not been commonly observedl. They appear when the interstice hetween two glasses, nearly in contact, is ſilled with a great number of minute portions of two different substances, as water and air, oil and air, or oil and water: the light, which passes through one of the mediums, moving vith a greater velocity, anticipates the light passing through the other; and their effects on the eye being confounded and combined, their interference produces an appearance of colours nearly similar to those of the colours of simple thin plates, seen by transmission; but at much greater thicknesses, depending on the diference of the refractive densities of the substances employed. The effect is observed by holding the glasses between the eye and the termination of a bright object, and iĩt is most conspicuous in the portion which is seen on the dark part beyond the ohject, being produced by the light scattered irregularly from the surfaces of the fluid. Here, however, the eſfects are inverted, the colours resembling those of the common thin plates, seen by reſlection; and the same considerations on the nature of the reſlections are applicable to both cases. (Plate XXX. Fig. 450.) The produetion of the supernumerary rainbows, which are sometimes seen within the primary and without the secondary how, appears to he intimately connected with that of the colours of thin platess. e have already seen that the light producing the ordinary rainbow is double, its intensity being only greatest at ĩts termination, where the common bow appears, while the whole light is extended mueh more widely. The two portions concerned in its produetion must divide this light into fringes; but unless almost all the drops of a shower happen to be of the same magnitude, the effects of these fringes must be confounded and destroyed: in general, however, they must at least cooperate more or less in producing one dark fringe, vhich must cut oſt the common rainbow much more abruptly than it vould othervise have been terminated, and eonsequently assist the distinetness oſ ĩts colours. The magnitude of the drops of rain, required for producing such of these rainbows as are usually observed, is between the 50th and the 100th of an inch: they become gradually narrower as they are more remote from he common . rainbows, nearly in the same proportions as the external fringes of a shadov, or the rings seen in a concave plate. (Plate XXX. Fig. 451.) The last species of the colours of double lights, which it will be necessary to notice, constitutes those which have been denominated, from Newton's experiments, the colours of thick plates, but which may be called, with more propriety, the colours of concave mirrorss The anterior surface of a mirror oſ glass, or any other transparent surface placed before a speculum of metal, dissipates irregularly in every direction two portions of light, one before, and the other after its reſlection. When the light falls obliquely on the mirror, being admitted through an aperture near the centre of its curvature, it is easy to sho, from the laws of reflection, that the two portions, thus dissipated, will conspire in their effects, throughout the circumference of a cirele, passing through the aperture; this circle will consequently be white, and it will be surrounded with cireles of eolours very nearly at equal distances, resembling the stripes produced hy difſraction. The analogy between these colours and those of thin plates is by no means so close as Newton supposed it; since the effect of a plate of any considerable thickness must be absolutely lost in white light, after ten or twelve alternations of colours at most, while these effects would require the whole process to remain unaltered, or rather to be reneved, after many thousands or millions of changes. (Plate XXX. Fig. a52) It is presumed, that the accuracy, with which the general law of the interference of light has been shown to be applicable to so great a variety of facts, in circumstances the most dissimilar, will be allowed to establish its validity in the most satisfactory manner. The full confirmation or decided rejection of the theory, by which this law was ſirst suggested, can be expected from time and experience alone; if it be confuted, our prospects will again be confined within their ancient limits, but if it be fully established, ve may expect an ample extension of our vievs of the operations of nature, by means of our acquaintance with a medium, so poverful and s0 universal, as that to which the propagation of light must be attributed LECTURE XL ON THE HISTORY OF OPTICS. THE science of optics is not one of those which had been cultivated with the greatest diligence and success by the philosophers of antiquity: almost every reſinement relating to it has originated in the course of about two centuries; and some of its greatest improvements have been made within these ſifty years. The reſlection of the rays of light is indeed an occurrence too frequent and too obvious to have escaped the notice even of the earliest observers: a river or a fountain was the first mirror: iĩts effect was easily imitated by speculums of metal; and as soon as any philosophical attention was paid to the phenomenon, it was easy to collect the equality of the angles of incidence and reſlection; but although it was well known that an oar, partially immersed in water, no longer appeared straight, it was long before any attempts were made to ascertain the relation between the angles of incidence and refractionn. The Greeks were, however, acquainted with the properties of the burning glass, which was sold as a curiosity in the toy shops; for it is well known, that one of the personages, introduced by Aristophanes, proposes to destroy the papers of his adversary by the assistance of this instrument. The magnifying powers of lenses were, however, hut little understood, although iĩt is scarcely credible that they could have escaped the notice of a person in possession of a buming glass; it appears from Seneca that the Romans at least were informed of the effects of spherical refracting substances, and it is not improbable that some use was occasionally made of them in the arts Empedocles is perhaps the first person on record that wrote systematically on light. He maintained that it consisted of particles projected from luminous bodies, and that vision was performed both by the effect of these particles on the eye, and by means of a visual inſluence, emitted by the eye itsel?. Both of these doctrines were combated by Aristotle, who thought it absurd to suppose that a visual inſluence should he emitted by the eye, and that it should not enable us to see in the dark; and who considered it as more probable that light consisted in an impulse, propagated through a continuous medium, than in an emanation of distinct particles. Light, he says, is the action of a transparent substance; and if there were absolutely no medium between the eye and any visible ohject, it would be absolutely impossible that we should see it. It is said that Archimedes made a compound burning mirror, of sufficient pover to set on fire the Roman ships: in this form the story is scarcely probable, although the possibility of burning an object at a great distance by a collection of plane mirrors has been suſficiently shown by the experiments of Buffon. It is, however, not unlikely that Archimedes was acquainted vith the properties of reſlecting surfaces, and that he confirmed his theories by some experimental investigations. The vork on catoptrics, attributed to Euclid, contains the determination of the effects of reſlecting surfaces of different forms; but it is not supposed to be genuine. The existence and the magnitude of the atmospheric refraction were well known to Ptolemy, and a treatise of this astronomer on the subject is still extant in manuscript. The mathematical theory of optics, or the science of dioptries and catoptrics, made some advances in the middle ages from the labours of Alhazen and Vitellio. Alhazen was mistaken in some of his propositions respecting refraction; Vitellio, a native of Poland, gave a more correct theory oſ this ubject, and constructed a tahle of refractive densities, showing the supposed proportions of the angles of incidence and refraction in the respective mediums. The invention of the magic lantern is attributed to Roger Bacon, and the lens vas soon afterwards commonly applied to the assistance of defective sight. It has been much disputed whether or no Bacon was acquainted with telescopes; the prevalent opinion is, that the passages, which have heen alleged to prove it, are insufficient for the purpose; but there is reason to suspect, from the testimony of Recorde, who wrote in 1551, not only that Bacon had VOL. I. j5 r uctually invented a telescope, but that Recorde himself knew something of its construction. Digges also, in a work published in 1571, has a passage of a similar nature, and from Bacons own vords it has been conjectured that an instrument resembling a telescope was even of much higher antiquity. But the ſirst person, vho is certainly known to have made a telescope, is Janson, a Dutchman, whose son, by accident, placing a concave and a convex spectacle glass at a little distance from each other, observed the increased apparent magnitude o an object seen through them; the father upon this fixed two such glasses in a tube a few inches long, and sold the instrument in this form. He also made some telescopes of greater powers, and one of his ſamily discovered a satellite of Jupiter with them. Galileo had heard of the instrument, but had not been informed of the particulars of its construetion, he reinvented it in 160-, and the following year rediscovered also the satellite which Janson had seen a little before. It was, hovever, Kepler that first redueed the theory of the telescope to its true principles; he laid down the common rules for ſinding the focal lengths of simple lenses of glass; he showed how ſo determine the magniſying power of the telescope, and pointed out the construction of the simple astronon ical telescope, which ĩs more convenient ſor accurate observations than rhe Galilean telescope, since the niicrometer may be more easily applied to it; a third glass, for recovering the erect position of the ohject, was afterwards added by Scheiner, and a fourth, for increasing the field of view, by Rheita. Kepler made also some good experiments on the nature of coloured bodies, and showed the inverted situation oſ the image formed on the retina of the eyee Maurolycus oſ Messina had demonstrated, in 1575, that the pencils of light are brought to focal points on the retina; Kepler's ubservations vere thirty or forty years later. The next great step in opties was made by De Dominis, who in 161 ſirst explained the cause oſ the interior or primary rainbow, and this was soon folloved by a still more important discovery respecting the nature of refraction, firdt made by Snellius, who ascertained, about I691, that the sines of the angles of incidence and refraction are always in the same proportion to each other at the same surſace; he died, however, in 1626, without having made his discovery publicc. Descartes, is generally supposed to have seen Snellius's papers, although he published the law of refraction without acknowledging to whom he vas indebted for it. Descartes also explained the formation of the secondary rainbow, and truly determined the angular magnitude of both the bows from mathematical principles; he did not, however, give a sufficient reason for the production of colours in either case. Descartes imagined light to consist in motion, or rather pressure, transmitted instantaneously through a medium infinitely elastic, and colours he attributed to a rotatory motion of the particles of this medium. He supposed that light passed more rapidly through a denser medium than through a rarer; other philosophers about the same time maintained a contrary opinion, without deciding with respect to any general theory of light: thus Fermat and Leibnitæ deduced, on this supposition, the path of refracted light from the natural tendency of every body to attain its end by the shortest possible way; and Barrow derived the same law, in a more geometrical manner, from a similar hypothesis respectiug the velocity of light, by considering a pencil of light as a collection of collateral rays inſluencing each other's motions. We are indebted to this learned mathematician for the first accurate investigation of the properties ofreſracting and reſlecting surfaces, and for the most general determination of the situations of focal points. The industrious Mr. Boyle had noticed with attention the phosphorescence oſ diamonds, the eolours produced by the effect of scratches on the surfaces of polished metals, and the diversiſied tints which a hubble or a film of soapy water usually assumes. Hisassistant, Dr. Hooke, investigated these and other similar appearances vith still greater accuracy, and proposed, in his Micrographia, which was published in 1665, a theory of light considerably resembling that of Descartes: he supposes that light is an impulse propagated through a medium highly, but not infinitely, elastic; that refraction is produced by the readier transmission of light through the denser medium, and that difference of colour consists in the different law of the particular impulse constituting coloured light, so that red and blue differ from each other in the same manner as the sound of a violin and of a ſlute. He explained the colours of thin plates from the interference of two such pulses partially reflected from the upper and under surface; but the hypothesis which he assumed, respecting the nature of colours, renders this explanation wholly inadequate, nor vere the phenomena at that time sufficiently investigated for a complete solution of the diſficulties attending them. It was still helieved that every refraction actually produces colour, instead of sepurating the colours already existing in white light; but in the year 1666, Newton first made the important discovery of the actual existence of colouts of all kinds in white light, vhich he showed to be no other than a compound of all possible eolours, mixed in certain proportions with each other, and capable of being separated hy refraction of any kind. About the same time that Newton vas making his earliest experiments on refraction, Grimaldi's treatise on light appeared; it contained many interesting experiments and ingenious remarks on the effects of niſtaction which is the name that he gave to the spreading of light in every direction upon its admission into a dark chamber, and on the colours which usually accompany these effects. He had even observed that in some instances the light of one pencil tended to extinguish that oſ another, but he had not inquired in what cases and according to what laws such an interference must be expected. The discoveries of Newton were not received without some controversy either at home or abroad; ſhe essential points of his theory were, however, s00n established, but Dr. Hooke very varmly opposed the hypothesis which Newton had suggested respecting the nature and propagation of light On this subject Newton professed himsel? hy no means tenacious; he was not, however, convinced by Dr. Hooke, and disliked the dispute so much, that he deferred the publication of his treatise on opties till after IIooke's death in 1708. Very soon after his ſirst communication to the Royal Society, in 1672, he had sent them a description of his reſlecting telescope, which as perhaps the first that had been construeted with success, although Gregory had invented his instrument some years before, and a plan of a similar kind had been suggested by Eskinard as early as 1615. The principal parts of the treatise on optics had been communicated at different times to the Royal Society; besides the experiments on refraction and the theory of the rainhow, they consist of an elegant analysis of the eolours of thin transparent suhstances, in which the phenomena are reduced to their simplest forms, and of a collection of miscellaneous experiments on the colours produced in cases of inſlection or diffraction. With respect to the nature of light, the theory which Nevton adopted was materially different from the opinions of most of his predecessorss He considered indeed the operation of an ethereal medium as absolutely necessary to the production of the most remarkable effects of light, but he denied that the motions of such a medium actually constituted light; he asserted, on the contrary, that the essence of light consisted in the projection of minute particles of matter from the luminous hody, and maintained that this projection was only accompanied by the vibration of a medium as an accidental circumstance, which vas also renewed at the surface of every refractive or reflective substance. In the mean time Bartholin had called the attention of naturalists and opticians to the singular properties of the Iceland crystal, and had hastily examined the laws of its unusual refraction. On this subjeet Huygens had been much more successſul: his analysis of the phenomena of the double refraction is a happy combination of accurate experiment with elegant theory; it was published in 1690, making a part of his treatise on light, the fundamental doctrines of which he had communicated to the Academy of Paris in 1678. They scarcely differ in their essential parts from those of our countryman Dr. Hooke, but the subject of colours Huygens has left wholly untouched. Roemer had then lately made the discovery of the immense velocity with which light passes through the celestial regions, by observing the apparent irregularities of the eclipses oſ Jupiters satellites; and Huygens readily admitted this property into his system; although Hooke, by a singular caprice, professed himself more ready to believe that the propagation of light might be absolutely instantaneous, than that its motion could be successive, and yet so inconceivably rapid. The merits of Huygens in the mathematical theory of optics were no less considerable than in the investigation of the nature of light; his determinations of the aberrations of lenses vere the first refinement on the construction of telescopes. In the year 1720 Dr. Bradley had the good fortune to discover buth the existence and the cause of the aberration of the ſixed starss He had for some time obscrved an irregularity in the places of the stars, which he was wholly unable to explain, and the idea of attributing it to a combination of the effect oſ the earth's motion in its orbit, with the progressive motion of light, occurred to him first as he happened to observe the apparent direction of the wind on hoard of a boat which was moving in a transverse direction. He also determined vith accuracy the magnitude of the atmospherical refraction, which had been theoretically investigated by Newton and by Taylor, but never hefore practically ascertained with sufficient precision. The formula, vhich Bradley appears to have deduced from observation only, agrees precisely with an approximation which was obtained by Simpson from calculation; but it cannot be considered as rigidly accurate. The opties of Bouguer were ſirst published in 1729, and an improved edition appeare thirty years aftervards; the merits of this author in the exmaination of the properties of a variety of substances, with respect to the transmission and reſlection of light in different circumstances, and in the comparison of lights of diſſerent kinds, require to be mentioned with the highest commendation. Dr. Porterſield's investigations of the functions of the eye tended greatly to illustrate the economy of this admirable organ, and some valuable remarks oſ Dr. Jurin on the same subject were soon aſter published in Dr. Smith's eluborate treatise on optics, which contains all that had been done at that time with respect to the mathematical part of the science. The invention of achromatic telescopes is with justice universally attributed to our countryman Mr. Dollond, hut there is reason to believe that he was not absolutely the ſirst author of the improvement. Mr. Hall, a gentleman of Worcestershire, is said to have discovered, about the year 1799, Sir Isaac Newtons mistake, in supposing that the rays of diſſerent colours must of necessity be equally separated by all surfaces which produce an equal mean refraction; and by combining the different dispersive properties of different kinds of glass, he constructed, in 1738, several compound object glasses, which were calculated not only for avoiding all appearance of colour, but also for correcting the imperfect reſractions of the spherical surfaces of the separate lenses. He did not, however, make known the parſculars of his investigations, and his invention was soon wholly forgotten. It was in ]æ consequence of a discussion with Euler, Klingenstierna, and some other mathematicians, that Mr. Dollond was led to make experiments on the refraction of different kinds of glass; these gentlemen had not questioned the general truth of Newtons opinion respecting the dispersion of the difſerent colours, hut Euler had asserted that the eye itself produced a refraction free from the appearance of colour, and Klingenstierna had shown the possibility of producing a deviation by refraction, withcut a separation of colour, according to the laws of refraction laid down by Newton himself. When Dollond had once discovered the material diſference which exists between the dispersive properties of ſlint glass and of crown glass, it vas easy to produce the combination required; but this ingenious artist was not satisfied vith the advantage of freedom from colours only; he adjusted the forms and apertures of his lenses in the most skilſul manner to the correetion of aberrations of various kinds, and he vas also particularly fortunate in being able to obtaiu, about the time of his discovery, a glass of a quality superior to any that has been since manuſactured. . This opinion of Euler respecting the eye was, however, by no means vell founded, for the eye acts very differently on rays of different colours, as ve may easily observe hy vieing a minute object in different parts of a beam of light, transmitted through a prism. It must be allowed that this great mathematician was less fortunate in his optical theories than in many other departments of science; his mathematical investigations of the effects of lenses are much more intricate and prolix than the subject actually requires, and with respect to the nature and propagation of light, he adopted several paradoxical opinions. Assuming the theory of Huygens, with the additional hypothesis respecting the nature of colours, vhich had heen suggested by Newton, and maintained by Pardies and Malebranche, that is, that the diſference of colours, like that of tones in music, depends on the different frequency of the vibrations constituting light; he imagined that opaque bodies are not seen by reſlected light, but that their particles are agitated by the impulse of the light which falls on them, and that the vibrations of these particles render the bodies again visible in every direction; he also conceived that the undulations of light are simply propagated through the solid substances of transparent mediums, in the same manner as sound travels through the air. But on these suppositions, all bodies would have the properties of. solar phos- phori, and the reſraction of the rarest of natural bodies would be incomparably greater than that of the densest is actually found to be: and on rhe whole, although the character of Euler has been so highly and so deservedly respected as to attach a certain degree of authority to all his opinions, so that in this instance the name oſ Huygens has been almost superseded hy that of Euler, vet in fact he has added no argumentative evidence whatever to the theory, but, by inaccurate and injudicious reasoning, has done a real injury to the cause which he endeavoured to support. The researches of Lambert may be considered as a continuation of those of Bouguer; they present us with many interesting observations on the natural history of light, and the properties of various bodies with regard to it. Mr. Lambert ſirst ascertained that a luminous surſace emits its light very nearly vith equal intensity in all directions, so that any part of it appears almost equally brilliant to an eye placed in any direction, while the light thrown by each square inch or square foot of the surface in any direction diſfers according to the obliquity of that direction. The mathematical theory of optics ĩs considerably indebted to the labours o Clairaut, Dalembert, and Boscovieh; Jeaurat, BEeguelin, Redern, and Kliigel have also continued the investigation; their caleulations may be of considerable utility to the practical optician, but it requires the ingenuity of a Dollond or a Ramsden to apply the whole of the results to any useful purposes. The experiments of Mazcas on the colours of thin plates are mere repetitions of those of Newton under disadvantageous circumstances; Mr. Dutour has, hovever, considerably diversified and extended these experiments, as well as those on the colours which are produced in difſracted light, yet without obtaining any general results of importance Comparetti's experiments on inſlection have every appearance of accuracy, but they are much too intricate to be easily compured with each other, or with those of former observers. The late Dr. Priestley rendered an essential service toſthe science of optics, considered as a subject for the amusement of the general reader, by an elegant and vellwritten account of the principal experiments and theories, which had been published before the year 1770. But this work is very defi- cient in mathematical accuracy, and the author was not suſicitntly nꝶt: oſ the science to distinguish the good from the indifſerent. Mr. Delaval's experiments on colours appear to show very satisſacto that all the colouring substances, in common use, ove their tints to r;s vhich are separated from white light, during its passage through them, and not, as Newton supposed, to the reſlection oſ a particular eolour from the first surface. It has heen observed that Kepler and Zuceliius had long ago made experiments nearly similar to those of Mr. Delaval. Dr. Robert Darwins investigation of the eſects of strong lights on the eye appears to comprehend almost all possible varieties of these ocular spectra, but iĩt does not lead to any fundamental analogy, capable of explaining the most intricate of them. The phenomena of the unusual atmospheric refraction, which frequently produces double or triple images of objects seen near a heated surface, have been successively illustrated by Mr. Huddart, Mr. Vince, and Dr. Wollaston, s0 that at present there appears to be little doubt remaining with respect to their origin. Dr. Wollastons instrument, for the measurement of refractive densities, very much facilitates the examination of the optical properties of substances oſ various kinds: he has applied it very successſully to the conſirmation of Iuygens's theory of double refraction; he has corrected the common opinion respecting the division of the prismatic spectrum; he discovered, vithout being acquainted vith the observations of Ritter, the dark rays which blacken the salts of silver; and he has remarked a singular property in some natural as well as artificial erystals, vhich appear of one colour when viewed in the direction of the axis, and of another vhen in a transverse direetion. To Dr. Herschel the sciences of opties and astronomy are equally indebted. He has carried the construetion of the reflecting telescope to a degree of perfection, far exceeding all that had heen before attempted, and the well known improvements, vhich astronomy has derived from his observations, are numerous and important. In the course of his researches for the attainment of his more immediate ohjects, he has also had the good fortune to discover the sepuration of the rays of heat from those of light by means of reſraction; a fact which has heen suſſiciently established by the experiments of several other persons. voL. I. S The investigations of Mr. Laplace, relating to atmospherical refraction, may be considered as the latest application of reſined mathematics to the purposes of opties and of astronomy. I have myself attempted to attain a degree of certainty, in attributing the changes oſ the refractive powers of the eye to a variation in the form of the erystalline lens; I have discovered a general law of the mutual action of two portions of light interfering with each other, to which no exception has yet been shown; and by reviving a theory of light similar to that of Hooke and Huygens, with an improvement originally suggested by Newton, respecting the nature of colours, I have endeavoured to obtain a satisfactory explanation of many circumstances, which appear, upon a minute examination, to be in every other hypothesis difiiculties absolutely insuperable. It cannot he expeeted that all objections to such a system will at once be silenced, but ĩf a full and candid discussion only of the facts, which I have advanced, should he exeĩted, I trust that the science of opties will be essentially heneſited, even if the theory should be ultimately confuted ON THE HISTORY OF OPTICS. CHRONOLOGY OF OPTICAL AUTHORS. COURSE OF LECTURES ATURAL PHILOSOPH AND THE MECHANICAL ARTS. PATT III. THVSICS. COURSE OF LECTURES ON NATURAL PHILOSOPHY AND THE MECHANICAL ARRTS. LECTURE XLI. ON THE FIXED STARS. THE departments of natural philosophy, which are to he the subjects of the third and last division of these lectures, are ineluded in the description implied by the term physies, or the history of the particular phenomena of nature; and the account, which will be given of these phenomena, will be accompanied by as much of mechanical theory and analogical reasoning, as can be applied to them with suſficient certainty, and without too great intricacy of calculation. The science of astronomy might, without any great impropriety, have been considered as a part of mechanics; but there are circumstances intimately connected vith it, for the complete investigation of which, a knowledge of the motions of fluids in general, and also of optics, is absolutely necessary. It could not, therefore, hold any other place in a strict order of arrangement, than that which is here allotted to it; and, since it will not be in our power to enter completely into a mathematical examinatiun of all the motions of the heavenly hodies, although we shall be able to pursue the derail of the most remarkable appearances which they exhibit, we may for this reason more properly consider suel a vie v of astronomy as belonging to descriptive than to theoretical philosophy. This method of treating the suhjeet is sometimes denominated plain astronomy, in contradistinetion to the meehanieal theory oſ the seience, which is callvd physical astronomy; but it is obvious that in the sense which ve are at present annexing to the vord physies, that vhich is eommonly called plain astronomy must he termed physical or descriptive, and vhat is usually called physical, must be denominated mathematical astronomy. We shall, thereſore, conſine ourselves in great measure to desciiptive astronomy, and shall take only a general view of the laws of gravitation, as an illustration oſ the phenomena previously described. After having eonsidered the mugniſicent ohjects of astronomy, which are scattered thronghont the universe, ve deseend to gengraphy, or the particular history of the terraqueous glohe, and to the tides, produced hy the influence of the celestial budies on the ocean: and then, quitting the aifections of the larger features oſf the matter, that constitutes the earth, ve come naturally to the properties and powers of iĩts individual particles, and to the phenomena oſ heat, electricity and magnetism, which are either q alities oſf matier, or dependent on substances diſſering in some respects ſrom common matter; and in the next place, to the combination of all these substunces and actions in meteorology, and in the phenomena of vegetable and animal life, a general view of which will complete our discussions on the subject of physiess The science oſ chemistry, or the doetriue of the qualities of particular kinds oſ matter, might be suid to helong to the investigition of the properties of matter in general; but this science ĩs of too great extent and importance to occupy a subordinate plae in a system of natural philosophy, and must, thereſore, be consĩdered as requiring a separate course of study. In our astronomienl inquſties, we shall ſirst examine the phenomena of the Ievens and earth in their simplest ſorm, not as they immeiiately appear to iervation, hut as they are shown hy unexeeptionahle proofs to he naagæl. Ihe sturs and sun, the planets and their satellites, and  ets, vill be severally described; the cãuses oſ the motions of these bodies will be superſicially indicated; their sensible effects with respect to the inhabitants of the earth will be shown, and the practical modes of determining their situations and orbits ill be explained. When ve begin to consider, on a large scale, the affections of matter and of space, ve are impressed, at the first sight, with the inconceivable disproportion between the magnitude of space and of sensihle matter: and we are naturally led to inquire if the apparently void expanse of the universe is wholly without all matter or all substance. The atmospheres of the planets cannot indeed be said absolutely to terminate at any given point, but they must become rare beyond all imagination at a very moderate distance. The substance whiceh. produces the sensation of light must, however, be every where found, at least without any sensible interval: for if an eye were placed in any point of the regions of unbounded space, wherever human investigation or fancy can penetrate them, some luminous object would at each instant be visible to it, and, in general, ohjects without number might be seen in every direction. Light, therefore, must be every where present, whether we suppose it to consist of separate projected corpuscles, or to be an affection of a highly elastie ether, pervading the universe in a state so rare, that although it constitutes a continuous medium, it suffers all bodies to move through it vithout sensible resistance, and is admitted even into their pores with perfect freedom; and if we follov Newton's opinion of the nature of light, we must suppose both such an ethereal medium, nearly at rest, and the particles of light also, moving swiſtly through it, to exist together in all places: to say nothing of the possibility of the coexistence of a thousand other unseen and unknown substances, essences, and inſluences, in the same individual place, which may for ever set at defiance the pride of a presumptuous philosophy, that would aspire to comprehend, within its own contracted sphere, the whole extent of the mighty work of the creation. The expanse of the universe is strewed, at immense distances, with detached portions of a substance, which we suppose to he matter, constituting stars, or suns, planets, and comets; hodies which certainly agree with each other in the power of emitting or reſlecting light, and which, in all prohability, have many other properties in common. Such of these, as emit their own light, are voL. I. 3 Rr y called fixed stars;: and this appears to be the only eriterion that we can apply to a star: for the word fixed is only to be understood in a comparative sense. i The stars must necessarily shine by their own light; for if we grant that they consist of gravitating matter, it must be allowed that no star could be near enough to another to be seen by refſlected light, vithout a very sensible change of the places of both in consequence of their mutual gravitation, nor would it be possible, on account of their immense distance from us, to distinguish two such bodies from each other. It follows also, on the same supposition of the universality of the force of gravity, that the form of the stars must be nearly spherical. The light of the stars appears to the naked eye to be generally white; being too faint to excite the ĩdea of a particular colour; but when it is concentrated by Dr. Herschel's large speculums, it hecomes in various stars of various hues; and indeed to the naked eye some of the stars appear a little redder and others a little bluer. The cause of the twinkling of the stars is not fully ascertained, but it is referred, with some probubility, to clſanges which are perpetually taking place in the atmosphere, and which affect its refractive density. It is said that in some climates, vhere the air is remarkably serene, the stars have scarcely any appearance of twinkling. Above two thousand stars are visible to the naked eye; and vhen a telescope is employed, their number appears to inerease without any other limit than the imperfection of the instrument. Dr. Hersehel has observed in the milky way ahove ten thousand stars in the space of a square degree Lucretius and Dr. Halley have argued that their number must be absolutely infinite, in order that all of them may remain at rest by the opposition of attractions acting in every possible direction; but we are by no means certain that they do remain in perfect equilibrium. OF the actual magnitude of the stars ve can give no exact aceount; but they are divided into seven or more orders, according to the degrees of their apparent biightness. There is, however, reason to suppose, from the quantity of light emitted by the brightest stars, that some oſ them are much 0 larger than the sun. Those stars which are below the sixth magnitude are scarcely visible without the help oſ telescopes. The distances of all the stars from us and from one another are so great, as not to he eapable of being immediately compared with their diameters; for no star subtends an angle large enough to be ascertained by direct observation. The more perfect the instruments that we employ, the smaller are the apparent diameters of the fixed stars. Dr. Herschel found that one of the stars of the ſirst magnitude, when viewed in his best telescopes, appeared to be about one third of a second in diameter. But there is always a limit to the perfection oſ the focus of the telescope and of the eye, and, however accurate both may be, the image of every radiant point will occupy on the retina a space of a certain magnitude, not depending on that of the object: so that it will perhaps he for ever impossible to measure any angle, which is only a very small fraction of a second(Plate XXXI. Fig. 4538, 454.) a There is, however, reason to suppose, that the angle subtended by the nearest stars is in reality more than a hundred times less than the angle measured by Dr. Herschel, for it may be conjectured that our distance from the nearest stars is about a hundred million million miles; taking about one third of a second for the annual parallax of the earth, that is, for the change of the apparent places of sume of the ſixed stars in consequence of the earths annual motion. This seems to be nearly the utmost amount of an annual parallax that could wholly have escaped observation; for Dr. Herschel supposes that, by means of double stars, a parallax of one tenth of a second only might become sensible, and even this has never yet been discovered; on the other hand, if the parallax were really mueh smaller than this, it would be necessary to suppose the actual magnitude or splendour of the brightest stars to be incomparably greater than that of the sun; for at the distance of a hundred million million miles, our sun would appear, according to Lambert's calculations, but about one fourth as bright as Saturn, or like a star of the second or third magnitude only. Perhaps, indeed, the stars may differ as much from each other in magnitude as the planetary bodies, but it is somewhat more natural to imagine them more nearly equal, until we have some reason for supposing any material inequality in their dimensions. At any rate there is little doubt, that the diversity of their apparent magnitudes is principally owing to their different distances; perhaps none of them are much nearer to each other than the nearest to us; and there may still be a very great variety in their actual dimensions. There can be only twelve points on the surface of a sphere as far from each other as rom the centre; in a sphere of twice the radius, there may he about 50 points at the same distance; in a sphere of three times the radius, more than 100: and it has been observed that these numbers do not greatly diſſer from the actual numbers of the stars of the ſirst, second, and third magnitudes; although it is true that they are not by any means placed at equal angular distances from each other. But, from a comparison of the light of diiſerent stars, ve may infer, that if their real magnitudes are nearly equal their distances must increase much faster than in this arithmetical progression; that is, that the stars of the second magnitude are more than twice as remote as those of the first, and those of the third more than three times as remote. Mr. Michell found the light of Sirius hbetween 400 and 1000 times as great as that of a star of the sixth magnitude; consequently, suppusing these stars actually equal, their distances must differ in the ratio of I to 20 or 50; since light alays diminishes in proportion to the square of the distance of the luminous object. The light of stars of different magnitudes, situated near each other, may be compared by viewing them through two apertures oſ diſſerent sizes, cut in cards, one held hefore each eye, the apertures being reduced to such magnitudes, that the stars may appear equally bright; and the comparison may be extended to the light of the sun, by ſinding a star and a planet of equal brightness, and calculating what proportion of the suns light must be reſlected by the planet, upon the most probable supposition respecting the disposition of its surface to reſlect more or less of the light which fulls on it. The stars are in general dispersed without any regular order, but we may observe in many parts of the heavens that a number of them are so much nearer together than to the rest, as to form a cluster or nebula. The ancients had notieed some of the most conspicuous nebulae, but Huygens first directed the attention of modern astronomers to the large one situated in the constellation Orion. Herschel has now given us catalogues of 2500 nebulae: many of them ean be resolved by very high magniſying powers into separate stars; but others appear to consist of a luminnus matter, spread uniſormly in the neighbourhood of the several stars to which they seem to belong. (Plate XXI. Fig. 455.. 463.) 5 It has been conjectured that all stars are disposed in nebulae, and that those, which appear to us to be more videly separated, are individual s:ars of that particular nehula in which ve are placed, and of which the marginal parts may he ohserved, in the form of a lucid zone, which is called the milky vay, being too distant to allow the single stars to be perceived by the naked eye. This opinion was ſirst suggested hy Proſessor Kant, the author oſ the system of metaphysics called the eritical philosophy. The ideavas adopted by Lambert, vho considers the largest stars as constituting a distinet nebula placed among a multitũde of others, which together produce the appearance of a continued zone; and Dr. Herschel has investigated very particularly the ſigure of a single nebula, which would be capable oſ heing projected into the form of the milky vay. We must not, however, suppose that each of Dr. Herschel's 2500 nebulae can be at all comparable in magnitude to this supposed nebula, since many of them are almost as much resolved by the telescope into single stars as the milky way itself; which would be utterly impossible, i? the stars which they contain were equally numerous with those of the nebula to which the milky way belongs. Supposing all the stars of this nebula to be as remote from each other as the nearest of them are from the sun, it may be calculated that the most distant are about 500 times as far from us as the nearest, and that light, which iĩs prohably 1I5 or 20 years in travelling to us from Sirius, would be nearly twenty thousand in passing through the whole diameter of the milky way. A nebula of the same size as this, appearing like a diffused light of a degree in diameter, must be at such a distance, that its light would require a million sears to reach us. (Plate XXXI. Fig. a64.) The stars are not, properly speaking, ahsolutely fixed with respeet to each other, for several of them have particular motions, which have been discovered by a comparison of accurate ohservations, made at very distant times. Arcturus, for instance, has a progressive motion, amounting to more than two seconds annually. Dr. Maskelyne found, that out of 56 stars, of which he ascertained the places with great precision, 35 had a proper motionn. Mr. Michell and Dr. Herschel have conjectured, that some of the stars revolve round others which are apparently situated very near them; and perhaps even all the stars may in reality change their places more or less, although their re- relative situations, and the directions of their paths may oſten render their motions impereeptible to us. Respecting all these arrangements of stars into different systems, DrHerschel has lately entered into a very extensive field of observation and speculation, and has divided them into a number of classes, to each of which he has assigned a distinct character. Some he supposes, like our sun, to be insulated stars, beyond the reach of any sensible action of the gravitation of others; and around these alone he conceives that planets and comets revolve. Double stars, in general, he imagines to be much nearer to each other, so as to be materially affected by their mutual gravitation, and only to preserve their distance by means of the centrifugal force derived from a revolution round their common centre of inertia; an opinion which, he thinks, is strongly supported by his own observations of some changes in the positions of double stars. Others again he supposes to be united in triple, quadruple, and still more compound systems. A fourth class consists of nebulae like the milky way, the clusters of stars being rounded, and appearing brightest in the middle Groups of stars Dr. Herschel distinguishes from these by a want of apparent condensation about a centre of attraction; and clusters by a still greater central compression. A seventh class includes such nebulae as have not yet been resolved into stars, some of which Dr. Herschel supposes to be so remote, that the light emitted by them must actually have been two millions of years in travelling to our system. The nebulae of another description resemble stars surrounded by a bur, or a faint disc of light: a diffused milky nebulosity, apparently produced by some cause distinct from the mmediate light of any stars, is the next in order: and Dr. Herschel has distinguished other more contracted nebulous appearances, in different states of condensation, into the classes of nebulous stars, and planetary nebulae, with and without bright central pointss Many of these distinctions are perhaps too refined to he verified by common observers; hut the discovery of the existence of double and triple stars, revolving round a common centre, vill, if it be conſirmed, add one more to the catalogue of Dr. Herschels important improvements. It is however fully ascertained, that some of the stars have periodical changes of brightness, which are supposed to arise either from the temporary interposition of opaque hodies revolving round them, or, still more probably, from a rotatory motion of their own, which brings at certain periodical times a less luminous part of the surface into our view. Thus, the star Algol, which is usually of the second magnitude, becomes, at intervals of Q days and 21 hours each, of the fourth only, and occupies 7 hours in the gradual diminution and recovery of its lightt. A less probable conjecture respecting this change of brightness was advanced by Maupertuis, who imagined that the disc of the star might be greatly flattened by a rapid rotation, and its edge occasionally presented to us, in consequence of the disturbances produeed by the attraction of planets revolving round the luminary. Other irregular variations may possibly be occasioned by the appearance and disappearance of spots, occurring, like the spots of the sun, without any determinate order or assignable cause; and many stars have in the course of ages wholly disappeared, and sometimes have been again recovered; others have made their appearance for a short time, where no star had before been seen. Such a temporary star was observed by Hipparchus, 120 years before our era, and the circumstance suggested to him the propriety of making an accurate catalogue of all the stars, with their respective situations, which is still extant, having been preserved by Ptolemy, vho added 4 stars to the 1029 that it contained. In 1572, Cornelius Gemma discovered a new star in Cassiopeia, which was so bright as to be seen in the day time, and gradually disappeared in sixteen months. Kepler, in 1604, observed a new star in Serpentarius, more brilliant than any other star or planet, and changing perpetually into all the colours of the rainbow, except vhen it was near the horizon; it remained visible for about a yea. Many other new stars have also been observed at different times. For describing the particular fixed stars according to their relative situations, it is necessary to consider them as they are visible to the inhabitants of the earth They have been divided, for the sake of convenience, into parcels, making up imaginary forms, denominated constellations. This division is of very remote antiquity, and though it may be useless, and sometimes even inconvenient, for the purposes of minute observation, yet for a general recollection of the great features of the heavens, these arbitrary names and associations cannot but greatly assist the memory. It is als- 496 LECTURE XLI. usual to deseribe particular stars by their situation with respect to the imaginary figure to which they helong, or, more commonly, at present, by the letters of the Greek alphabet, which vere ſi rst applied by Bayer in 1603, and in addition to these, by the Roman letters, and by the numbers of particular catalogues. There are two principal modes of representing the stars; the one by delineating them on a globe, where each star occupies the spot in which it would appear to an eye placed in the centre of the globe, and where the situations are consequently reversed, when ve look on them from without, in the same manner as a vord appears reversed when seen from the back of the paper: the other mode is by charts, which are generally so arranged as to represent the stars in positions similar to their natural ones, or as they would appear on the internal concave surface of the globe. Sometimes also the stars have been delineated as they would be projected on imaginary surfaces, vithout any reference to a globe; for instance, on the surfaces of transparent cones or cylinderss. The art of constructing all such projections belongs to the subject of perspective. In deseribing the particular stars, it ill be most convenient to begin with such as never set in our climates, and we may then reſer the situations of others to their positions with respect to these. I The great bear is the most conspicuous of the constellations which never set; it consists of seven stars, placed like the four wheels of a waggon, and its three horses, except that the horses are ſixed to one of the wheelss The two hind wheels are the pointers, which direet us to the pole star, in the extremity of the tail oſ the little bear: and further on, to the constellation Cassiopeia, which is situated in the milky vay, where it is nearest to the pole, and which consists of several stars, nearly in the form of the letter W. The two northernmost wheels of the great bear, or wain, point at the bright star Capella, the goat, in Auriga Descending along the milky vay from Cassiopoſa, i? we go towards Capella, ve come to Algenib, in Perseus; and a little further from the pole we find Algol, or Medusa's head: but if ve take the opposite direction, we arrive at Cygnus, the swan; and beyond it, a little out of the milky vay, is the bright star Lyra. The dragon consists of a chain of stars partly surrounding he little bear; and between Cassiopeia and the swan is the constellation Cepheus. Near Algenib, and pointing directly towards it, are two stars of Andromeda, and a third is a little beyond them A line drawn through the great bear and Capella passes to the Pleiades, and then, turning at a right angle towards the milky way, reaches Aldebaran, or the hull's eve, and the shoulders of Orion, who is known by his belt, consisting of three stars, placed in the middle of a quadranglee. Aldebaran, the Pleiades, and Algol, make the upper, and Menkar, or the whale's jawv, with Aries, the lower points of a W. In Aries we observe two principal stars, one of them with a smaller attendant. A line drawn from the pole, midway between the great bear and Capella, passes to the twins and to Procyon; and then, in order to reach Sirius, it must bend across the milky vay. Algol and the twins point at Regulus, the lion's heart, vhich is situated at one end of an arch, with Denebola at the other end. The pole star and the middle horse of the wain direct us to Spica Virginis, considerahly distant: the pole and the ſirst horse nearly to Arcturus, in the waggoner, or Bootess Much further southwards, and near the milky way, is Antares, in the scorpion, forming, with Areturus and Spica, a triangle, within which are the two stars of Libra. The Northern crown is nearly in a line between Lyra and Arcturus, and the heads oſ Hercules and Serpentarius are between Lyra and Scorpio. In the milky vay, below the part nearest to Lyra, and on a line drawn from Arcturus through the head of Hercules, is Aquila, making with Lyra and Cygnus a conspicuous trianglee. The last of the three principal stars in Andromeda makes, with three of Pegasus, a square, of which one of the sides points to Fomalhaut, situated at a considerable distance in the southern ſish, and ĩn the neighbourhood of the whale, which has already been mentioned. BY means of these allineations, all the principal sturs that are ever visible vVOL. I. 3s in Britain may be easily recognisedc. Of those which never rise above our horizon, there are several of the first magnitude; Canopus, in the ship Argo, and Achernar, in the river Eridanus, are the most brilliant of them; the feet of the centaur, and the crosier are the next; and according to Humboldts observations, perhaps some others may require to be admitted into the same class. (Plate XXXVI, XXXVII.) LECTURE XILII. ON THE SOLAR SYSTEM. TuE most conspicuous of all the celestial bodies, which we have been examining, is the sun, that magnificent luminary which occupies the centre of the system that comprehends our earth, together with a variety of other primary and secondary planets, and a still greater number of comets. The sun agrees with the fixed stars in the property of emitting light continually, and in retaining constantly its relative situation with very little variation; it is probable also that these bodies h ave many other properties in common. The sun is, therefore, considered as a fixed star comparatively near us; and the stars as suns at immense distances from us: and ve infer from the same analogy, that the stars are possessed ofſ gravitation, and of the other general properties of matter; they are supposed to emit heat as well as light; and it has with reason been conjectured that they serve to cherish the inhabitants of a multitude of planetary bodies revolving round them. The sun, like many other stars, has probably a progressive motion, which is supposed, from a comparison of the apparent motions of a great number of the stars, to be directed towards the constellation Hercules. It is beyond all question that many of the stars have motions peculiar to themselves, and it is not certain that any of them are without such motions: it is, therefore, in itself highly probable that the sun may have such a motion. But Dr. Herschel has confirmed this conjecture by arguments almost demonstrative. He observes that the apparent proper motions oſ 44 stars out of 56 are very nearly in the direction which would be the result of such a real motion of the solar system: and that the bright stars Arcturus and Sirius, which are probably the nearest to us, have, as they ought to have, the greatest apparent motions. Besides, the star Castor appears, vhen viewed with a teleseope, to consist of two stars, of nearly equal magnitude; and though they have both a considerable apparent motion, they have never been found to change their distance a single second: a circumstance which is easily understood if both their apparent motions are supposed to arise from a real motion of the sun, but which is much less probable on the supposition of two separate and independent motions. Besides this progressive motion, the sun is subjected to some small change of place, dependent on the situations of the planetary bodies, vhich was long inferred from theory only, but which has been actually demonstrated by modern observations. Supposing all the planets to be in conjunction, or nearly in the same direction from the sun, the common centre of inertia of the system is at the distance of about a diameter of the sun from his centre: and since the centre of inertia of the whole system must be undisturbed hy any reciprocal actions or revolutions of the bodies composing it, the sun must describe an irregular orbit round this centre, his greatest distance from it being equal to his own diameter. We may form an idea of the magnitude of this orbit by a comparison with the orbit of the moon: a body revolving round the sun, in contact with his surface, must he nearly twice as remote from his centre as the moon is from the earth, and the sun's revolution round the common centre of gravity of the system must therefore be, where it is most remote, at four times the distance of the moon from the earth. The sun revolves on his axis in 25 days 10 hours, with respect to the fixed stars: this axis is directed towards a point about half vay between the pole star and Lyra, the plane of the rotation being inelined a little more than 7° to that in which the earth revolves. The direction of this motion is from est to east, terms which we can only define from our presupposed knowledge of the stars, by saying that the motion is such, that a point of the sun's surface at first opposite Aries, moves towards Taurus. Nor have ve any better mode of deseribing north and south, or right and leſt: ve can only say comparatively, that if we are placed with our heads northwards, and looking tovards the centre, our right hands vill be eastwards, and our left westwards. All the rotations of the difſerent bodies which compose the solar system, as far as they have been ascertained, are in the same direction, and all their a revolutions, excepting those of some of the comets, of which the motions are retrograde, and those of some of the surellites of the Georgian planet, vhich revolve in planes so distant from those of the other planetary motions, that the directions of their revolutions can scarcely be called either direct or retrograde. The time and direction of the sun's rotation is ascertained by the change of the situation of the spots, which are usually visible on his dise, and which some astronomers suppose to be elevations, but others, apparently on better foundations, to be excavations or deſiciencie;s in the luminous matter covering the suns surfacee. These spots are frequently observed to appear and disappear, and they are in the mean time liable to great variations, but they are generally found ahout the same points of the sun's surface. Lalande imagines that they are parts oſ the solid hody of the sun, vhich, by some agitations of the luminous ocean, with which he conceives the sun to be surrounded, are left nearly or entirely bare. Dr. Wilson and Dr. Herschel are disposed to consider this ocean as consisting rather of a ſlame than of a liquid substance, and Dr. Ierschel attributes the spots to the emission of an aeriform ſluid, not yet in combustion, which displaces the general luminous atmosphere, and which is afterwards to serve as fuel for supporting the process; hence he supposes the appearance of copious spots to be indicative of the approach of warm seasons on the surface of the earth, and he has attempted to muintain this opinion by historical evidence. The exterior luminous atmosphere has an appearunce somewhat mottled, some parts of it, appearing brighter than others, have generally been called faculae; but Dr. Iſerschel distinguishes them by the names of ridges and nodules. The spots are usually surrounded by margins less dark than themselves, which Dr. Herschel calls shallows, and which he considers as parts of an inferior stratum consisting of opaque clouds, capable of protecting the immediate surface of the sun from the excessive heat produced hy combustion in the superior stratum, and perhaps oſ rendering ĩt habitable to animated beingss (Plate XXXI. Fig. a65.. 44-.) But if ve inquire into the intensity of the heat which must necessarily exist wherever this combustion is performed, we shall soon be convinced that no clouds, however dense, could impede its rapid transmission tO the parts helow. Besides, the diameter of the sun is 111 times as great as that of the earth; and at its surface, a heavy body would fall through no less than 450 feet in a single second: s0 that if every other circumstance permitted human beings to reside on it, their own veight would present an insuperable difficulty, since it would become nearly thirty times as great as upon the surface of the earth, and a man of moderate size would veigh above two tons. Some of the most celebrated astronomers have ima gined from the comparative light of different parts of the sun's disc, or apparent surface, that he is surrounded by a considerably dense and extensive atmosphere, imperfectly transparent; conceiving that, vithout such an atmosphere: the marginal parts, which are seen most obliquely, must appear considerably the brightest; but this opinion is wholly erroneous, and the inferences which have been drawn from it, respecting the sun's atmosphere, are consequently without foundation. We are, however, assured, by direct observation, of the existence of some aerial substance in the neighbourhood of the sun, producing the appearance called the Zodiacal light, which is sometimes seen, nearly in the plane of the sun's rotation on its axis, extending beyond the orbit of Mercury. It is said to have been first distinctly described in Childrey's Dritannia Baconica, a work published in 1661, and it vas afterwards more particularly observed by Cassini, Mairan, and others. In the torrid zone it is almost constantly visible; and in these climates, it may often be distinguished in the beginning of March, after the termination of twilight, exhibiting the appearance of a narrow triangle, somewhat rounded off, of a vhiteness resembling the milky way, ascending from the sun as a base, like the projection or section of a very ſlat spheroid, and extending to a distance of more than 50° from the sun. The whole orbit of Venus never subtends 30 great an angle ſrom the earth as 96°, consequently this substance must occasionally involve both Mercury and Venus; and if it were not extremely rare, it would produce some disturbance in their motions; while in fact it does not appear to impede the progress even of the tails of the comets, which are prohably themselves of very inconsiderable density. It cannot he a continuous ſluid atmosphere, revolving vith the same velucity as the sun; for the gravitation of such an atmosphere vould cause it to assume a form more nearly spherical; and the only probable manner in which it can be 4 supposed to retain its figure, is hy means of a revolution much more rapid than the sun's rotation. Some persons have attributed the appearance to the refraction of the earth's atmosphere only; but if it arose from any such cause as this, its direction could scarcely be oblique with respeet to the horizon, and it is highly improbable that it should always happen to coincide vith the plane of the sun's rotation. (Plate XXXI. Fig. 470.) The sun is accompanied in his progressive motion among the fixed stars by ten planetary bodies, of different magnitudes, revolving round him, from west to east, in orbits approaching to circles, and visible to us by means of the light which they receive from him. These are Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Juno, Pallas,. Ceres, Jupiter, Saturn, and the Georgian planet. It is unnecessary to adduce at present any arguments to prove the actual existence or direction of any oſ these motions; their complete agreement vith the visible phenomena of the heavens, and with the laws of gravitation, will hereafter appear to afford sufficient evidence of the accuracy of the received theory of the arrangement of the solar system. The motion of the earth is the most unanswerably proved hy the apparent aberration of the fixed stars, derived from the different directions of this motion at different times, and corresponding precisely with the known velocity of light, deduced from observations of a very different kind. That the planets receive their light from the sun, is undeniably shown by the appearance of the dises of many of them, when viewed through a telescope, those parts of their surfaces only being luminous, on which the sun shines at the time of observation. These planets are neither all in one plane, nor does any one of them remain precisely in the same plane at all times; but their deviations from their respective planes are inconsiderable, and they are commonly represented by supposing each planet to revolve in a plane passing through the sun, and the situation of this plane to be liable to slight variations. There is, however, a certain ĩmaginary plane, determinable from the situations, the velocities, and the masses of the planets, which, like the centre of inertia, never changes its position on account of any mutual actions of the hodies of the system, and this plane of inertia is called the ſixed ecliptic. Its situation is nearly half vay hetween the orbits of Jupiter and of Saturn; and iĩt is inclined in a small angle only to the plane oſ the earth's orbit, which is called the earths reliptie, or simply the ecliptic. The ecliptic passes through the constellations denominated the signs of the zodiac, between Aries, the Pleiades, the twins, and Regulus, to the north, and Aldebaran, Spica, and Antares, to the south. Its position has varied slowly in the course of many ages, so that its northmost point is now more than one third of a degree more remote from the pole star than it was in the time of Eratosthenes, vho observed its place 230 years before the birth of Christ. It appears from Lagrange's calculations, that the limit of its greatest possible variation is ahout 10 or II degrees. The ecliptic is supposed to be divided into twelve angular parts, or signs, each containing thirty degrees: they are named Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cuncer, Leo, Virgo. Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Piscess. Those who preſer the cadence of a Latin distich, in order to assist the memory, may repeat them thus, Sunt Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libraque, Scorpius, Arcitenens, Caper, Amphora, Pisces. ll , The planes of the orbits of the other primary planets, excepting the three minute plancts lately discovered, interseet the ecliptic in small angles, and the lines of interseetion are called lines of the nodes. The nodes of all the planets move very slowly, but not quite uniformly, from east to west, that is, with respect to the fixed stars. At present the inclinations of all the orbits appear to be somewhat diminishing: that of the orbit of Jupiter is less by 6 minutes than it was in the time of Piolem;. The onit of each planet is very nearly an ellipsis, one of the foci of which coincides with the sun, or ruther with the common centre of inertia of the sun and planet. The extremities of the greater axis, vhere the orbit is furthest from the sun and nearest to it, are called the upper and the lover apsis, or the aphelion and perihelion; the mean distance being at eĩther end of the lesser axis; and the distance of the centre of the ellipsis from the sun is called the eccentrieity. The slight deviations of the planets from these elliptic paths are expressed by considering the apsides as moveable, and this motion is direet, that is, from west tovards east, in the case of all the planets except Venus, of vhich the aphelion has a retrograde motion, with respect to the ſixed stars. The elliptic motion of the planets was first discovered hy Kepler; and he found that a right line, joining the sun and any planet, describes alvays equal areas in equal times. The observations, on which Kepler founded these important laws, vere made principally on the planet Mars. He determined Ly calculation, upon the supposition which was then generally adopted, of a motion in an eccentric circle, vhat must be nearly the situation of the planet, with respect to the sun, that is, its heliocentric place, and observing its grocentrie place, with respect to the earth, he was thus able to construct a triangle representing the situation of the three bodies; repeating this opera ion in various parts of the orbit, he discovered its form; and having done this, the velocity of the motion in difſerent parts of the orbit was easily determined from the apparent change of place in a given time. (Plate XXXII. Fig. 471.) The same astronomer also ascertained, that the squares of the times of revolurion of the different planets are in proportion to the cubes of their mean distances from the sun. For example, if one planet were four times as distant as a other, it would revolve in a period eight times as long, since the cube of 4 is equal to the square of 8; thus Murs is nearly four times as remote from the sun as Mercury, and the Georgian planet four times as remote as Jupiter, and their periods are nearly eight times as long respectively. It is probuble that all the planets have a rotatory motion from west to east, either perſectly or very nearly equablee This motion has been observed in Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn; and from some phenomena of the satellites of the Georgian planet, Mr. Laplace thinks that it may also be assumed as nearly certain that this planet has also a rotatory motion. The figure of the planets is spheroidical; they are more or less flattened at the poles, as they revolve more or less rapidly on their axes. These axes retain, with a very slight deviation, a situation always parallel, in every part of the orbits. DBut, in the course of time, the gradual change of the position of the axis produces a sensible effect. In the case of the earth, this efſect is denominated the precession of the equinoxes. The equinoctial points are the intersections of the apparent ecliptic, or the path of the sun in the heavens, voL. I S r vith the plane of the equinoctial, which is perpendicular to the earth's axis and vhich passes through the equator on the earth's surface; these points of intersoction have a retrograde motion, from east to west, on the ecliptic. This motion vas discovered by Hipparchus, in the year 198 before Christ, from a comparison of his own observations with those of Timocharis, made 155 years before; and since the time of Hipparchus, the equinoctial points have receded about 2G;°. Ience it happens that the constellations, called the signs of the zodiac, are now at a considerable distance from those divisions of the ecliptic which bear the same names, The earth's axis has also a small periodical change of inclination, or a nutation, performed in about 19 years, and amounting in the whole to 18 seconds only. Tts existence vas determined by Newton from theory, although he failed in the attempt to ascertain its quantity with accuracy; it was first actually observed by Dr. Bradley, about the year 1747. The absolute direction of the axis in the heavens is also liable to some variation, in the course oſ many ages, but this change has not alvays heen suſficiently distinguished from the change of the position of the ecliptie. The inclination oſ the equator to the ecliptic is now very nearly 23° 25. In order to retain in memory a general idea of the proportional distances of the primary planets from the sun, ve may call that of the earth 10 and that of Saturn 100; the distance of Mercury vill then be 4, to vhich we must add 3 for Venus, making 7; twice 3 or 6 for the earth, making 10; twice 6 or 12 for Mars, making 1G; twice 12 or 24, making 28, for the three small nlanets, Juno, Pallas, and Ceres; twice 24 or 48, making 52, for Iupiter twice 48 or ™G for Saturn, making 100 and twice 96 or 162, making 196, for the Georgian planet; and these sums vill represent the distances, without any material exception, in the nearest integer numbers. The planet Mercury is little more than one third as large as the earth in diumeter. Ile performs his revolution in somewhat Iess than three months, at about two ſiſths of the distance of the earth. His orbit is more eccentrie, and more inclined to the ecliptic, than those of any of the planets ex- cept the three small ones lately discovered; the eccentricity being one fifth of the mean distance, and the inclination 7°. Of his density and his rotation we know nothing but from conjecture. Venus is very nearly as large as the earth; Dr. Herschel thinks her even a little larger. Her revolution occupies about 7 mon ths, her distance from the sun heing about seven tenths of that of the earth, and her orbit nearly circular, inclined in an angle of 3° ꝗ4' to the ecliptic. Mr. Schroeter attributes to her mountains much higher than those of the earth, he has observed strong indications of an atmnsphere surrounding her, and he assigns for her rotation on her axis the period of 23.hours 21 minutes. Iler density has been estimated from the perturbations, occasioned by her attraction, in the motions of the other planets, and it has been supposed to be a little less than that of the earth. I The distance of the earth from the sun is about 95 million English miſes⸗? and this determination is generally supposed to be so far accurate, that there is no probability of an error of more than a million or two, at most, although some authors are still disposed to helieve that the distance may be even greater than a hundred millions. The period of its revolution, with respect to the equinoctial points, which are the usual standard of comparison, since their situation determines the annual return of the seasons, is 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, and a8 seconds; and this is called iĩts tropical revolution; that of its absolute or sidereal revolution is 365 days, 6 hours, ꝗ minutes, and 8 seconds; the difference, which is 20 minutes and 20 seconds, being the time occupied in passing over the space, through which the equinoctial points have retreated in the course of the tropical year. By a day, we alvays understand the time vhich elapses during the rotation of the earth with respeet to the sun; a sidereal day is about ſour minutes shorter. At a distance from the sun exceeding that of the earth by one half, the planet Mars revolves, in about a year and seven eighths. Ile is of halt the earth's linear dimensions: he has spots which change their form, and, therefore, probably, an atmosphere. Dr. Ierschel, found his rotation performed in 39 minutes more than a day; his equator inelined 28° 42' to the plane of his orbit, and his ſigure 50 much ſlattened at the poles, that his axis is 47th shorter than his equatorial diameter. From this form, compared with the time of his rotation, it may be inferred that his density must be very unequal in different parts: Laplace supposes it from calculation to be on the whole about three fourths as great as that of the earth. In the interval between Mars and Jupiter, and nearly at the distancevhere, from a dependance on the regularity of the progression already mentioned, a number of astronomers had for some years heen seeking for a primary planet, the observations of Mr. Piazzi, Dr. Olbers, and Mr. Harding have placed three very small bodies, diſfering but little in their mean distance and their periodical time. They have named them Ceres, Pallas, and Juno: none of them subtends an angle large enough to be measured hy our best instruments; and all the circumstances oſ their motions are yet but imperfectly established. Juno, however, appears to be somewhat less remote than the other two; all their orbits are considerably inclined to the ecliptic, especially that of Pallas, which is also extremely eccentrie. Dr. Herschel does not admit that thex deserve the name of planets, and chooses to call them asteroids. Jupiter is the largest of all the planets, his diameter being 11 times as great as that of the earth, and the force of gravitation at his surface being triple the terrestrial gravitationn. He revolves in about I2 years, at a little more than five times the carth's distance from the sun. His rotation is performed in less than ten hours, his equator heing inclined ahout three degrees to his ecliptie, which makes an angle of I° 1Y with nurss His helts are suppused by many to be clouds in his atmosphere; they seem to have a rotation somevhat slower than that of the planet. The diameter of Saturn is ten times as great as that of the earth, but, on account of the smaller density of his substance, the force of gravity at his surface scarcely exceeds its force at the surface of the earth. Iſe revolves in 20 years and a half, in an orbit inclined 2° to the ecliptic, at the distance af 9; semidiameters of the earth's orbit: his rotation occupies only 103 hours, and his equator is inclined abuut 50° to our eclipticc. The most remarkable circumstance attending him ĩs the appearance oſf a double ring, which is suspended over his equator, and revolves with a rapidity almost as great as that of the planet. His ſigure appears also, according to Dr. Herschel's observations, to be extremely singular; deviating very considerably from that of an elliptical spheroid, which ĩs the form assumed hy all the other planets that appear flattened, and approaching in some degree to a cylinder with its angles rounded off. Such a form can only be derived from some very great irregularities in the density of the internal parts of his substance. The Georgian planet, discovered by Dr. Herschel in 1780, sometimes also called Herschel, and sometimes Uranus, revolves in 835 years, at a distunce from the sun equal to I9 times that of the earth. Its diameter is a little more than 4 times that of the earth, and the weight of hodies at its surface a little less than here. Notwithstanding its dimensions are by no means comparatively small, it appears to us as a star of the sixth or seventh magnitude, and is seldom seen by the naked eye. Its orbit approaches very near to the ecliptic; its disc is said to be somewhat ſlattened, and it is supposed to revolve with considerable rapidity. These ten planetary bodies are the only ones hitherto discovered which have any title to be considered as primary planets, that is, as bodies revolving round the sun, in orbits so nearly circular, as to remain always within the reach of our observation. It has been conjectured that the number of planets may in reality be much greater, that not only many small and perhaps invisible bodies may be revolving in the intervals of the planets with vhich we are acquainted, but that larger bodies also may belong to our system, vhich never approach within such a distance as to be seen by us. Some have even bestowed names, borrowed from the ancient mythologv, on these imaginary planets; but the idea of such an appropriation of terms is rather to be regarded as belonging to the regions of poetical fiction than to those of solid philosophy. The largest and the most remote of the primary planets have their attendant satellites, or secondary planets, accompanying them in their respective revolutions round the sun, and moving, at the same time, in subordinate orbits, round the primary planetss The earth is attended by the moon, Iupiter by four moons or satellites, Saturn by seven, besides his ring, and the Georgian planet by six moons. All these satellites move in the direct order of the signs, anũ in planes not very remote from the ecliptic, except. ing those of the Georgian planet, which revolve in planes nearly perpendicular to the eclipticc. Each of these planets thus becomes the central luminary oſ a little system of its own, in which the motions and the periods observe the sume general laws as prevail in the solar system at large. OF the 28 primary and secondary planets, ve are indebted to Dr. Ierschel for the Enowledge of 9; the Georgian planet, with its six satellites, and the two innermost moons of Saturn. j The motions oſf some of these satellites, in particular of those of J upiten and of the moon, are of considerable importance for the assistance they afford us in determinations of time, and of the relative situations of places. They are subjected to considerable irregularities, but the united labours of various astronomers have enabled us to calculate all their motions with the greatest accuracy. The moon performs a complete sidereal revolution in 27 days 74 hours, and a synodical revolution, during which she returns to the same position vith respeet to the earth and sun, in 29 days I9- hours; a period which constitutes a lunation, or a lunar month. Her orbit is inclined to the ecliptic in an angle of a little more than ſive degrees, but this inclination is liable to great variations: the place of ĩts nodes is also continually changing, their motion being sometimes retrograde, and sometimes direet, but on the whole the retrograde motion prevailss. The form of the moons orbit ĩs irregularly elliptic, and the velocity of its motion deviates considerably from the Keplerian lav oſ the description oſf equal areas in equal times; the apsides, or the extremities of the greater axis of the ellipsis, which are called the apogee and perigee, have on the vhole adirect motion. From a comparison of modern observations with the most ancient, the mean motion of the moon is found to be somewhat accelerated. The moon revolves on her own axis with a very equable motion, and the period oſ her rotation is precisely equal to the mean period oſ her revolution round the earth; so that she always presents to us the sume portion of her surface, excepting the apparent librations produced by her unequal velocities in her orbit, and by the position of her axis;, which ĩs inclined I° 49' to the ecliptie, and sometimes as much as 79 to her own orbit. Her distance from the earth is about 240 000 miles; her diameter, of that of the earth, or 2160 miles; and the weight of bodies at her surface is supposed to be about one ſifth of their weight at the surface of the earth. The surface of the moon presents to us, vhen vieved with a telescope, a great diversity of light and shade, the principal features of which are visible even to the naked cyee. Many of these inequalities resemble very strongly the effects of volcanos; several astronomers have imagined that they have seen volcanos actually burning in the unenlightened part of the planet; and Dr. Herschel's instruments have enabled him to obtauin satisfactory evidence of the truth of the conjecture. The appearance of a perforation, which Ulloa supposed that he observed near the margin of the Moons disc, in a solar eclipse, has been attributed hy some to a volcano actually burning. Dr. Halley and Mr. Weidler have also observed ſlashes of light on the dark part of the moon, considerably resembling the effect of lightning. The height of the lunar mountains has been commonly supposed to exceed very considerably that of the mountains of the earth; but Dr. Herschel ĩs of opinion that none of them are so much as tvo miles high. The names, which have been given by astronomers to various parts of the moons surface, are of some utility in the observation of the progress of an eclipse. OF the satellites of Jupiter, some are a litile larger, and others smaller than the moon: they all revolve in planes inclined between 2ĩ° and 3° to the orbit of the planet, and they are therefore always seen nearly in the same line. Itis inferred, from some periodical changes of light which they undergo, that, like our moon, they always present the same ſace to their primary planet. The ring of Saturn is inclined 31 degrees to our eeliptic; of his seven satellites, six are nearly in the same plane with the ring; but the plane of the seventh or outermost satellite is but half as much inclined to the ecliptic. The ring has been observed by Dr. Herschel to revolve in 10 hours, which is considerably less than the time that would be occupied hy the revolution of a satellite at the same distancee The planes oſ the six satellites of. the Georgian planet are nearly perpendicular to the ecliptic; and some oſ their revolutions are supposed to be rather retrograde than direct. Besides the bodies which revolve completely round the sun, within the limits of our observation, there are others, of which we only conclude from analogy, that they perform such revolutionss. These are the comets; they generally appear attended by a nebulous light, either surrounding them as a coma, or stretched out to a considerahle length as a tail; and they sumetimes seem to consist of such light only. Their orbits are so eccentrie, that in their remoter situations the comets are no longer visible to us, although at other times they approach much nearer to the sun than any of the planets: for the comet of 1680, when in its perihelion, was at the distance of only one sixth of the suns diameter from his surfacee Their tails are often of great extent, appearing as a faint light, directed alvays towards a point nearly opposite to the sun: it is quite uncertain of what substance they consist; and it ĩs difficult to determine which of the conjectures respeeting them can be considered as the least improbable; it is possible that, on account of the intense cold, to which the comets are subjected in the greatest part of their revolutions, some substances, more light than any thing we can imagine on the earth, may be retained by them in a liquid, or even in a solid form, until they are disengaged by the effect of the sun's heat: but we are still equally at a loss to explain the rapidity oſ their ascent: for the huoyaney of the sun's atmosphere cannot possibly be supposed to be adequate to the effect; and on the whole there is, perhaps, reason to believe that the appearances are derived from some cause, bearing a considerable analogy to the fluid, supposed to be concerned in the effects of electrieity. It is prohable that the density of the nucleus, or the body of the comet itself, is comparatively small, and its attraction for the tail consequently weak, so that it has little tendency to reduce the tail, even if it consists of a material substance, to a spherical form: for since some comets have no visible nucleus at all, there is no difficulty in supposing the nucleus, when present, to be of very moderate density, and perhaps to consist of the same kind of substance as constitutes the tail or coma, in a state of somevhat greater condensation. If, thereſore, it should ever happen to æ planet to fall exactly in the way of a comet, of which there is but very little probability, it is to be supposed that the inconvenience 4 suffered by the inhabitants of the planet might he merely temporary and local: the chances are, however, much greater, that a comet might interfere in such a manner with a planet, as to deſlect it a little from its course, and retire agai n without coming actually into contact with it. Nearly 500 comets are recorded to have been seen at different times, and the orbits of about a hundred have been correctly ascertaimed: but ve have no opportunity of observing a sufſicient portion of the orbit of any comet, to determine with accuracy the whole of its form as an ellipsis, since the part vhich is within the limits of our observation does not sensibly differ from the parabola, vhich would be the result of an cllipsis prolonged without end. Two comets at least, or perhaps three, have been recognised in their return. A comet appeared in 1770, vhich Prosperin suspected to move in an orbit materially different from a parabola: Mr. Lexell determined its period to be 5 years and 7 months, and its extreme distances to be between the orbits of Jupiter and of Merenry; but it does not appear that any subsequent observations have conſirmed his theory. It hus, however, been calculated, that supposing the theory correet, it must afterwards have approached s0 near to Jupiter as to have the ſorm of iĩts orbit entirely changed. Dr. Halley foretold the return of a comet about 1758, which had appeared in 1581, in 1607. and in 1689, at intervals of about 75 years; and vith Clairaut's further correction for the perturbations of Jupiter and Saturn, the time agreed within about a month. The mean distance of this comet from the sun must be less than that of the Georgiin planet; so that by improving vur telescopes still more highly, we may, perhaps, hereafter be able to convert some of the comets into planets, so far as their remaining always visible would entitle them to the appellationn. Dr. Ialley also supposed the comet of 1680 to have been seen in 1106, in 551, and in the year 44 before Christ, having a period of 575 years; and it has been suspected that the comets of 1556 and 1264 vere the same, the interval being 292 years; a conjecture which vill either be conſirmed or confuted in the year I848. Some persons have even doubted of the perfect coincidence of the orbits of any comets, :een at difſerent times, with each other, and have been disposed to consider them as voL. I. 3v messengers forming a communication between the neighbouring systems of the sidereal world, and visiting a variety of stars in succession, so as to have their eourses altered continually, by the attraction towards many different centres; but considering the coincidence of the calculation of Halley and Clairaut with the subsequent appearance of the comet of I759, this opinion can scarcely be admitted to be in any degree prohable with respect to the comets in general, however possible the supposition may be in some particular cases. (Plate XXXII. Fig. 472.. 475. Plate XXXIII Fig. A76.. 485.) ON THE LAWS OF GRAVITATION. IT vas first systematically demonstrated by Sir Isaac Newton, that all the motions of the heavenly bodies, which have been deseribed, may be deduced from the effects of the same force of gravitation which causes a heavy body to fall to the earth; he has shown that in consequence of this universal property of matter, all bodies attract each other with forces decreasing as the squares of the distances increase; and of later years the same theory has heen still more accurately applied to the most complicated phenomena. We are at present to take a general view of the operation of this law, in the same order in which the affections of the celestial bodies have been enumerated. It vill not he possible to investigate mathematically the effects of gravity in each particular motion, but we may in some measure illustrate the subject, by considering in what manner astronomers have proceeded in their explanations and caleulations, and wèe may enter sufficiently into the principles of the theory, to understand the possibility of its applications. The bodies which exist in nature are never single gravitating points; and in order to determine the effects of their attraction, we must suppose the actions of an infinite number of such points to he combined. It was shown hy Nevton, that all the matter of a spherical body, or of a spherical surface, may be considered, in estimating its attractive force on other matter, as collected in the centre of the spheree The steps of the demonstration are these: a particle of matter, placed at the summit of a given cone or pyramid, is attracted hy a thin surface, composed also of attractive matter, uccupying the base of the cone, with equal force, whateve r may be the length of the cone, provided that its angular position remain unaltered: hence it is easily inferred that if a gravitating point be placed any where within a hollow sphere, it will remain in equilibrium, in consequence o? the upposite and equal actions of the infinite number of minute surſaces, terminating the opposite pyramids into vhich the sphere may be divided: it ĩs also demonstrable, by the assistance of a ſluxional calculation, that a point, placed without the surſace, is attracted by it, precisely in the same manner, as if the whole matter which it contains were collected in the centre; consequently the sume is true of a solid sphere, which may he supposed to consist of an infinite number of such hollow spheres. If, however, the point vere placed vithin a solid sphere, it would be urged towards the centre, by a foree vhich is simply proportional to its distance from that centree This proposition tends very much to facilitate all calculations of the attractions of the celestial bodies, since all of them are so nearly spherical, that their action on any distant bodies is the same, as iſ the vhole of the matter of which they consist were condensed into their respective centres; but iſ the force of gravity variei according to any other law than that which is ſfound to prevail, this simplilication would no longer be admissible, even with respect to a sphere. : It can scarcely be douhted that the power of gravitation extends from one fixed star to another, although its efſects may in this case be much too inconsiderable to be perceived by us. It may possibly influence the progressive motions of some of the stars; and if, as Dr. Herschel suppuses, there are double and triple stars revolving round a common centre, they must he retained in their orbits by the force of gravity. Dr. Herschel also imagines that the motion of our sun is in some measure derived from the same cause, heing directed nearly towards a point in which two strata of the milky vay meet; the attraction of the stars, other things being equal, must, however, be proportional to their brightness, and that part of the heavens, to vhich the sun is probably moving, appears to afford less light than almost any other part, nor does the hemisphere, of which it is the centre, abound so much in bright stars as the opposite hemisphere. If Sirius is a million times as far from the sun as the earth, and if he should descend towards the sun by means of their mutual gravitation only, he would move, on a rough estimate, but about 40 feet in the ſirst year, and in 1000 years only 8000 miles. It has been conjectured that the mutual gravitation of the stars of a nebula is sometimes the cause of the peculiar ſorm of the agg™regate, vhich somewhat resembles that of a drop of a liquid, held together by its cohesion: but unless the form of the nebula vas originally spherical, it could scarcely have acquired that form from the operation of gravity, since the spherical form of a drop is owing as much to the elasticity as to the attractive force of the particles of water, and it would he necessary, in order to preserve the analogy, that the stars should also be floating in an incompressible fluid. The sun's change of place, dependent on the relative situation of the planets, is so inconsiderable, that it escaped observation until its existence had been deduced from theory. Not but that this change vould be suſficiently conspicuous if ve had any means of deteeting it, since it may amount in the whole to a distance equal to twice the suns diameter, or seven times the distance of the moon from the earth; and this change is readily deducible from the general and unquestionable law of mechanics, that the place of the centre oſ inertia of a system cannot be changed by any reciprocal or mutual action of the bodies composing it, the action of gravity heing found to be perfectly reciprocal. But the earth accompanies the sun in great measure in this aberration, and the other planets are also more or less aſfected by similar motions; so that the relative situations are much less disturbed than if the sun described this irregular orbit by the operation of a cause foreign to the rest of the system. The simple revolution of a body, in a given plane, indicates, at first sight, the existence of an attractive force directed to some point withiu the orbit; and the Keplerian law of the equality oſ the areas described in equal times, by a line drawn from each planet to the sun, agrees precisely with what is demonstrable of the effects oſ central forces and points at once to the sun as the centre of attraction of the system. And since the orbits of the planets are elliptical, anq the sun is placed in one of the foci of each, it may be mathematically proved that the force directed to the sun must increase in proportion as the square of the distance decreases. The times of the revolutions of the planets are also in perfect conſormity with the laws of gravitation, that is, the squares of the times are proportinnal to the cubes of the distancs from the sun. It vas easy to infer, from what Huygens had already demonstrated of ceutrifugal forces, that this Ke; lerian Iaw must be true of bodies revolving in circles by the force of gravitation; but Newton first demonstrated the same proportion with respect to elliptic orbits, and showed that the time of revolution in an ellipsis is equal to the time of revolution in a circle, oſf which the diameter is equal to the greater axis of the ellipsis, or the semidiameter to the mean distance of the planet. The universality of the laws of gravitation, as applied to the difſerent planets, shows also that the matter, of which they are composed, is equally subjected to its power; for if any of the planets contained a portion of an inert substance, req iring a force to put it in motion, and yet not liable to the force oſ gravitation, the motion of the planet would be materially diſferent from that of any other planet similarly situated. The deviations of each planet from the plane of its orbit, and the motions of its nodes, or the points in which the orbit intersects the plane of the ecliptic, as ell as the motions of the aphelion, or the point where the orbit is remotest from the sun, have also been deduced from the attractions of the other planetary bodies; but the calculations of the exact quantities of these perturbations are extremely intricate. In general, each of the disturbing forces causes the nodes to have a slight degree of retrograde motion; but on account of the peculiar situation of the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, it happens that the retrograde motion of Jupiter's node, on the plane of the orbit oſ Saturn, produces a direct motion on the ecliptic, so that the action of Saturn tends to lessen the effect of the other planets in causing a retrograde motion of Jupiter's nodes on the ecliptic. The secular diminution of the obliquity of the ecliptic, or that slow variation of its position, which is only discovered by a comparison of very distant observations, is occasioned by the change of position of the earths orbit, in consequence of the attractions of the other planets, especially of Jupiter. It has heen calculated that this change may amount, in the course of many ages, to 10° or 11°, vith respect to the fixed stars; but the obliquity of the eeliptic to the equator can never vary more than two or three degrees, since the equator vill follow, in some measure, the motion of the ecliptic. The mutual attraction of the particles of matter, composing the bulk of each planet, would naturally dispose them, if they were either wholly or partially ſluid, to assume a spherical form: but their rotatory motion would require, for the preservation of this form, an excess of attraction in the equatorial parts, in order to balance the greater centrifugal force arising from the greater velocity of their motion: but since the attractive force of the sphere on the particles at an equal distance from its centre is every where equal, the equatorial parts would necessarily recede from the axis, until the greater number of particles, acting in the same column, compensated for the greater eſſect of the centrifugal forcee The form would thus be changed from a sphere to an oblate or flattened spheroid; and the surface of a ſluid, either wholly or partially covering a solid body, must assume the same figure, in order that it may remain at rest. The surface of the sea is therefore spheroidical, and that of the earth deviates so far only from a spheroidical figure, as it is above or below the general level of the sea. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 486.) . The actions of the sun and moon, on the prominent parts about the earth's equator, produce a slight change of the situation of its axis, in the same manner as the attractions of the other planets occasion a deviation from the plane of its orbit. Hence arises the precession of the equinoxes, or the retrograde motion of the equinoetial points, amounting annually to about 50 secondss. The nutation of the earts orbit is a small periodical change of the same kind, depending on the position of the moon's nodes; in consequence of vhich, according to Dr. Bradley's original ohservations, the pole of the equator deserihes in the heavens a little ellipsis, of which the diameters are 16 and 20 secondss. The same cause is also concerned in modifying the secular variation of the obliquity of the ecliptic; and on the other hand, this variation has a considerable effect on the apparent precession of the equinoxes. On account of the different quantity of the precession at different times, the actual length of the tropical year is subjected to a slight variation; it is now 4 or 5 seconds shorter than it was in the time oſ Hipparchus. The utmòst change, that can happen from this cause, amounts to 43 seconds. The exact computation of the moons motion is one of the most diſficult, as well as the most important problems in astronomy; but it is easy to understand, in general, how the difference in the quantity and direction of the sun's actions on the moon and earth, may cause such a derangement of the moons gravitation towards the earth, that the inclination of the orbit must be variable, that the nodes must have a retrograde, and the apsides a direct motion; and that the velocity of the moon must often he different from that which she would have, according to the Keplerian law, in a simple elliptic orbit. Tor, the suns attraction as far as it acts equally on the earth and the moon, can have no effect in disturbing their relative position, being always employed in modifying their common annual revolution: but the difference of the forces, occasioned by the difſference of distances, alvays tends to diminish the effect of their mutual attraction: since the sun acts more powerfully on the nearer than on the remoter of the two bodies The difference of the directions, in vhich the sun acts on the earth and the moon, produces also a force, which tends, in some degree, to bring them nearer together; but this force is, on the vhole, much smaller than the former; and the result of both these disturbing forces is always directed to some point in the line which joins the earth and the sun, on the same side of the earth with the moon. It is obvious that vhen the nodes are also in this line, the disturbing force can have no effect, either on their position, or on the inclination of the orbit, since it acts vholly in the plane of that orbit; but when they are in any uther situation, the disturbing force must cause a deviation from the plane, tovards the side on vhich the sun is situated, so that the inclination of the orbit increases and decreases continually and equally; but whatever may be the position of the nodes, it will appear that they must recede during the greater part of the moons revolution, and advance during the smaller. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 437.) When the disturbing force tends to separate the earth and moon, it deducts from the gravitation of the moon towards the earth a portion which increases with the distance, and therefore causes the remaining force to decrease more rapidly than the square of the distance increases; and the reverse happens when the disturbing force tends to bring the earth and moon nearer together; but the former eſiect is considerably greater than the latter. Nov in the simple ellipsis, vhen the hody descends from the mean distance, the veloeĩty continually prevails over the attractive force, so as to turn away the direction of the orbit more and more from the revolving radius, until, at a certain point, which is called the lower apsis, it becomes perpendicular to it: but if the central force increase in a greater proportion than is necessary for the description of the ellipsis, the point where the velocity prevails over it will be more remote than in the ellipsis; and this is expressed hy saying that the apsis moves forvardss. When, on the contrary, the force varĩes more slowly, the apsis has a retrograde motion. Since, therefore, the foree attracting the moon towards the earth, increases, on the whole, a little more rapidly than the square of the distance decreases, the apsides must have, on the whole, a direct motionn. And a similar theory is applicable to the mutual perturbations of the primary planets. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 488.) The secular acceleration of the moon's mean motion, which had long presented a difficulty amounting almost to an exception, against the suſſiciency of the theory of gravitation, has at last been satisfactorily deduced by Mr. Laplace from the effect of the gradual change of the eccentricity of the earth's orbit, which is subject to a very slow periodical variation, and which causes a difference in the magnitude of the sun's action on the lunar revolution. The perfect coincidence of the period of the moon's rotation, with that of a mean revolution, has been supposed to be in some degree an effect of the attraction exerted by the earth on a prominent part of her surface; there are however, many reasons to doubt of the suſſiciency of the explanation. If the periods had originally been very nearly equal, we might imagine that the motion of the earth would haye produced a libration or oscillation in the position of the moon, retaining it always within certain limits with respect to the earth: no libration is, however, observed, that can be derived from any inequality in the moons rotation; and it has very properly been suggested that the same attraction towards the earth ought to have made the moons axis precisely perpendicular to the plane of her orbit, instead oſ being a little inclined to itt. At the same time the appearance of a similar coincidence, in the periods of the rotation and revolution of many other satellites, makes it prohable that some general cause must have existed, which has produced the same effect in so many different cases. The orbits of the comets afford no very remarkable singularity in the application of the laws of gravity, excepting the modifications which depend on VOL. I. 3 x their near approach to the paraholic form, and the great disturbance whi ch their motions occasionally suffer, vhen they happen to pass through the neighbourhood of any of the larger planetss. The velocity of a comet in its perihelion is such, that its square is twice as great as the square of the velocity of a body revolving in a circle at the same distance. It was determined by Halley and Clairaut, that the attractions of Jupiter and Saturn would delay the return of the comet of 1759 about 18 days; and the prediction was accomplished within the probable limits that they hail assigned for the error of the calculationn. The labours of Clairaut have indeed in many respects improved the science of mathematical astronomy; he was the first that obtained a complete determination of the effects of the mutual actions of three pgravitating bodies, disturbing each other's motions; and his investigations, which were founded on those of Newton, led the way to still further improvements and refinements, which have been since made in succession by Euler, Lagrange, and Laplace. ON THE APPEARANCES OF THE CELESTIAL BODIES. WE are next to proceer to examine the sensible effects produced by those motions vhich we have ſirst considered in their simplest state, and aſtervards with regard to their causes and their laws. Many authors have chosen rather to pursue a contrary method, and have attempted to imitate the original and gradual developement of the primitive motions from their apparent effects. But no conception is suſſiciently clear, and no memory suſſiciently strong, to comprehend and retain all these diversiſied appearances with aceuracy and facility, unless assisted by some previous idea of the real changes vhich produce them, or hy some temporary hypothesis respecting them, which may have been of use in its day for the better connexion of the phenomena, although it does not at present deserve to be employed for a similar purpose, in preſerence to simpler and better theories, which happen to be historically of a later date. The proper motions of the ſixed stars, as they are subjected to our ohservation, undergo tvo modifications; the one from the relative direction of the motion, by which it may be more or less concealed from our view; the other from the proper motion of the sun, and the planets attending him. This motion has indeed only been inferred from the apparent motions of a great number of stars, which are either purtly or totally referable to it, and vhich could scarcely have agreed so correetly as they do, if they had arisen from the real and separate motion of each star. Among the motions of the primary planets, that of the earth itself requires a principal share of our attention. The apparent places of the fixed stars are not sensibly affected by the earth's annual revolution: if any of them had been considerably less remote than they are, it is probable that this motion vould have occasioned a sensible annual parallax, or a change of their relative situation, according to the earth's place in its orbit round the sun; for if this orbit, viewed from any of the stars, subtended an angle even of a single second, the place oſ that star might be observed to vary a second at difſerent times of the year. Dr. Hooke supposed at one time that he had discovered such a parallax, but later observations have not confirmed those of Dr. Hooke. The stars have, however, a small aberration, in consequence of the progressive motiun of the earth in its orbit, combined with the limited velocity of light; and the standard of comparison being the earth's axis, its nutation must also in some degree affect the apparent places of the stars. It was in endeavouring to ascertain the annual parallax, that Dr. Bradley discovered both the aberration of light and the nutation of the earths axis. The revolution of the earth, in its orbit round the sun, produces the apparent motion of the sun among the stars, hy which he describes his annual path in the ecliptic, with an apparent angular velocity equal to the angular velocity of the earth, which varies considerably at various times. It required some investigation of the magnitudes and distances of the heavenly bodies, to be convinced that the sun and stars had not in reality the motion which a superficial inspection of the heavens vould naturally lead a spectator to attribute to them; but it is at present perfectly unnecessary to enter into arguments to prove that the true cause of these apparent motions is the real motion of the earth. The eſſect of the earth's annual revolution is the change of place of the sun among the ſixed stars: it is obvious that the sun vill always appear, when viewed from the earth, in a place diametrically opposite to that in which the earth would appear, if seen from the sun: consequently, since the earth and sun remain in the same plane, the apparent path of the sun will mark the same circle among the stars as the earth would appear to describe, if viewed from the sun, that is, the ecliptie. If the light of the stars were much stronger, or that of the sun much weaker, we might see him pass by the stars in each part of the eeliptie, as ve do the moon; but we are now obliged to observe what stars are in turn diametrically opposite to the sun, or at certain distances ſrom him, and thus we obtain a correct knowledge of his path. The suns apparent diameter is larger by one thirtieth in January than in June; of course the earth is s0 much nearer to the sun in winter than in summer; and since the revolving radius of the earth's orbit describes equal areas in equal times, the angular motion must increase as the square oſ the distance diminishes, or about twice as fast as the distance itself diminishes; 50 that the whole variation of the apparent diurnal motion of the sun is one fiſteenth of his mean motion: hence, the sun passes through the wnter half of the ecliptic in a time 7 or 8 days shorter than the summer half. According to the different situations of the earth, with respect to the plane of the sun's equator, his rotation on his axis causes the paths of his spots to assume different forms; when the earth is in that plane, the paths appear straight, but in all other situations, elliptical. The rotation of the earth on its axis produces the still more obvious vicissitudes of day and night; and, in combination with its annual motion, occasions the change of seasons. Since the axis remains always parallel to itself, and is inclined to the plane of the ecliptic in an angle of about 664°, the plane oſ the equator, which is perpendicular to the axis, must pass twice in the year through the sun. When this happens, the limit of illumination, or the cirele which separates the dark portion of the earth trom the enlightened part, will then pass through the poles; and as the earth turns on iĩts axis, each point of its surface must remain for an equal length of time in light and in darkness. Hence the points of the ecliptic, in which the sun is situated at such times, are called the equinoctial pointss At all other times, one pole of the earth is in the light, and the other in the shadow; and all the points of the earth nearest to the illuminated pole have their day longer than their night, while the parts on the opposite side oſ the equator, which are consequently nearer to the unenlightened pole, have their day shorter. The purts nearest to the poles have also one of their days and one of their nights protracted to a period of several common days, or even months, whenever they revolve entirely within the limit of illuminationn. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 189.) The sun appears to ilesceribe every day a circle in the heavens, more or less distant from the plane of the equator, according to the actual situation of the earths axis; this distance bèing always the same as that of the poles from the limit of illumination, and never exceeding 29°; so that by determining the sun's path at the time of the equinoxes, or the apparent place of the equinoctial in the heavens, for any given point on the earth's surface, we may represent the sun's path at any other time by a smaller cirele parallel to it. Speaking hovever, more correctly, the sun's apparent path is a spiral, formed by the continuation of these supposed circles into each other. . æ The effect of the centrifugal force, derived from the earths rotation, is pereeptible, at the equator, in the retardation of the vibrations of penduIums. The whole centrifugal force at the equator is found, by computation, to be 4 of the force of gravity; hut the diminution of the force of gravitation appears, by experiments on pendulums, to be 5; this diminution being the sum of the centrifugal force, and of the decrease of gravity on account of the oblate ſigure of the earth, the equatorial parts being further removed from its centre, and the force of gravity being less powerful there. The changes of inclination in the earth's axis are ohservable in the places of the equinoctial points, and in the situation of the plane of the earth's equator vith respect to the ſixed stars; and the secular diminution of the obliquity of the celiptio is discoverable by a comparison of distant observations on the sun's apparent motion, and on the places of the fixed stars with respeet to the ecliptic. Tor the phenomena of twilight, we are principally indebted to the light reſlected hy the atmosphere: when the sun is at a certain distance only below the horizon, he shines on some part of the air immediately visible to us, which affords us a portion of reſlected light. The distance, at which this may happen, has been variously estimated, and it is perhaps actually different in diſſerent elimates, being a little greater in countries near the poles than in those which are nearer the equator: there is also sometimes a secondary tvilight, when the parts of the atmosphere, which refleet a faint light on the earth, are themselves indehted for this light to an earlier reſlection, Some have assigned I8 as the limit of twilight, and on this supposition, allowing ſfor refraction, the atmosphere must be capable of reſlecting sensible light at the height of about 40 miles Mr. Lambert, on the contrary, makes the limit only about 62°. The duration of twilight is greater or less as the sun moves more or less obliquely with respect to the horizon; it is, therefore, shortest near the time of the equinoxes, since the equinoctial intersects the horizon less obliquely than any lesser cirele parallel to it. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 490, 491.) The revolutions of the primary planets, combined with that of the earth, necessarily produce the various relations, in which they are either in opposition or conjunction, with respect to each other or to the sun, and in which the apparent motion is direct or retrograde, or the planet is stationary, according to the directions and the comparative velocities of the real motions. Iſ the earth were at rest, the inferior planets would appear to be stationary vhen they are at the greatest elongation or angular distance from the sun; but, on account oſ the eſfect of the earth's motion, Venus is stationary at an elongation of about 29°, while her greatest elongation is between 4° and 48°. The greatest elongation of Mercury, in each revolution, is from 285° to 177°, according to the position of his orbit, which is very eccentrie. All these appearances are precisely the same as if the sun actually revolved round the earth, and the planets accompanied him in his orbit, performing at the same time their several revolutions round him; and the path which would thus he deseribed in the heavens, and which is of a cycloidal nature, represents correctly the true positions of the planets with respect to the earth. The apparent angular deviation from the ecliptic, or the latitude of the planet, is also greater or less, accordingly as the earth is nearer or remoter to the planet, as vell as according to the inclination of its orbit and its distance from the node. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 492.. 494) The various appearances of the illuminated dises, especially of the inferior planets, and the transits of these planets over the sun, depend on their positions in their orbits, and on the places of the nodes, with respect to the earth. Jupiter, Saturn, and the Georgian planet, are so remote in comparison of the earths distance from the sun, that they appear always ſully illuminated. Venus is brightest at an elongation of about 40° from the sun, in that part of her orbit which is nearest to the earth; she then appears like the moon vhen 5 days old, one fourth of her disc being illuminated; she casts a shadow, and may even be seen in the day time in our climates, if she happens to be far enough north: a circumstance which oceurs once in abont 8 years. In order that tſere may be a transit of Venus over the sun, she must be within the distance of I7 of her node at the time of conjunction, otherwise she will pass either to the north or to the south oſ the sun, instead of being immediately interposed between him and the earth. The phases and eclipses of the moon are very obviously owing to the same causes; that part of the moon only, on which the sun shines, being strongly illuminated, although the remaining part is ſaintly visible, by means of the light reflected on it from the earth; it is, therefore, most easily seen near the time of the new moon, vhen the greatest part oſ the earths surface turned towards the moon ĩs illuminated. The parts oſf the moon vhich are immeaditely opposed to the earth, appear to undergo a libration, or change of situation, of two kinds, each amounting to ahout 7 degrees: the one arising from the inequality oſ the moons velocity in her orbit at different times, the other from the inclination of the axis of her rotation to her orbit; besides these changes, the diurnal rotation of the earth may produce, to a spectator situated on some parts of it, a third kind of libration, or a change of almost two degrees in the appearance of the moon at her rising and setting. Plate XXXIV. Fig. 405) When the moon passes the conjunction, or becomes new, near to the node, she eclipses the sun, and vhen she is full, or in opposition, in similar circumstances, she herself enters the earth's shadow. The earth's shadow consists of two parts, the true shadow, vithin which none of the sun's surface is visible, and the penumbra, which is deprived of a part only of the sun's light; the true shadow forms a cone terminating in a point at a little more than 35 times the mean distance oſ the moon; the penumbra, on the contrary, constitutes, together with the shado, a portion oſ a cone diverging ſrom the earth vithout limit; but the only effeet of this imperfect shadow is, that it causes the beginning of a lunar eclipse to be incapable of very precise determination; for the limit of the darkened part of the moon, as it appears in the progress of the eclipse, is that of the true shadow, very little enlarged hy the penumbra. The true shadow, where the moon crosses it, is about 80 minutes in diameter, as seen from the earth, while the moon herself is only 30. This shadov is not, however, wholly deprived of the suns light; for the atmospherie refraction inſlects the light passing nearest to the earth, in an angle of 66 minutes, and causes a great part of the shadow to be filled with light of a ruddy hue, by means of which the moon remains still visible to us, the cone of total darkness extending to somewhat less than two thirds of the moons distance. But it has sometimes happened, probably from the effect of clouds occupying the greatest part of our atmosphere, that the moon has totally disappeared. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 496.) When the sun is eclipsed, it depends on the situations of the earth and moon in their orbits, whether the sun or moon subtends the greatest angle as seen from the earth; since at their mean distances their apparent diameters are each about half a degree. If the sun's apparent diameter is the greater, the celipse, when the centres coincide, must be annular, the margin of the suns disc being still visible in the form of a ring: when the moon's apparent diameter is greater than the suns, the eclipse, if central, becomes total; but still a ring of pale light is seen round the disc, which has been attributed to the effeet of the sun's atmosphere, since that oſ the moon is prohably too inconsiderabte to produce the appearance: a red streak is also sometimes observed at the margin, before the actual emersion of the sun. The degree of darkness depends on the situation oſ the place of observation vithin the shadow, on account of the greater or less illumination of the atmosphere within view: sometimes a considerable number of stars may be seen during a total eclipse of the sun. It is obvious that, since the carth is much larger than the moon, the whole shadow of the moon vill only pass over a part oſ the earth's surface: and that no solar eclipse can be visible in the whole of the hemisphere turned to the sun: while lunar eclipses, on the contrary, present the sume appearanee wherever the moon is visible. In the sume manner, to a spectator on the moon, an eclipse of the earth, or a transit oſ the moon's shadow over the earth's disc, would have nearly the same appearance wherever he might be stationed; but an eclipse of the sun by the earth would be total to that part of the moon's surface only, which to us appears dark at the same time. (Ilate XXXIV. Fig. 497.. 499.) The moon's nodes arrive very nearly at the same situation with respect to the earth after 225 lunations, or revolutions of the moon, which are performed in 18 years of 365 days each, I5 days, 7 hours, and 435 minutes; so that aſter a period of about I8 years, the series of eclipses recmmences ncarly n the same order. This circumstance vas observed by the ancients, and is VOL. I. - S5Y mentioned by Ptolemy and by Plinyg. When the full moon happens within 73 of the node, there must be a lunar eclipse and there may be an eclipse at the distance of 13° from the node. An eclipse, of the sun may happen when the moon changes, or comes into conj unction with the sun, at any distance vithin 173 of the node. The mean number of eclipses which occur in a year is about 4; and there are sometimes as many as 7: there must necessarily be two solar eclipses, but it ĩs possible that there may not be even one lunar. In speaking of the magnitude oſ the part of the sun or moon eclipsed, it is usual to consider the whole diameter as divided into 12 parts, called digits, each oſ which contains 30 m inutes: thus if one fifth part of the diameter were dark, the extent of the eclipse would be called ę digits 12 min utes. The moon travels through the heavens vith a motion contrary to their apparent diurnal revolution. Hence she rises and sets, on an average, about three quarters of an hour later every day. The least possible diiſerence between the time sof the moons rising on two successive days, is, in London, 17 minutes; and this circumstance occurs once in about 19 years, which is nearly the period of the moon's nodes with respect to the heavens: the greatest possible difference is 1 hour 17 minutes. But it happens every month that the difference hecomes greater and less by turns, and when the least difference is at the time of the full moon, ĩt is usually called the harvest moon. In parts nearer to the poles, the moon often rises at the same hour on tvo succeeding days. The eclipses of the satellites of Jupiter exhibit appearances extremely interesting for their utility in identifying the same instant of time in different places. On account of the small inclination of their orbits to the plane of Jupiters orbit, the ſirst three never pass the shadow without heing plunged into it, and the fourth but seldom; while those of Saturn are much less frequently liable to he eclipsed, on account of their greater deviation from the plane of his ecliptic. These satellites are also frequently hidden hehind the body of the planet, and this circumstance constitutes an occultation: hence it happens that we can never see hoth the immersion of the ſirst satellite into the shadov of Jupiter, and its emersion from it; but both the immersion and emersion of the three outer satellites are sometimes observablee. The ring of æLtnrn exhibits a variety of forms according to its angular position: it disapprars to common ohservation when either its edge or ĩts dark side is presented to us: but to Dr. Herschels telescopes it never becomes invisible; the light reflected from the planet being probably suſfieſent for illuminating in some measure the side not exposed to the suns direct rays. The comets are seen for a short time, and are again lost to our view; their tails are in general situated in the planes of their orbits, following them in their descent towards the sun, and preceding them in their ascent, with a ilight degree of curvature in their forms; they must also appear to us more or less arched, and of differenl extent, according to their distances, and to the angular position of the orbits with respect to the eeliptic. The proportion of the light afforded by the different heavenly hodies has been variously estimated hy various authors; but there is little reason to call in question the acouracy of the experiments and calculations of Mr. Bouguer. He states the intensity of the moon's light as only one three hundred thousandth of that of the sun. These calculations have been extended by Euler and by Lambert; Euler considers the direct light of the sun as equal to that of 6560 candles of a moderate size, supposed to be placed at the distance of I foot from the object: that of the moon to the effect of 1 candle, at the distance of 75 feet; the light of Venus to a candle at 421 feet, and of Jupiter to a candle at 1620 feet; so that the sun would appear as bright only as Jupiter if he were removed to a distance 151 thousand times as great as his present distance. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 500.) When we reſlect on the magnificence of the great picture of the universe, the outlines of which we have been considering, we are lost in the contemplation of the immensity of the prospect, and returning to the comparatively diminutive proportions of our individual persons, and of all the objects with vhich we are most immediately connected, ve cannot help feeling our own insignificance in the material world. The mind, notwithstanding, endeavours to raise itself above the restraints which nature has imposed on the body, and to penetrate the abyss of space in search oſ congenial existences. But in speculations of this kind, reason and argument must give way to con- jecture and imagination; and thus, from natural philosophy, our imaginations wander into the regions of poetry; and it must be confessed that the union of poetical embellishment with natural philosophy is seldom very happy. A poet has few facts to communicate, and these he wishes to expand and diversify; he dwells on a favourite idea, and repeats it in a thousand emblematical forms; his object is, to say a little, very elegantly, in very circuitous, and somevhat obscure terms. But the information, which the natural philosopher has to impart, is too copious to allow of prolixity in its detail; his subjects are too intricate to be compatible with digressions aſter amusement, vhich, besides interrupting, are too likely to enervate the mind; and if he is ever fortunate enough to entertain, it must be by gratifying the love of truth, and satisfying the thirst aſter knowledge. We have, however, a favourable specimen of highly ornamented philosophy in Fontenelle's Plurality of Worlds; a work which must be allowed to convey much information in a very interesting form, although somewhat tinctured with a certain frivolity which is not alvays agreeablee. We need not attempt to accompany all the flights of Fontenelle's imagination; it will be sufficient for our purpose to pursue his ideas in a simple enumeration of the most remarkable phenomena, that vould occur to a spectator placed on each of the planets. Of Mercury we know little except the length of his year, which is shorter than three of our monthss Supposing all our heat to come from the sun, it is probable that the mean heat on Mercury is above that of hoiling quicksilver; and iĩt ĩs scarcely possible that there should be any point about his poles where water would not boil. The sun's diameter would appear, if viewed from Mercury, more than twice as great as to us on the earth. Venus must have a climate far more temperate than Mercury, yet much too torrid for the existence of animals or vegetables, except in some circumpolar parts; her magnitude and diurnal rotation differ but little from those of the earth, and her year is only one third shorter; so that her seasons, and her day and night, must greatly resemble ours. The earth, when in opposition to the sun, must be about four times as bright as Venus ever appears to us, and must, therefore, always cast a shadow; it must be frequently, and perhaps generally, visible in the day; and together with the moon, must ex- hibit a very interesting object. The atmosphere of Venus is supposed to be nearly like our own, or somevhat more rare. : The inhabitants of the moon, if the moon is inhabited, must he capable of living vwith very little air, and less water: there is reason to think their atmosphere less than a mile high, and ĩt is never clouded: so that the sun must shine without intermission for a whole fortnight on the same spot, without having his heat moderated hy the interposition of air, or hy the evaporation of moisturee. The want of water in the moon is not, as some have supposed, the necessary consequence of the want of an atmosphere; but it is inferred partly from the total absence of clouds, and partly from the irregular appearance of the margin of the moon, as seen in a solar eclipse; no part of it being terminated by a line suſiciently regular to allow us to suppose it the surface of a fluid. The earth must always appear to occupy nearly the same part of the sky, or rather to describe a small oval orbit round a particular point, exposing a surface 13 times as great as that of the moon appears to us. This large surface, suspended, with phuses continually changing, like those of the moon, must afſord, especially when viewed with a telescope, an excellent timepiece; the continents and seas coming gradually and regularly into view, and affording a variety equally pleasing and useful. To us such a timepiece would be of inestimable value, as it would afford us an easy method of discovering the longitude of a place, by comparing its motion with the solar time: but in the moon, the relative position of the earth and sun, or of the earth and stars only, would be sufficient for determining the situation of any place in sight of the earth; if, however, there are no seas and no navigation, astronomical observations of this kind would be of very little utility. The assistance of the earth's phases in the measurement of time might, however, still be very useful, for many purposes, to the inhabitants of the nearer half oſ the moon; and prohably the remoter part is much deserted, for in their long night of half a month, they must be extremely in vant of the light refſlected from the earth, unless the inhabitants have the faculty of sleeping through the whole of their dark fortnight. The surſuce of the moon appears to be very rocky and barren, and liable to frequent disturbances from volcanos. These have been supposed to project sume of their contents within the reach of the earth's attration, which they might easily do, if they could throw them out with a velocity of about eight thousand ſeet in a second, which is only four times as great as that of a cannon hall: and these stones, falling through the atmosphere, might very possibly generate so much heat, by compressing the air, as to cause the appearance of fiery meteors, and to fall in a state of ignition. The appearance of the moon, as viewed through a good telescope, is extremely well imitated by Mr. Russels Iunar globe, which is also capable of exhibiting, with great accuracy, the changes produced by its librations. The climate of Mars is as much colder than ours, as that of Venus is warmer; in other respects there is no very striking diſference: the inclination of his axis to his ecliptic heing nearly the same as that of the earths axis, the changes of seasons must be nearly like our own. Dr. Herschel has observed a constant appearance of two bright spots or circles near the poles of Mars, which he attributes to the ice and snow perpetually surrounding them. It is not, however, probable that water could remain fluid in any part of Mars, and even quicksilver and aleohol would, perhaps, he frozen in his temperate climates. Tt ĩs pretty certain that Mars has an atmosphere, and his dark spots seem to be occasioned by clouds: this atmosphere may, perhaps, also be tne cause of the ruddy hue of his light. It appears to he doubtful, whether either of the three little planets newly discovered can be sufficiently solid, to give a ſirm footing to any material beings: we should probably weigh only a few pounds each if transported there. According to Dr. Herschel's opinion, neither Ceres nor Pallas is much larger than a good Scotch estate, although they must, sometimes, appear to each other as planets of a most respectable size: The light reſleeted from Ceres is of a more ruddy hue than that of Pallas; both of these planets are attended by more or less of a nebulosity, proceeding, perhaps, from copious atmospheres; and in this respect, as vell as in the great inclination of their orbits, they appear to have some afſinity to comets. It is tolerahly certain that neither of them is 200 miles in diameter; and Juno is also probably ubout the same size. Itis obvious that the most striking features of the heavens, when contemplated from Jupiter, would be the diversiſied positions and combinations of his satellites: their light must be faint, but yet of service; and to a traveller on the surface of this vast glohe they must afſord useful information, as well vith respect to time as to place. Our little earth must probably be always invisible to a spectator situated on Jupiter, on account of its apparent proximity to the sun, in the same manner as a planet at half the distance of Mercury would be invisible to uss. The year of Jupiter must contain nearly ten thousand of his days, and that of Saturn almost thirty thousand Saturnian days. Besides the vicissitudes of the seven satellites revolving round Saturn, his ring must afſord, in different parts of his surface, very diversiſied appearances of magniſicent luminous arches, stretched across the heavens, especially in that hemisphere which is on the same side of the ring with the sun. From the Georgian planet the sun must be seen but as a little star, not one hundred and fiftieth part as bright as he appears to us. The axis of this planet being probably near to the plane of its ecliptic, it must he directed twice in the year towards the sun, and the limit of illumination must approach to the equator, so that almost every place on his surface must sometimes remain, for a great number of diurnal revolutions, in light and in darkness; the most moderate climates having one night, in their long year, equal in duration at least to several of our years: and it must be confessed that this planet would afford but a comſortless habitation to those accustomed to our summer sunshine, even if it were possible to colonise it. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 501.) On the vhole,we are tempted, from an almost irresistible analogy, to conclude that the planets are all in some manner or other inhabited; but at the same time ve can scarcely suppose that a single ecipses of terrestrial animals or even vegetables could exist in any of them; their minerals may, perhaps, resemble ours, and if the stones vhich Mr. Hovard has analysed are really lunar productions, we hae proofs that the moon at least contains snme substances resembling those vhich compose the earth; but the seas and rivers of the other planets must consist of some ſluid unknown to us, since almost all our liquids would either be frozen, or converted into vapour, in any of them. LECTURE XLV. ON PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY. I7T is generally most convenient in practical astronomy to neglect the real, and to consider only the apparent motions of the sun the stars, and planets, for the visible eſfects must be precisely the same, whether the sun or the earth perſorm a revolution in the plane of the ecliptic, and whether the earth actually move on its axis, or the vhole of the celestial bodies move round it ina day We may, therefore, suppose the sun to move, as he appears to do, from west to east in the ecliptie, so as to advance almost a degree in 24 hours, and from east to west, together with all the stars and planets, so as to perform a vhole revolution in a day. Speaking more correctly, the sun appears to describe, in every sidereal day, a spiral, vhich diſfers a little froma cirele, and is also about a degree shorter, so that about four minutes more are required for the return of the sun to the same part of the heavens, ani the completion of a solar day. In order to determine the place of any point in the heavens, iĩt is usual to eompare its situation either with the plane of the earth's equator, or with the ecliptic; its. angular distance from the equator heing called its declination, and from the ecliptic, its Ilatitude; these distances must be measured in planes perpendicular to those of the equator or ecliptie, and the distances of these planes from their intersection, or from the equinoctial point in Aries, are called respeetively the right ascension and the longitude oſ the point to he described. For the stars, the declination and right ascension are most usually laid down; but with respect to the sun and the planets, performing their revolutions in or near the ecliptic, ĩt is most convenient to calculate their latitude and longitude. . ũ TLe plane passing through the earth's axis and the place of a spectator is the plane of the meridian of that place; and a plane touching the earth in any point is its horizon. With respect to the; appearances of the fixed stars, this plane may be considered as passing through the earth's centre in the same direction: and the difference is scarcely sensible with respect to the sun and the primary planets; but in observations of the moons place, these planes must he careſully distinguished. (Plate XXXV. Fig. 509.) The instruments requisite for astronomical observations are principally referable to genmetrical or to optical apparatus, or to the measurement of time. Particular constructions and combinations are, however, necessary for the accommodation of quadrants, graduated circles, telescopes, and transit instruments, to the uses of observatories; and astronomical observations are as necessary to the correct determination of time, as artificial timekeepers are useſul for other astronomical purposes. The most aceurate standard of time is the diurnal rotation of the earth on jts axis, as ascertained by its situation with respeet to the fixed stars. The time elapsing hetween two successive passages of any star over the same meridian, vhich constitutes a sidereal day, may be measured with great precision; and the star may for this purpose be ohserved, with almost equal accuracy, in any other situation, and sometimes with greater convenience. The length of the sidereal day may be considered as perfectly constant, the inequalities arising from the aberration of light, and from the nutation of the earth's axis, being too small to be easily discovered; but the correction for the aberration may be applied when it is necessary. For ohservatinns of this kind, it is usual to have a elock adjusted to sidereal time, which not only admits of a more ready enmparison vith the transits or passages oſ any onc star over the meridian, but, by the difſerence oſ the times of any two transits, shows at once the diſſerence oſ right aseension of the stars or planets, expressed in time instead of degrees. The solar days are not only about four minutes longer than the sidereal days, but they are also unequal aimnng themselves; and this inequality arises from two causes; the one, that even if the suns motion in the eeliptic were uniform, his diurnal chunges of right ascension would be diſſerent at different times, and the diſſerence between his puth in every sidereal day, and VOL. I. jzæ a whole cirele, depending on this change, would also vary; the other that the suns motion in the ecliptic is actually variable, consequently the diurnal change of right ascension is liable to adouble inequality. Hence it happens that the solar time agrees at four instants in the year only with the mean time, derived from supposing the whole 365 duys to be divided into as many equal parts; the difference is called the equation of time, and amounts sometimes to as much as 16 minutes. The term equation is commonly applied in astronomy to any small quantity, which is to be added to, or subtracted from, another, quantity; thus it is usual, in calculating the place of a planet, to find from the tables o its motion, the mean place, in which it would be found if its orbit were circular, and thence to derive the true place, by means of various corrections called equationss. In France the solar time is considered as the true time, and is used for all civil purposes, so that the clocks are sometimes embarrassed vith a complicated appuratus, calculated forimitating the inequalities of the actual apparent motion of the sun. (late XXXV. Fig. 503.) The art of dialling consists principally in projecting, on a given surface, such lines as will coincide with the shadow of an index or gnomon parallel to the earth's axis, at intervuls corresponding to the different hours of the day: so that nothing more is necessary for the construetion oſ a dial, than to determine the interseetions of the surface on which the dial is to beconstrueted, with planes passing through the edge of the gnomon, and situated at equal angular distances from each other: thus, supposing the plane of the dial perpendicular to the gnomon, and parallel to the equinoctinl, the hour Iines oſ the dial will be at equal distances from each other; but in other cases their distances will he unequal, and must be determined either by caleulation or by constructionn. A point may also be used as a gnomon, as vell as a line; but in this case the hour lines must cover a larger portion of the surface, in order that the shadow of the point may always ſall among them. late XXXV. Fig. 504.. 506.) The changes of the seasons depend on the return of the sun to the same position with respect to the equator, or on the length of the tropieal year, so called from the tropies, which are cireles supposed to be purallel to the equator, and hetween which the sun travels continually backwards and forwards, appearing to remain for some time, when he is near them, vith very little change of declination; whence the ſime vhen the sun touches either tropic is called the solstice:. The vicissitudes of light and darkness depending also on the solar day, it is necessary, for the regulation of the civil calendar, to establish the proportion between the periods of the solar day and the tropical year; and since the tropical year exceeds the time of 365 days, by 5 hours, 48 minutes and 48 seconds, it is usual to add to the common year an intercalary day once in about four years. The ancient Egyptians reckoned only 365 days in a year, and their nominal new year arrived continually earlier and earlier, s50 that aſter 1507 of their years, it would have happened successively on each of the 365 days, and returned to the original place: the same mode of computation vas also adopted by the Greek astronomerss. The Romans inserted intercalary days, at ſirst without much regularity, according to the direction of their augurs, until the time of Julius Caesar; who, observing that the year vas almost GC hours longer than 565 days, added a cay every fourth year to the calendar, by reckoning twice the day in February called sexto calendas Martias, whence this year of 566 days was denominated a bissextile year. The new moon immediately following the winter solstice, in the 707th year of Rome, was made the ſirst of January of the ſirst year of Caesar; the 25th of December in his 45th year is considered as the date of the Nativity oſ Christ, and Caesar's 46th year is reckoned the ſirst of our era. The preceding year is commonly called by astronomers the year 0, but by chronologists the year I before Christt. The correction introduced by Caesar was, however, too great, the error being exaetly 7 days in 900 years; so that in 1582 it amounted to about 12 days. This error was not wholly remover by Pope Gregory, who reformed the calendar; he omitted IO days only oſ the usual reckoning, in order to bring back the course oſ the movealle feasts to the same state, in which they had heen established by the Nicene council, in the fourth century. He determined at the same time that the last year of every century should be passed without an intercalary day, excepting that of every fourth century, which was still to be bissextilee Thus every  ear divisible by four, vithout a remainder, is in general a bissextile or leap year, but the last year of every century must he a common year, unless the number of the century he divisible hy 4; the year 1800 being a common year, and 2000 a bissextilee In this manner 27 Julian bissextiles are omitted in 3600 3ears, while the true length oſ the year vould require the omission of 23; but so smull a difference can be of no material consequence. The Persians had introduced into their calendar, in the 11th century, an interealation stiill more accurate; they make 8 bissextiles only every 33 years, reckoning four common years together instead of three, at the end of this period, so that in 12 years they have 52 leap years instvad of 33; and the error is nnly a day in about five thousand years. If any change in the Gregorian calendar were thought necessary, it vould be easy to make the last year of every fourth and ſifth century alternately a bissextile, and this correction would be quire as accurate as it is possible for our calculations to render it. The adoption of the Gregorian calendar in this country was ſor some time delayed by religinus prejudices; one of the hest founded objections to it vas, that 2 days of the real error was still uncorrected; but better arguments at lust overcame these difiiculties, and the new stile was introduced on the I4 September 1754, which would have been called, according to the old stile, the third. Any tolerable approximation of this kind, when once ge nerally established, appears to be more eligible than the mode which was lately adopted in France, vhere the republican year began at the instant of the midnight preceding the suns arrival at the autumnal equinox. Mr. Lalande very judiciously olserves, that there are several years, in which the sun will puss the equinox s0 near to midnight, that iĩt is not at present in the pover oſ calculation to determine on vhat day the republican year ought to begin; and perhaps these arguments have cooperated with others in facilitating the restoration of the ancient calendar. The revolutions oſ the sun and moon are not very obviouslv commensurable, the solar year containing 12 lunations and almost I1 days; but Meto discovered, more than 2000 years ago, that 1I9 solar years contain exactly 235 lunations; and this determination is so accurate, that it makes the lunar month only about half a minute too long. Hence it happens, that in every period of I9 years, the moons age is the same on the same day of the year. The number of the year, in the Metonic cycle, is called the golden number, the calendar of Meto having heen ordered; at the celebration of the Olympic games, to be engraved in letters of gold on a pillar of marble. At present, if we add I to the number of the year, and divide it by Iy, the remainder will be the golden number; thus, ſor 1806, the golden number is 2. IF we subtract I from the golden number, then multiply by II, and divide by 30, the remainder will be the epact, which is the moons age on the first of January, without any material error; thus, for 1806, the epact is 11, and the moon is actually I1 days old on the first of January. From a combination of chronological periods of various kinds, Scaliger imagined the Julian period, as an epoch to which all past events might with convenience be referred, beginning 4713 years before the birth of Christ. Laplace proposes, as a universal epoch, the time when the earth's apogee was at right angles with ĩits nodes, in the year 1250, calling the vernal equinox of that year the first day of the first year. But the fewer changes oſ this kind that we make, the less confusion we introduce into our chronology. The astronomical year begins at noon on the SIst of December, and the date of an observation expresses the days and hours actually elapsed from that time. Thus, the first of January 1806, at 10 in the morning, vould be called, in astronomical language, 1805 December 31 days 22 hours, or more properly 1806 January O day 29 hours. l For ascertaining, by immediate measurement, the position of any of the heavenly bodies, it is usual to determine its meridian altitude by quadrants, and the time of its passing the meridian by transit instruments. The large quadrants, generally used for this purpose in observatories, are ſixed to vertical walls, in order to give them greater stability, and are thence called mural quadrants; sometimes a smaller portion of an arc only is adapted for observations near the zenith, under the name of a zenith sector. A transit instrument is a telescope so fixed on an axis as to remain always in the plane oſ the meridian; the axis being perpendicular to this plane, and consequently in a horizontal position, and directed east and west. Those who are in the constant habit of observing with attention, can estimate, in this manner, the precise time of the passage of a celestial object over the meridian; vwithout an error of the tenth of a second, so that its angular right ascension may be thus determined vithin about a second of the truth. A very convenient mode of adjusting a transit instrument is to direct it to the north polar star, at the same time that the last oſ the three horses in the wain is perpendicularly above or belov it: this process, in 1751, gave precisely the true meridian; but since that thne, the precession of the equinoxes, which produces a slight change in the places of the stars, has made it necessary to wait I minute 135 seconds for every ten years that have elapsed. Thus, in 1806, if we vait 6; minutes, the pole star will then be precisely in the meridian, and will serve for the correct adjustment of the instrument. (Plate XXXV. Fig. 507.. 5100 The quadrant in most common use, especially for nautical observations, vas ſirst proposed by Newton, but improved, or perhaps reinvented, by Hadley. Its operation depends on the efſect of two mirrors which bring both the objects, of which the angular distance is to be measured, at once into the ſield of view; and the inelination of the speculums by which this is performed serves to determine the anglee. The ray proceeding from one of the objects is made to coſncide, after two reſlections, with the ray coming immediately from the other, and since the inelination of the reſlecting surfaces is then half the angular distance of the objects, this inclinatoin is read off on a seale in which every uctual degree represents two degrees of angular distance, and is marked accordingly. There is also a second fixed speculum, placed a right angles to the moveable one, when in its remotest situation, which then produces a deviation of two right angles in the apparent place of one of the ohjects, and which enables us, by moving the index, to mensure any angle between 180C and 90°. This operation is called the back observation; it is however seldom employed, on aceount of the diſliculty of adjusting the speeulum for it with accuracy. The reflecting instrument originally invented hy Hooke vas arranged in a manner somevhat different. (Plate XXXV. Fig. 511.) From the meridian altitude oſ any point, it is easy, when the elevation of the pole is known, to deduce its declination: and its right ascension may be found ſrom the time of its passuge over the meridian after that of the equinoctial point, allowing 15 degrees for each sidereal hour. (Plate XXXV. Fig. 512.) In all astronomical observations it is necessary to make proper correetions, according to the rules oſ optics, for the effects of atmospherical reſraetion; and also, in observations on the muon more especially, for those of parallax, or the diſſference of the apparent place oſ the luminury vith ON PRACTICAL ASTRONOMV. 543 respect to the earth's centre, and to the place of the speetaton which is equel to the angle subtended at the centre of the luminary by the semidiameter of the earth passing through the place of observation; since all calculations of the geocentric places of the heavenly bodies are referred to the earth's centre This angle, which is to be added to the apparent altitude, amounts sometimes, in the case of the moon, when near the horizon, to more than a degree; the refraction, vhich is in a contrary direction, and is to be subtracted from the altitude, being at the horizon about 33 minutess. (late XXXV. Fig. 5139 The most important applications of practical astronomy are in the determination of the latitudes and longitudes of places on the earth's surface The latitude, which is the angular distance of the place from the equator, or the angle formed by the plane of its horizon with the earth's axis, is easily ascertained by ſinding the meridian altitude of a body, of which the declination is known; since, by deducting or adding the declination, wve have at once the elevation of the equinoctial, or of the plane of the equator, above the horizon, and subtracting this from a right angle, we ſind the elevation of the pole, or the latitude. (Plate XXXV. Fig. 512.) It is also common to determine the latitude of a place by means of two altitudes observed at different times in the same day, noticing accurately the interval of time that elapses between the observations. This method has a great advantage in cloudy weather, vhen it is not possible to insure an ohservation of a meridian altitude. l The longitude of a place, or te relative position oſ its meridian, is by no means so readily determined. For this purpęse it becomes necessary to ascertain the time that elapses between the pussages oſ a given point in the heavens over its meridian and some other meridian which serves as a standard of comparison. Thus, if the sun arrives three hours later at the meridian of any place than at the meridian of London, that place must. necessarily be 45 degrees vest of London, or in 45° west longitude: and if we knov, when it is noon at the given place, that it is three oclock in the afternoon at Greenwich, ve may be certain that we are in some part of a meridian 45° vest of that of Greenwich. Iad we perfect timekeepers, ve might casily adjust them to the time of our first meridian, and then, by comparison with the usual determinations of time in any other place, to which they might he carried, the longitude of this place might be found with perfect accuracy. Such timekeepers as we have are indeed sufficiently correct, to be of considerable utility, but it is necessary to compare them frequently with astronomical ohservations of phenomena, hich occur at times capable of a correct calculation. Sometimes the transits of Mercury and Venus, or the eclipses of the moon, are employed for this purpose, but more usually the eclipses of the satellites of Jupiter; these, however, cannot be vell observed without a more poverful telescope than can be employed at sea; and the theory of the moons motion, has of late years been so much improved, that her distance from the sun or from a fixed star can be calculated, with suſſicient accuracy, for determining the time in London or at Paris without an error of one third of a minute; so that supposing the observation could be rendered perfectly correct, the longitude might be thus ascertained within about one twelſth of a degree, or at most ive nautical miles, . The observed parallax of the sun and moon may he employed for the determination of their distances from the earth;; but in the case of the sun, the simple comparison of his calculated with his apparent altitude is insuſſicient for ascertaining the magnitude of the parallax with aceuracy. Sometimes the parallax oſ? Mars, which is considerably greater than the suns, has heen directly measured; but the most eorreet mode of ascertaining the actual dimensions of the solar system is, to observe a transit of Venus over the suns dise, at two places situated in opposite parts oſf the earth's surſace. For, since the diurnal motion oſ some parts of the earth is directed the same vay ith the motion of Venus in her orbit, and that of others the contrary vay, the diſferent efeets of these motions must furnish a mode of comparing the rotatory velocity of the earth, with the progressive velocity of Venus, and consequently of inferring, from the known velocity with which the earth's surſace revolves, the actual velocity of Venus, and her distance from the sun; whence the distances oſ all the other phnets may be readily deduced. (Plate XXXV. TFig. 514) Our countryman Horrox vas the first that particularly attended to the phenomena of a transit of Venus over the suns disc: Dr. Halley, when he observed a transit of Mercury at St. Helena, thought that he could ascertain the times of immersion and emersion vithout an error of a single second; and hence he concluded, that by means of a transit of Venus, the suns distance might be determined within a five hundredth part. The most advantageous places for the experiment being sueh as differ most in longitude, and are most remote from each other, Captain Cook was sent by the British government to the South Seas, in the years 1761 and 1769, in order to observe the transits of Venus in the island of Otaheite. These observations ere compared with those which were made at Wardhuys, in Danish Lapland; the difference of the times occupied by the transit at these places vas found to be 23 minutes 10 seconds, and from this comparison, corrected by a number of collateral observations, the sum's mean parallax was found to he 8 seconds and two thirds, or perhaps 8; for it does not appear that we are sure of having avoided even an error of one fortieth part of the whole; although Mr. Laplace's determination of the sun's distance, from the lunar motions, agrees very well with that which is usually considered as the result of the observations of the transit of Venus. The comparative densities oſ the sun, and of such planets as have satellites, may be calculated from the periods and distances of the bodies revolving round them; the densities of the other planets have sometimes been assigned from conjecture only, but of late years the mathematieal theory oſ the planetary perturbations has been rendered so perfect, that some dependence may perhaps be placed on the density assigned to them from ealculations of this kind. It vas formerly supposed that the densities of the planets were regularly greater as they were nearer to the sun; but iĩt is now certain that the Georgian planet is more dense than Saturn, and it is probable that Venus is somevhat less dense than the earth. The mass of the moon is deduced from a comparison of the eſſects of her attraction on the earth and sea vith those of the suns attraction. The artificial globe serves as a useful instrument for determining, in a rough manner, without caleulation, the afſections of the heavenly bodies at purticular times; their places being fiist uscertained from tables, or, in the ease of the sun, merely from a seale on the globe's horizon, or on its surfacee e have only to adjust the elevation oſ the pole of the globe in such a manuer, vVOL. I. 4 a that its axis may form the same angle with its horizon as the axis of the earth does with the real horizon of the place; then finding a point on its surface corresponding to the place of the sun or planet, ve may represent its apparent motion by the motion oſ this point, and the time occupied hy that motion vill be shown by the index of the globe; thus ve may ſind the length of the day and night, and the time and place of rising and setting; and by means of a graduated circle, perpendicular to the horizon, ve may measure the altitude of the sun or planet at any other time, and also its azimuth, or the distance of this circle from the north or south point of the horizon. If we have a ring of any kind parallel to the horizon, and 535 minutes below it, we may consider this ringas the apparent horizon, allowing for the effects of refraction; if it be still 15 or 16 minutes lover, it will represent the rising or setting of the extreme margin of the sun or moon: we might also have a circle about a degree above either of these, which might represent the sensible or apparent horizon with regard to the moon, including the correction for her parallax; and a similar ring, placed still lower, would show the duration of twilight, on any supposition that might be formeũ respecting the depression of the sun requireũ for producing total darkness. By means of the celestial globe, the apparent motions of the ſixed stars may be represented in a manner nearly similar, proper attention being paid to the situation of the sun in the ecliptic, as determining the time corresponding. Many of these operations may also be performed with equal convenience with a planisphere, which is a stereographical projection of the globe on a plane surface. Professor Bode's planisphere comprehends in one view all the stars that are ever visible at Berlin: he has added to it a moveable circle, representing the horizon of that place, carrying with it the cireles of altitude and azimuth, delineated on a transparent paper, which is adjusted, by graduations at the margin of the chart, to the day and hour for which ve vish to ascertain the apparent places of the heavenly bodiess. Any other churt of the stars, having the pole in its centre, may be applied to a similar use, by cutting out a cirele, or a part of a cirele, to represent the horizon of a place of which the latitude is given; and if the stars are projected, as is usual, on two equal charts, they must have two equal ares to represent the respective parts oſ the horizon belonging to them. A simple construction may also oſten be made to serve for solving many problems of a similar nature. (Plate XXXV. Fig. 515, 516b Plate XXXVI. Fig. 517. Plate XXXVII. Fig. 518.) For representing the real as well as the apparent motions of the different parts of the solar system, planetariums or orreries have sometimes been employed, in which the comparative periods of the revolutions have been expressed by various combinations of wheelwork. Of these instruments Archimedes was the original inventor, and Huygens revived them, with many improvements, in modern times. The construction of the large planetarium, which has been made in the house of the Royal Institution, was principally directed by Mr. Pearson. I suggested to him, that the instrument might be placed in a vertical position, and that the eccentricities of the planetary orbits might he shown by the revolution oſ short arms, retained in their situation by weights, and their deviation from the plane of the ecliptic by inclining the axes of these arms, in a proper angle, to the plane of the instrument. The other parts of the arrangement, which have any claim to novelty, vere entirely of Mr. Pearson's invention, and he appears to have rendered the instrument in many respects more accurate than any other planetarium that has ever been constructed. LECTURE XLVI. ON GEOGRAPHY. FroM the consideration of the stars, the sun, and the planets in general, we are nov to descend to that oſ the earth, the particular planet which we inhabit, and which we can examine more minutely than the other parts of the solar system. Its external form, its divisions, whether astronomical or natural, its most remarkable features, and its internal structure, vill require to be separately iuvestigated. The generl curvatire oſ the earth's surſace is easily observable in the diappearance of distant objects, and in particular, when the view is limited by the sea, the surface of which, from the common property of a ſluid, becomes naturally smooth and horizontal: for it is well known that the sails and rigging of a ship come into view long beſore her hull, and that each part ĩs the sooner seen as the eye is more elevatedl. On shore, the frequent inequalities of the solid parts of the earth usually cause the prospecet to be hounded by some irregular prominence, as a hill, a tree, or a building, so that the general curvature is the less observable. The surface of a lake or sea must be alvays perpendicular to the direction of a plumb line, which may be considered as the direction of the force of gravity; and hy means either oſ a plumb line or of a spirit level, we may ascertain the angular situation of any part of the earth's surface with respect to a ſixed star passing the meridian; by going a little further north or south, and repeating the observation on the star, we may ſind the diſference of the inclination oſ the surſaces at hoth points; of course, supposing the earth a sphere, this diſference in latitude will he the angle subtended at its centre by the given portion oſ the surface, whence the whole circumſerence may be determined; and on ſhese principles the earliest measurements of the earth vere condueted. The ſirst of these, which can be considered as accurate, vas executed by Picart in France, towards the end of the seventeenth century. But the spherical form is only an approximation to the truth; it vas calculated by Newton, and ascertained expẽrimentally by the French Academicians, sent to the equator and to the polar circle, that, in order to represent the earth, the sphere must be ſlattened at the poles, and prominent at the equato. We may therefore consider the earth as an oblate elliptic spheroid; the curvature being greater, and consequently every degree shorter, at the equator, than nearer the poles. IF the density of the earth were uniform throughout, its ellipticity, or the difference of the length oſ its diameters, would be 4, oſ the whole; on the other hand, if it consisted oſf matter of inconsiderable density, attracted by an infinite force in the centre, the ellipticĩty would be only 5;. and whatever imay be the internal str icture of the earth, its form must he between these limits, since its internal parts must necessarily be denser than those parts which are nearer the surface. If indeei the earth consisted of vater or ice, equally compressible with common water or ice, and following the same laws of compression with elastic fluids, its density would be several thousand times greater at the centre than at the surſuce; and even steel would he compressed into one fourth of its bulk, and stone into one cighth, iſ it were continued to the earth's centre; so that there can he no doubt hut that the central purts of the earth must be much more dense than the superſicia. Whatever this diſſerence may be, it has been demonstrated hy Chiiraut, that the ſractions expressing the ellipticity and the apparent diminution of gravity at the equator must always make together 44, and it hns heen founid, hy the most accurate observations on the lengths oſ pendulums in diſſerent latitudes, that the foree oſ gravity is less poverſul by 45 at the equator than at the pole, whence the ellipticity is found to be 4æ of the equatorial diameter, the form heing the sume as vould he produced, if about three eighths of the whole ſoree of gravity were directed tovards a central particle, the density of the rest of the earth being uniform. This method of determining the general form of the earth is mueh less liable to error and irregularity, than the measurement of the lengths of degrees in various parts, since the accidental variations of curvature produced by local diſſerences of density, and even by superſicial elevations, muy oſten produce considerable errors in the inferences which might be deduced from these measurements. For example, a degree measured at the Cape of G ood Hope, in latitude 39 south, vas found to be longer than a degree in France, in latitude 460 north, and the measurements in Austria, in North America, and in England, have all exhibited signs oſ similar irregularitie. There appears also to he some difſerence in the length of degrees under the sume latitude, and in diſferent longitudes. We may, however, imagine a regular elliptic spheroĩd to ecoincide very nearly with any small portion of the earths surface, although its form must be somewhat diſferent for diſſerent parts: thus, for the greater part of Europe, that is, for England, France, Italy, and Austria, if the measurements have been correct, this osculating spheroid must have an ellipticity of4. The earth is astronomically divided into zones, and into climates. The torrid zone is limited by the tropies, at the distance of 23° .5 on each side of the equator, containing all such places as have the sun sometimes vertical, or immediately over them; the frigid zones are within the polar circles, at the same distance from the poles, including all places which remain annually within the limit of light and darkness, for a whole diurnal rotation of the earth, or longer; the temperate zones, between these, have an uninterrupted alternation of day and night, but are never subjected to the suns vertical rays. At the equator, therefore, the sun is vertical at the equinoxes, his Ieast meiĩdian altitude is at the solstices, when it is 66G° 39, that is, more than with us at midsummer, and this happens once on the north and once on the south side oſ the hemisphere. Between the equator and the tropics, he is vertical twice in the year, when his declination is equal to the latitude of the place, and his least meridian altitudes, which are unequal hetween themselves, are at the solstices. At the tropies, the meridian sun ĩs vertical once only in the ) ear, and at the opposite solstice, or the time of midwinter, his meridian altitude is 43° 4, as with us in April, and the beginning of September. At the polar cireles, the sun describes on midsummer day a complete cirele, touching the north or south point of the horizon; and in midwinter he shows only half his disc above ĩt for a few minutes in the opposite point; that is, neglecting the elevation produced by refraction, vhich, in these climates especially, is by no means inconsiderable At either pole, the eorresponding pole of the heaven heing vertical, the sun must annually describe a spiral, of which each coil is nearly horizontal, half of the spiral being above the horizon, and half below; the coils being much opener in the middle than near either end. The climates, in the astronomical sense of the word, are determined by the duration of the longest day in different parts of the earth's surface; but this division is of no practical utility, nor does it furnish any criterion for judging oſ the climate in a meteorological sense. The natural division of the surface of the globe is into sea and land: about three fourths of the whole being nccupied by water, although probably no vhere to a depth comparatively very considerable, at most of a few miles on an average. The remainiug fourth consists of land, elevated more or less above the level of the sea, interspersed, in some parts, with smaller collections of ater, at various heights, and, in a few instances, somevhat lower than the general surface of the main ocean. Thus the Caspian sea is said to be about 300 feet lower than the ocean, and in the interior part of Africa there is probably a lake equally depressed. We eannot observe any general symmetry in this distribution of the earth's surface, excepting that the two large continents, of Afriea and South America, have some slight resemblance in their forms, and that ench of them is terminated to the eastward by a collection of numerous islandss. The large capes projecting to the southward have also a similarity with respect to their ſorm, and the islands near them: to the west the continents are excavated into large bays, and the islands are to the east: thus Cape Horn has the Falkland Islands, the Cape of Good Hope Madagascar, and Cape Comoriu Ceylon, to the eust. (Plate XLII, XLIII) The great continent, composed of Europe, Asia, and Africa, constitutes about a seventh of the vhole surſace of the carth, Amenca about a sixteenth, and Australasia or New South Wales about a fiftieth; or, in hundredth parts of the whole, Europe contains 2, Asia 7, Africa 6, Ameriea , and Australasia 2, the remaining 77 being sea; although some authors assign 7 parts only out . f 100 to the sea, and à8 to the lund. These proportions may be ascertained with tolerable accuracy by weighing the paper made ſor cover- ing a globe, ſirst entire, and then cut out according to the terminations of the different countries: or, if still greater precision vere required, the greater part of the continents might be divided into known portions of the whole spherical surface, and the remaining irregular portions only veighed. lE The general inclinations and levels oſ the continents are discovered by the course oſ their riverss OF these the principal are, the River of Amazons, the Senegal, the Nile, the River St. Laurence, the Hoangho, the River Laplata, the Jenisei, the Mississippi, the Volga, the Oby, the Amur, the Oronooko, the Ganges, the Euphrates, the Danube, the Don, the Indus, the Dnieper, and the Dwina; and this is said to be nearly the urder of their magnitudes. But if we class them according to the length of country through which they run, the order will, according to Major Rennel's caleulation, be somevhat difſferent: tuking the length of the Thames for unity, he estimates that of the River of Amazons at 15, the Kian Kew, in China, 15, the Honngho 134, the Nile 125, the Lena 114, the Amur Il, the Oby 104, the Jenisei 10, the Gange;, its companion the Burrampooter, the river of Ava, and the Volga, each 9, the Euphrates 82, the Mississippi 8, the Danube 7, the Indus 5, and the Ithine 54. We may form a tolerably aceurate idea of the levels oſ the ancient continent, hy tracing a line across it in such a direction as to pass no river, which vill ohviously indivate a tract of country higher than most of the neighbouring parts. Iginning at Cape Finisterre, ve soon arrive at the Pyrenees. keeping to the south of the Garonne and the Loire. After taking a long turn northwards, to avoĩd the Rhine, ve come to Swisserland, and ve may approach very near to the Mediterranean in the state oſ Genoa, taking care not to cross the branches of the PoO. We make a eireuit in Swisserland, and pass between the sources of the Danube and of the branches of the thine in Swabia. Crussing Franconia, we leave Bohemia to the north, in order to avoſl the Elbe, and coming near to the horders of Austria, follow those oſ Hungary, to the south oſ the Vistla. The Dnieper then obliges us to go northards through Lithuania, leaving the Don wholly to the right; and the Volg⸗, to pass stĩll further north, hetween Petershirg and Moscov, a little above Bjelesero We may then go enstwards to the houndary of Asia, and thence northwards to Nova Zembla. IIence we descend to the west of the Oby, and then to the east of the branches of the Volga, and the other inland rivers flowing into the lake Aral and the Caspian sea. Here we are situated on the widely extended elevation of India, in the neighbourhood of the sources of the Indus: and, lastly, in our way from hence towards Kamschatka, we leave the Jenisei and Lena on the left, and the Ganges, the Kiang Kev, the Hoangho, and the Amur to the right. The direction of the most conspicuous mountains is, however, a little diſferent from this, the principal chain first constitutes the Pyrenees, and divides Spain ſrom France, then passes through Vivarais and Auvergne, to join the Alps, and through the south of Germany to Dalmatia, Albania, and Macedonia; it is found again beyond the Euxine, under the names of Taurus, Caucasus, and Imaus, and goes on to Tartary and to Kamschatka. The peninsula of India is divided from north to south by the mountains of Gate, extending from the extremity of Caucasus to Cape Comorin. In Africa, Mount Atlas stretches from Fez to Egypt, and the mountains of the moon run nearly in the same direction: there ĩs alsv a considerable elevation between the Nile and the Red Sea. In the new world, the neighbourhood of the western coast is in general the most elevated; in North America the Blue mountains, or Stony mountains, are the most considerable; and the mountains of Mexico join the Andes or Cordeliers, vhich are continued along the whole of the west coast of South Ameriea. There are several points in both hemispheres from which we may ohserve rivers separating to run to different seas; such are Swisserland, Bjelosero Tartary, Little Tibet, Nigritia or Guinea, and Quitoo. The highest mountains are Chimboracan and some others of the Cordeliers in Peru, or perhaps Descabesado in Chili, Mont Blanc, and the Peak of Tenerifſee. Chimhoracao is about 7000 yards, or nearly 4 miles, above the level of the sea; Mont Blane 5000, or nearly 3 miles; the Peak of Teneriſfe about 4000, or 2 miles and a quarter: Ophir, in Sumatra, is said to be 5 or G hundred feet higher. It has, however, been, asserted that some of the snowy mountains, to the north of Bengal, are higher than any of those of South America. The plains of Quito, in Peru, are so much elevated, that the barometer stands at the height of 15 inches only, and the air is reduced to half its usual density. But none of these heights is equal to a thousandth part of the earth's semiVOL. I. 4 B diameter, and the greatest of them might be represented on a six inch globby a single additional thickness of the paper with which it is covered. Mount Sinai in Japan, Mount Caucasus, Etna, the Southern Pyrenees, St. George among the Azores, Mount Adam in Ceylon, Atlas, Olympus, and Taurus are also high mountains: and there are some very considerable elevations in the island Ohyhee Ben Nevis, in Scotland, is the loftiest of the British hills, but its height is considerably less thau a milee (Plate XXXVIII. Fig. 519.) l The most elevated mountains, excepting the summits of voleanos, consist of rocks, more or less mixed, without regular order, and commonly of granite or porphyry. These are called primary mountains; they run generally from east to west in the old world, and from north to south in the new; and many of them are observed to be oſ easier ascent on the east than on the west sidee. The secondary mountains accompuny them in the same direction, they consist of strata, mostly calcarious and argillaceous, that is, of the nature of limestone and clay, with a few animal ani vegetable remains, in an obscure form, together with salt, coals, and sulphur. The tertiary mountains are still smaller; and in these, animal and vegetable remains are very abundant; they consist chieſly of limestone, marble, alabaster, building stone, mill stone, and chalk, with beds of flint. Where the secondary and tertiary mountains are intersected hy vallies, the opposite strata oſten eorrespond at equal heights, as if the vallies had been cut or vashed from between them, but sometimes the mountains have their strata disposed as if they had been elevated by an internal force, and their summits had afterwards erumbled avay, the strata which are lowest in the plains heing highest in the mountains. The strata of these mountains are often intermixed with veins of metal, running in all possible directions, and occupying vacuities which appear to be of somewhat later date than the original formation of the mountainss. The voleanic mountains interrupt those of every other description without any regulurity, as if their origin were totally independent of that of all the rest. The internal constitution of the earth is little known from actual observation, for the depths to which we have penetrated are comparatively very inconsiderable, the deepest mine scarcely descending half a mile perpendicularly. GEOGRAPHY. 575 It appears that the strata are more commonly in a direction nearly horizontal than in any other; and their thickness is usuãlly almost equable for some little distance; but they are not disposed in the order of their speciſic gravity, and the opinion of their following each other in a similar series, throughout the greater part of the glohe, appears to rest on very slight foundations. From observations on the attraction of the mountain Shehallion, Dr. Maskelyne inferred the actual mean density of the earth to be to that of vater as 43 to l, judging from the probable density of the internal substance of the mountain, which he supposed to be a solid rock. Mr. Cavendish has concluded more directly, from experiments on a mass of lead, that the mean density of the earth is to that of water as 54 to I. Mr. Cavendish's experiments, vhich vere performed with the apparatus invented and procured by the late Mr. Michell, appear to have been conduceted with all possible accuracy, and must undoubtedly be preferred to conclusions dravn from the attraction of a mountain, of which the internal parts are perfectly unknown to us, exeept by conjectures founded on its ex ternal appearance. Supposing both series of experiments and caleulations free from error, it will only follow that the internal parts of Shehallion are denser, and perhaps more metallic, than vas before imagined. The density assigned by Mr. Caventlish is not at all greater than might be conjectured from observations on the vibrations of pendulums; Newton had long ago advanced it as a probable supposition that the mean density of the earth might be about 5 or G times as great as that of vater, and the perfect agreement of the result of many modern experiments vith this conjecture affords us a new proof, in addition to many others, of the accuracy and penetration of that illustrious philosopher. LECTURE XLVII. ON THE TIDES. THE form and structure of the solid parts of the globe have afforded but few remarkable features capable of arresting our attention, except the general distribution oſ land and water, and the permanent differences of elevation oſ different parts of the earth. But the sea exhibits a series of phenomena far more interesting to the mathematical philosopher, because they admit of a methodical investigation, and of a deduetion from general causes, the action of which may be traced in detail. For the height of the surface of the sea at any given place is observed to be liable to periodieal variations, vhich are found to depend on the relative position of the moon, combined in some measure vith that of the sunn. These variations are called tides; they were too obvious to escape the observation even of the ancients, who inhabited countries where they are least conspicuous: for Aristotle mentions the tides of the northern seas, and remarks that they vary with the moon, and are less conspicuous in small seas than in the ocean: Caesar, Strabo, Pliny, Seneca, and Macrobius give also tolerably accurate aceounts of them. There are in the tides three orders of phenomena which are separately distinguishable: the first kind occurs twice a day, the second twice a month, and the third twice a year. Every day, about the time of the moons passing over the meridian, or a certain number of hours later, the sea becomes elevated ahove its mean height, and at this time it is said to be high water. The elevation subsides by degrees, and in about six hours it is low water, the sea having attained its greatest depression; after this it rises again when the moon passes the meridian below the horizon, 50 that the ebb and flood occur twice a day, but, become daily later and later by about 505 minutes, which is the excess of a lunar day above a solar one, since à83 lunar days are nearly equal to 297 solar ones. 4 The second phenomenon is, that the tides are sensibly increased at the time of the nev and full moon; this increase and diminution constitute the spring and neap tides; the augmentation becomes also still more observable when the moon is in its perigee, or nearest the earth. The lowest as well as the highest water is at the time of the spring tides; the neap tides neither rise so high nor ſall so low. The third phenomenon of the tides is the augmentation which oceurs at the time of the equinoxes: so that the greatest tides are vhen a new or full moon happens near the equinox, while the moon is in its perigee. The effects of these tides are often still more increased by the equinoctial winds, which are sometimes so powerful as to produce a greater tide before or after the equinox, than that which happens in the usual course, at the time of the æquinox itselſ. These simple facts are amply suſſicient to establish the dependence of the tides on the moon; they were first correctly explained by Newton as the necessary consequences of the laws of gravitation, but the theory has been still further improved by the labours oſ later mathematicians. The whole of the investigations has been considered as the most difficult of all astronomical problems; some of the circumstances depend on causes which must probahly remain for ever unknown to us; and unless ve could every where measure the depth of the sea, it would be impossible to apply a theory, even if absolutely perfect, to the solution of every difficulty that might occur. A very injudicious attempt has been made to refer the phenomena of the tides to causes totally different from these, and depending on the annual melting of the polar ice: the respectability of its author is the only claim which it possesses even to be mentioned; and a serious confutation of so groundless an opinion would be perfectly superſluouss A detached portion of a fluid would naturally assume, by its mutual gravitation, a spherical form, but if it gravitate towards another body at a distance, it will hecome an oblong spheroid of which the axis will point to the attracting body: for the diſfſerence of the attraction of this body on its different parts will tend to separate them from each other in the greatest part of the sphere, that is, at all places within the angular distance of 795° from the line passing through the attracting body, either in the nearer, or in the remoter hemisphere; but to urge them towards the centre, although with a smaller force, in the remaining part. Hence, in order that there may be an equilibrium, the depth of the fluid must be greatest where its gravitation, thus composed, is least; that is, in the line directed towards the attracting hody, and it may be shown that it must assume the form of an oblong elliptic spheroid. If the earth were wholly fluid, and the same part of its surface were always turned towards the moon, the pole of the spheroid being immediately under the moon, the lunar tide would remain stationary, the greatest elevation being at the points nearest to the moon and furthest from her, and the greatest depression in the circle equally distant from these points; the elevation being, however, on account of the smaller surface to which it is conſined twice as great as the depression. The actual height of this elevation would probably be about 40 inches, and the depression 20, making together a tide of 5 feet. If also the vaters vere capable of assuming instantly such a form as the equilibrium would require, the summit of a spheroid equally elevated would still be directed towards the moon, notwithstanding the earth's rotation. This may be called the primitive tide of the ocean: but on account of the perpetual change of place which is required for the accommodation of the surface to a similar position with respeet to the moon, as the earth revolves, the form must be materially difſferent from that of such a spheroid of equilibrium. The force employed in producing this accommodation may be estimated by considering the actual surface of the sea as that of a wave moving on the spheroid of equilibrium, and producing in the water a sufficient velocity to preserve the actual form. We may deduce, from this mode of considering the subject, a theory oſ the tides which appears to be more simple and satisfactory than any which has yet heen published: and hy comparing the tides of narrover seas and lakes vith the motions of pendulums suspended on vibrating centres, ve may extend the theory to all possible cases. If the centre of a pendulum he made to vibrate, the vibrations of the pendulum itself, vhen they have arrived at a state of permanence, will be performed in the same time with those of the centre; but the motion of the pendulum will be either in the same direction with that of the centre, or in a contrary direction, accordingly as the time of this forced vibration is longer or shorter than that of the natural vibration of the pendulum; and in the same manner it may be shown that the tides either of an open ocean or of a conſined lake may be either direct or inverted with respect to the primitive tide, which vould be produced if the waters always assumed the form of the spheroid of æquilibrium, according to the depth of the ocean, and-to the breadth as well as the depth of the lake. In the case of a direct tide, the time of the passage of the luminary over the meridian must coincide with that of high vater, and in the case of an inverted tide with that of low vater. In order that the lunar tides of an open ocean may be direct, or synchronous, its depth must be greater than 13 miles, and for the solar tides than 14. The less the depth exceeded these limits, the greater the tides would be, and in all cases they would be greater than the primitive tides. But in fact the height of the tides in the open ocean is always far short of that which would be produced in this manner; it is therefore improbable that the tides are ever direct in the open ocean, and that the depth of the sea is so great as 13 miles. In order that the height of the inverted or remote lunar tides may be ſive feet, or equal to that of the primitive tides, the depth of the open sea must be 6; miles; and if the height is only two feet, which is perhaps not far from the truth, the depth must be 3 miles and five sevenths. The tides of a lake or narrow sea differ materially from those of the open ocean, since the height of the water searcely undergoes any variation in the midile of the lake; it must alvays be high water at the eastern extremity when it is low water at the western: and this must happen at the time when the places of high and low water, with respect to the primitive tides, are equally distant from the middle of the lake. Plate XXXVIII. Fig. 520.) The tides may be direct in a lake 100 fathoms deep and less than 8 degrees vide; but if it be mueh wider, they must be invertedl.. Supposing the depth a mile, they will be direct when the breadth is less than 259; but if a sea, like the Atlantic, were 50 or GO degrees wide, it must be at least four miles deep, in order that the time of high water might coincide with that oſ the moon's southing. l Hitherto we have considered the motion of the water as free from all resistance; but vhere the tides are direct, they must be retarded by the effect oſ a resistance of any kind; and vhere they are inverted, they must he accelerated; a small resistance producing, in both cases, a considerable diſſerence in the time oſ high vater. :i Where a considerable tide is observed in the middie of a limited portion of the sea, it must be derived from the eſfect oſ the elevation or depression of the ocean in its neighbourhood; and such derivative tides are probably combined in almost all cases vith the oscillations belonging to each particular branch of the sea. Mr. Laplace supposes that the tides, which are observed in the most exposed European harbours, are produced almost entircly by the transmission of the effect of the main ocean, in about a day and a half; but this opinion does not appear to be justified by observation; for the interval between the times of the high vater belonging to the same tide, in any two places between Brest and the Cape of Good Hope, has not been ohserved to exceed about twelve hours at most; nor can ve trace a greater difference by compuring the state of the tides at the more exposed situations of St. Helena, the Cape Verd Islands, the Canaries, the Madeiras, and the Azores, which constitute such a suecession as might be expected to have indicated the progress of the principal tide, if it had been such as Mr. Laplace supposes. The only part of the ocean, which we can consider as completely open, lies to the south of the two great continents, chieſly between the latitudes 300 and 70° south, and the original tide, hich happens in this widely extended ocean, where its depth is sufiiciently uniform, must take place, according to the theory which has been advanced, at some time befſore the sixth lunar hour. It sends a wave into the Atlantic, vhich is perhaps 12 or 13 hours in its passage to the coast of France, but certainly not more. This tide, which would happen at the sixth lunar hour after the moon's transit, if there were no resistance, is probably so checked by the resistance, that the vater begins to subside about the fourth, and in some seas even somevhat earlier, although in others it may follow more nearly its natural coursee There is scarcely a single instance which favours the supposition of the time of high water in the open sea being vithin an hour of the moon's southing, as it must be if the depth were very great: so that neither the height of the tides nor the time of high water will allow us to suppose the sea any where quite so deep as 4 miles. The tide entering the Atlantic appears to advance northwards at the rate of about 500 miles an hour, corresponding to a depth of about 3 miles, so as to reach Sierra Leone at the 8th hour after the moon's southing; this part of Africa being not very remote from the meridian of the middle of the south Atlantic ocean, and having little share in the primitive tides of that ocean. The southern tide seems then to pass by Cape Blanco and Cape DBojador, to arrive at Gibraltar at the 15th hour, and to unite its effects with those of other tides at various parts of the coast of Europe. We may therefore consider the Atlantic as a detached sea about 3500 miles broad and 3 miles deep; and a sea of these dimensions is susceptible of tides oonsiderably larger than those of the ocean, but hov much larger ve cannot determine without more accurate measures. These tides would happen on the European coasts, if there were no resistance, a little less than 5 hours after the moon's southing, and on the coast of America, a little more than seven hours after; but the resistance opposed to the motion of the sea may easily accelerate the time of high water in both cases about two hours, so that it may be a little before the third hour on the vestern coasts of Europe and of Africa, and before the ſifth on the most exposed parts of the eastern coast of America; and in the whole of the Atlantic, this tide may be combined more or less both with the general southern tide, and with the partial effects of local elevations or depressions of the bottom of the sea, which may cause irregularities of various kindss. The southern tide is, however, probably less considerable than has sometimes heen supposed, for, in the latitudes in which it must originate, the extent of the elevation can only be half as great as at the equator; and the Islands of Kergulens Land and South Georgia, in the latitudes of about 500 and 55°, have their tides delayed till the I0th and Ith hours, apparently because they receive them principally from distant parts of the ocean, vhich are nearer to the equator. 4 c On the western coasts of Europe, from Ireland to Cadiz, on those of Aſrica, from Cape Coast to the Cape of Good Hope, and on the Coast of America, from California to the streights of Magellan, as vell as in the neighbouring islands, it is usually high water at some time hetween two and four hours after the moon's southing; on the eastern coust of South America between four and six, on that of North America between seven and eleven; and on the eastern coasts of Asia and Nev Holland hetween four and eight. The Society islands are perhaps too near the middle of the Pacific ocean to partake of the effects oſ its primitive tide, and their tide, being secondary, is probably for this reason a few hours later. At the Almirantes, near the eastern coast oſ Africa, the tide is at the sixth hour; but there seem to be some irregularities in the tides oſ the neighbouring islands. The progress of a tide may be very distinetly traced from its source in the ocean into the narrow and shallow branches of the sea which constitute our channels. Thus the tide is an hour or tvo later at the Scilly Islands than in the Atlantic, at Plymouth three, at Cork, Bristol, and Weymouth four, at Caen and Havre six, at Dublin and Brighthelmstone seven, at Boulogne and Liverpool eight, at Dover near nine, at the Nore eleven, and at London bridge twelve and a half. Another portion appears to proceed round Ireland and Scotland into the North Sea; it arrives ſfrom the Atlantic at Londonderry in about three hours, at the Orkneys in six, at Aberdeen in eleven, at Leith in fourteen, at Leostoſfe in twenty, and at the Nore in about tventy ſour, so as to meet there the subsequent tide coming from the south. From the time occupied by the tide in travelling from the mouth of the English channel io Ioulogne, at the rate of ahout 50 miles an hour, we may caleulate that the mean depth of the channel is about 28 fathoms, independently of the mugnitude oſ the resistances of various kinds to be overcome, vhieh require us to suppose the depth from 30 to 40 fathoms. In the great river of Amazons, the eſſects oſ the tides are still sensible at the streights of Pauxis, 00 miles from the sea, aſter an interval of several days spent in their passage up: for the slower progressive motion oſ the water no more impedes the progress of a vave against the stream, than the velocity of the vind prevents the transmission of sound in a contrary direction. (Plute XXXVIII. Tig. 521.) Such are the general outlines of the lunar tides; they are, however, liable to a great variety of modiſications, besides their combination with the tides produced by the sun. When the moon is exactly over the equator, the highest part of the remoter, or inferior, as well as of the nearer or superior tides, passes also over the equator, and the effect of the tide in various latitudes decreases gradually from the equator to the pole, where it vanishes; but when the moon has north or south declination, the two opposite summits of the spheroid deseribe parallels of latitude, remaining alvays diametrically opposite to each other. Hence the two successive tides must he unequal at every place except the equator, the greater tide happening when the nearer elevation passes its meridian: and the mean between both is somewhat smaller than the equal tides which happen vhen the moon passes the equator. This inequality is, however, much less considerable than it would he if the sea assumed at once the form of the spheroid oſ equilibrium; and the most probable reasons for this circumstance, are, ſirst, that our tides are partly derived from the equatorial seas; secondly, that the eſſects of a preceding tide are in some measure continued so as to inſluence the height of a succeeding one; and, thirdly, that the tides oſ a narrow sea are less affected by its latitude than those of a wide ocean. The height of the sea at low vater is the same vhatever the moon's declination may hbe. There is also a slight difference in the tides, according to the place of the moons nodes, which allows her declination to be greater or less, and this difference is most observable in high latitudes, for instance, in Ieeland; since, in the neighbourhood of the poles, the tides depend almost entirely on the declination. In all these cases, the lav of the elevation and cepression of each tide may be derived, like that of the vibrations of a pendulum and of a balance, from the uniſorm motion of a point in a cirele Thus, if we conceive a cirele to be placed in a vertical plane, having its diameter equal to the whole magnitude of the tide, and touching the surface of the sea at low water, the puint, in vhieh the surface meets the circumference of the cirele, will advance vith a uniform motion, so that if the cirele be divided into 12 parts, the point will pass over each of these parts in a lunar hour. It sometimes happens, however, in confined situations, that the rise and ſall of the water deviates considerably from this lav, and the tide rises somewhat more rapidly than it falls; and in rivers, for example in the Severn, the tide frequently advances suddenly with a head of several feet in height. These deviations probably depend on the magnitude of the actual displacement of the water, which in such cases bears a considerable proportion to the velocity of the tide, while in the open ocean a very minute progressive motion is suſſicient to produce the whole elevationn. The actual progress of the tides may be most conveniently observed, hy means of a pipe descending to some distance below the surface, so as to he beyond the reach of superficial agitations, and having within it a float, carrying a wire, and indicating the height of the vater on a scale properly divided. We have hitherto considered the tides so far only as they are occasioned by the moon; hut in fact the tides, as they actually exist, depend also on the action of the sun, which produces a series of effeets precisely similar to those of the moon, although much less conspicuous, on account of the greater distance of the sun, the solar tide being only about two ſifths of the Iunar. These tides take place independently of each other, nearly in the same degree as i hoth were single; and the combination resulting from them is alternately inereased and diminished, accordingly as they agree, or disagree, with respect to the time of high vater at a given place; in the same manner as iſ two series of waves, equal among themselves, of which the breadths are as 29 to 50, be supposed to pass in the same direction over the surface of a ſluid, or if two sounds similarly related be heard at the same time, a periodical increase and diminution of the joint effect will in either case be produced. Hence are derived the spring and neap tides, the effects of the sun and moon heing united at the times of conjunetion and opposition, or of the new and ſull moon, and opposed at the quadratures, or first and Iast quarters. The high tides at the times of the equinoxes are produced by the juint operation oſ the sun and moon, when both of them are so situated as to act more poverſully than elsevhere. The lunar tide heing mueh larger than the solar tide, it must always determine the time of high and lov vater, vhich, in the spring and neap tides, remains unaltered by the effect oſ the sun; so that in the neap tides, the actual time of low water is that of the solar high water: but at the intermediate times, the lunar high water is more or less accelerated or retarded. The progress of this alteration may easily be traced by means of a simple construction. I we make a triangle of which two of the sides are two feet and five feet in length, the external angle which they form being equal to twice the distance of the luminaries, the third side will show precisely the magnitude of the compound tide, and the halves of the two angles opposite to the first two sides the acceleration, or retardation, of the times of high water belonging to the separate tides respectively. Hence it appears that the greatest deviation of the joint tide from the lunar tide amounts to II° 48 in longitude, and the time corresponding, to 47 minutes, supposing the proportion of the forces to remain always the same; but in fact the forces increase in proportion as the cubes of the distances of their respective luminaries diminish, as well as from other causes; and in order to determine their joint effects, the lengths of the sides of the triangle must be varieſ accordingly. In some ports, from a combination of circumstances in the channel, by which the tides reach them, or in the seas, in which they originate, the inſluence of the sun and moon may acquire a proportion somewvhat different from that which naturally belongs to them: thus at Brest, the influence of the moon appears to he three times as great as that of the sun; when it is usually only twice and a half as great. late XXXVIII. Fig. 509.) : il The greatest and least tides do not happen immediately at the times of the new and full moon, but at least two, and commonly three tides after, even at those places which are most immediately exposed to the effects of the general tide of the ocenn. The theory which has been advanced vill afford us a very satisfactory reason for this circumstance; the resistance of ſluids in general is as the square of the velocity, consequently it must be much greater for the lunar than for the solar tide, in proportion to the magnitude of the ſorce, and the acceleration of the lunar tide produced by this cause must be greater than that of the solar; hence it may happen that when the lunar tide occurs two or three hours after the transit of the moon, the solar tide may be three or four hours after that of the sun, s0 as to be about an hour later, at the times of conjunction and opposition, and the tides will be highest when the moon passes the meridian about an hour after the sun; while at the precise time of the new and full moon, the lunar tide will he retarded about a quarter õf an hour by the eſſect oſ the solar tide. The particular forms of the channels, through which the tides arrive at diſferent places, produee in them a great variety of local modiſications; of vhich the most usual is, that ſfrom the convergence of the shores of the channels, the tides rise to a much greater height than in the open se. Thus at Brest the height of the tides is about 20 feet, at Bristol 30, at Chepstow 40, at St. Maloes 50; and at Annapolis Royal, in the Bay of Fundy, as much sometimes as 100 feet; although perhaps in some of these cases a partial oscillation of a limited portion of the sea may be an immediate eſfect of the attraction of the luminary.. In the Mediterranean the tides are generally inconsiderable, but they are still pereeptible; at Naples they sometimes amount to a foot, at Venice to more than two feet, and in the Euripus, for a certain number of days in each lunation, they are very distinctly observable, from the currents which they occasion. In the West Indies, also, and in the gulfof Mexico, the tides are less marked than in the neighbouring seas, perhaps on account of some combinations derived from the variations of the depth of the ocean, and from the different channels by which they are propagated. In order to understand me ⸗ more readily the effects of such combinations, we may imagine a canal, as large as the river of Amazons, to communicate at both its extremities with the ocean, so as to receive at each an equal series of tides, passing tovards the opposite extremity.. If we suppose the tides to enter at the same instant at hoth ends, they will meet in the middle, and continue their progress vithout interruption: precisely in the middle the times of high and low water belonging to each series will always coincide, and the eſfects will he doubled; and the same will happen at the points, where a tide arrives from one ex tremity at the same instant that an earlier or a later tide comes from the other; but at the intermediate points the effects will be diminished, and at some of them completely destroyed, vhere the high vater of one tide coincides vith the low water of another. The tides at the port of Batsha in Tonkin have been explained by Nevton ſrom considerations of this naturee. In this port there is only one tide in a day; it is high water at the sixth lunar hour, or at the moon's setting, vhen the moon has north declination, and at her rising, when she has south declination; and vhen the moon his no deelination there is no tide. In order to explain this circumstance, we may represent the two unequal tides which happen in succession every day, by combining with two equal tides another tide, in- dependent of them, and happening only once a day; then, if a point be so situated in the canal vhich we have been considering, that the effects of the two equal semidiurnal tides may be destroyed, those of the duily tides only vill remain to he combined with each other; and their joint result will be a tide as much greater than either, as the diagonal of a square is greater than its side; the times of high and low water being intermedia between those which belong to the diurnal tides considered separately. Thus, in the port oſ Batsha, the greater ride probably arrives at the third Iunar hour directly from the Puciſic ocean, and at the ninth from the gulf of Sinm, having passed between Sumatra and Borneo; so shat the actual time of high water is at the sixth lunar hour. The magnitude of this compound tide is by no means inconsiderable; it sometimes amounts to as much as 15 ſeet. (Plate XXXVIII. Fig. 523, 524.) Besides the variations in the height of the sea, which constitute the tides, the attractions of the sun and moon are als: supposed to occasion a retardation in its rutatory mution, in consequence of vhich iĩt is left a little behind the solid parts of the earth and a current is produced, o? vhich the general dircetion is from east to west. This current comes from the Paciſic and Indian oceans, round the Cape of Gond Hope, along the coust of Aſrica, then crosses to America, and is there divided and reſlected southwurds tovards the Drazils, and northwards into the Gulf stream, which travels round the gulf oſ Mexico, and proceeds north eastwards into the neighbourhood of Nevfoundland, and then prohubly eastwards and south eastwards once more across the Atlantic. It is perhaps on account of these currents that the Red Sea is found to he about 25 feet higher than the Mediterranean: their direction may possibly have been somewhat changed in the course of many ages, and with it the level of the Mediterranean also; since the ſloor of the cathedral at Ravenna is now several feet lower with respeet to the sea than itis supposed io have been formerly, and some steps have been found in the rock of Malta, apparently mtended for ascending it, which are at present under vater. The atmosphere is also liable to elevations and depressions analogous o those of the sea, and perhaps these changes may huve some little efſeet on the winds and on the veather; but their inſluence must be very inconsider- able, since the addition of two or three feet to the height of the atmosphere at any part can scarcely be expected to be perceptiblee The height of an aerial tide must be very nearly the same with the observed height of the principal tides of the sea; and the variation of atmospherical pressure, which is measured by the difference between the actual form and the spheroid of equilibrium, must be equivalent to the veight of a column of about I0 feet of air, or only 47 of an inch of mercury A periodical variation ſive times as great as this has indeed been ohserved near the equator, where the state of the atmosphere is the least liable to accidental disturbances; but this chango camot in any degree be referred to the efſſect of the moons action, since it happens alvays about the same hour of the day or night. The atmosphere is also affected hy a general current from east to vest, like that of the sea, and there is reason, from astronomical ohservations, to suppose that a similar circumstance happens in the atmosphere of Jupiter, on account of the actions of his satellites, which must be considerably more powerful than that of the moon. LECTURE XLVIII. ON THE UISTORY OF ASTRONOMY. WE have now taken a general view of the most striking phenomena of the universe at large, of the great features oſ the solar system, and of the peculiarities of the planet which we inhabit, with respect both to its solid and to its fluid parts All these are departmehts of astronomy, and we shall conclude our examination of the subject with a summary of the history of the science, principally extracted and abridged from Laplace's Exposition du systme du monde. In all probability the astronomy of the earliest ages was confined to observations of the obvious motions and eclipses of the sun and moon, the rising, setting, and occultations of the principal stars, and the apparent motions of the planets. The progress of the sun was folloved, by remarking the stars as they vere lost in the twilight, and perhaps also by the variation of the length of the shadow ofa detached ohject, observed at the time of the day when it was shortest. In order to recognise the ſixed sturs, and their different motions, the heavens vere divided into constellations; and twelve of these occupied the zone denominated the zodiac, within the Ilimits of which the sun and planets were always found. The entrance of the sun into the constellation aries, or the ram, denoted, in the time of Hipparchus, the beginning of the spring; and as the season advanced, the sun continued his progress through the bull, the twins, and the other signs in order; some of which appear to have been denominated from their relation to the agriculture and to the climates of the countries in which they were imagined, and others from the celestial phenomena attending the suns passage through them; the crab, for example, denoting his retrograde motion after the time of the solstice, and the halance the equality of day and VOL. I. 4 » night at the autumnal equinox. But the motion of the equinoctial points having changed in some degree the course of the seasons with regard to the stars, the signs of the ecliptio, by which the places of the sun and planets are deseribed, no longer coincide precisely with the constel lations of the zodiac from which they derive their numes. The most ancient observations of which ve are in possesæſon, that are suſiciently accurate to be employed in astronomical caleulations, are those made at Babylon in the years 719 and 720 before the Christian era, of three eclipses of the moon. Ptulemy, who has transmitted them to us, employed them for determining the period of the moons mean motion, and, therefore, had probubly none more ancient on which he could depend. The Chaldeans, hovever, must have made a long series of observations before they could discover their Saros or lunar period of 65855 days, or ahout IB years, in vhich, as they had learnt at a very early time, the place of the moon, her node, and apogee, return nearly to the same situation with respect to the earth and sun, and of course a series of nearly similar eclipses recurss The observations attributed to Hermes indicate a date seven hundred years earlier thun those of the Baby lonians, but their authenticity appears to be extremely doubtful. The Egyptians were very early acquainted with the length of the year, as consisting nearly of 365 days and a quarter, and they derived from it their Sothie period of 1460 years, containing 365 days each. The accurate correspondence of the faces of their pyramids with the points of the compass is considered as a proof oſ the precision of their observations: but their greatest merit was the discovery that Mereury and Venus revolve round the sun, and not round the earth, as it had prohably been before believed: they did not, Eovever, suppose the same of the superior planetss. (Plate XXXVIII. Fig. 525, 526.) In Persia and in India, the origin of astronomy is lost in the darkness which envelopes the early history oſ those countriess We ſind the annals of no country so ancient and so vell authenticated as those of China, which are c nſirmed by an incontestable series of historical monuments. The regulation of the calendur, and the predietion oſ eclipses, were regarded in this country as important ohjeets, for which a mathematical tribunal vas estaLlished at a very early period. But the serupulous attachment of the Chinese to their ancient customs, extending itsel? even to their astronomy, has impeded its progress, and retained it in a state oſ infaney.. The Indian tables indicate a much higher degree oſ perfection in the early state oſ the science, than it had attained in China; but we have every reason to believe that they are not of very remote antiquity. Here, says Mr. Laplace, who must be allover to be free from prejudices in favour of established opinions, I am sorry to be obliged to differ from an illustrious philosopher, Mr. Buailly, who, after having distinguished his career by a variety of labours useful to the sciences, and to mankind at large, fell a vietim to the most sanguinary tyrauny that ever disgraced a ciilised nation. The Indian tables are referred to two principal epochs, which are placed the one 3102 years before Christ, the other 1491. These are connected by the mean motions, and not the true motions, of the sun, the moon, and the planets; so that one of the epochs must necessarily be fabulous. The celebrated author, who has heen mentioned, has sought to establish, in his treatise on Indian astronomy, that the former of these epochs is founded on observation. But if ve caleulate from our own improved tables, we shall ſind that the general conjunction of the sun, moon, and planets, which the Indian tables suppose, in reality never happened, although it may be deduced, according to those tables, by ascending from the later seriess. The equation of the sun's centre, depending on the eccentricity of the earth's orbit, appears indeed to indicate a still higher antiquity; but its magnitude, as deduced from eclipses, must have been affected by a contrary error with respect to the moon's place: and the determination of the mean motion of the moon seems to make it probable that these tables are even of a later date than Ptolemy. In astronomy, as well as in other sciences, the Grecks were the disciples of the Egyptians; they appear to have divided the stars into constellations 15 or 1400 years before Christ. Nevwton attributes this arrangement to Chiron, and he supposes that he made the middle of the constellations correspond to the beginning of the respective signs. But until the time of the foundation of the school of Alexandria, the Greeks treated astronomy as a science purely speculative, and indulged themselves in the most frivolous conjectures respecting it. It is singular that amidst the confusion of systems heaped up on each other, without affording the least information to the mind, it should never have occurred to men of so great talents, that the only vay to hbecome aceurately acquainted with nuture, is to institute experimental inquiries throughout her works. Thales of Miletus, vho was horn in the year 640 before Christ, having travelled and studi ed in Egypt, founded, on his return, the Ionian school of philosophy, in which he taught the spherieity of the earth, and the obliquity of the ecliptic vith respect to the equator. Ile also explained the true causes of eclipses, which he vas even ahle to foretel, unquestionably hy means of the information that he had obtained from the Egyptian priests. Pythagoras of Samos was horn 590 years before Christ; he probably profited by the information which Thales had acquired, and travelled also into Egypt for his further improvement. It is conjectured that he was acquainted with the diurnal and ammual motions of the earth, but he did not publicly profess the true system of the worſd. It was taught after his death, by his disciple Philolaus, about the year 450, as well as by Nicetas, and by others of the school. They considered all the planets as revolving round the sun, and as inhabited globes; and they understood that the comets were only eccentric planets. Some time after this, the lunar period of Meto vas publicly made known at the Olympic games, and was universally adopted as the basis of the calendar. (Plate XXXVIII Fig. 527.) The next occurrence which deserves to be noticed, with respect to astronomy is the foundation oſ the school of Alexandria, which was the ſirst source of accurate and continued observations. Upon the death of Alexander, and the subsequent division of his empire, the province of Egypt fell to the Iot of Ptolemy Soter; a prince whose love of science, and vhose muniſicence towards its professors, attracted to his capital a great number of learned men from various parts of Greece. Iis son, Ptolemy Philadelphus, continued and increased the beneſits conferred on them by his father, and built the magnificent ediſice which contained, together vith the celebrated library, eollected by Demetrius] Phalereus, an observatory, furnished with the necessary books and instruments. The first astronomers, who were appointed to occupy this building, were Aristyllus and Timocharis; they flourished about 500 years before Curist, and observed with accuracy the places of the principal stars of the zodiac. Aristarchus of Samos was the next: he imagined a method of ſinding the sun's distance, by observing the portion of the moon's disc that is enlightened, when she is precisely in the quadrature, or 90° distant from the sun; and although he failed in his attempt to determine the sun's distance vith accuracy, yet he showed that it vas much greater than could at that time have been otherwise imagined; and he asserted that the earth was but as a point in comparison with the magnitude of the universe. His estimation of the distance of the sun is made by Archimedes the hasis of a calculation of the number of grains of sand that would be contained in the whole heavenly sphere, intended as an illustration of the powers of numerical reckoning, and of the utility of a decimal system of notation, vhich was the foundation of the modern arithmetie. Eratosthenes, the successor of Aristarchus, is known by his observation of the obliquity of the ecliptic, and his measurement of a certain portion of the earth's circumſerence; the whole o vhich he determined to be 250000 stadia; but the length of his stadium is uncertain. PtoIemy, calculating perhaps from the same measures, or from some others still more ancient, calls it 180000; which, if the stadium is determined from the Nilometer at Cairo, and from the base of the pyramid, is within one thousandth part of the truth, the length of the base of the pyramid being equal to 400 Egyptian cubits, or to 729 feet 10 inches English. Hipparchsu of Bithynia flourished at Alexandria about the year 140 before Christ. Employing the observations of Timocharis, and comparing them with his own, he discovered the precession of the equinoxess. He also observed that the summer vas ꝗ days longer than the winter, and that the solstices divided each of these seasons a little unequally. In order to explain this, Hipparchus supposed the sun to move uniformly in an eccentrie cirele, the distance of its centre from that of the earth being,ſ of the radius, and placed the apogee in the sixth degree of gemini. Probably the annual equation of the moon, which has some inſluence on the time of eclipses, was the cause of his making the eccentricity too great; had he assumed it but one fifth part less, the supposition would have represented the suns place vith tolerable accuracy Hipparchus appears to have been the ſirst that employed astronomical observations for determining the latitudes and longitudes of places. The interval oſ three centuries, vhich elapsed hetween Hipparchus and Ptolemy, offers us little that is remarkable in the progress oſ astronomy, except the reformation of the calendar, by Julius Caesar, who was assisted in making the arrangement by Sosigenes, an astronomer of the samo sehool that gave hirth to all the preceding discoveries, as ell as to the improvements of Ptolemy. This great astronomer was born at Ptolemais in Egypt, and flourished about the year 140 of our era. He continued the vast project, begun by Hipparchus, of reforming the whole science which he studied. He discovered the eveetion of the moon, or the change of her velocity, occasioned hy the positinn of the apogee with respeet to the sun; he determined the quantity of this equation vith great precision; and in order to represent it, he supposed the moon to perſorm a subordinate revolution in an epicycele, or a smaller cirele, of which the contre was carried round in the line of the general orhit, which he considered as an eccentric cirelee This mode of approximation is exceedingly ingenious; it is said to have been the invention of Apollonius of Perga, the mathematician, and although it sumetimes hecomes complicated, yet it is very convenient for calculation; and it may he employed vith advantage in the representation of the planetary motions by machinery. Ptolemy adopted the most ancient opinion with respect to the solar system, supposing all the heavenly bodies to revolve round the earth; the moon being nearest, then Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. This opinion had long heen the most general, although some astronomers had placed Mereury and Venus at greater distances than the sun, and some attributed to the enrth a diurnal motion only; but the doctrine of the Pythagoreans appears to have heen wholly exploded or forgottenn Ptolemy determined the quantity of the precession of the equinoxes from a comparison of his own observations with those of Hipparchus; but he made it smaller than the truth; and he probably formed his table or the places of the stars by applying this erroneous correction to the tables of Hipparchus, in order to accommodate them to his own time. Both these errors may, however, be otherwise explained, by supposing him to have followed Hipparchus in the length of the tropicãl year, which being somew hat too great, caused an error - in the calculation of the suns place, to which that of the stars was referred; but upon this supposition, he must also have been mistaken in three observations of the place oſ the equinoctial points. Ptolemy's prineipal vork is his mathematical system of astronomy, vhich was afterwards culled the great syntax or body of astronomy, and is at present frequently quoted hy the Arabic name Almagest. He also wrote a treatise on opties, in which the phenomena of atmospherical refraction are deseribed, and which is extant in manuseript in the National library at Paris. (Plate XXXVIII. Fig. 58.) Ptolemy was the last as well as the greatest of the Alexandrian astronomers and the science made no further progress till the time of the Arahians. The first of these vas Almamoun, was the son of the celebrated Aaron Reschid; he reigned at Bagdad in 814, and having conquered the Greek emperor, Michael the Third, he made it a condition of peace, that a copy of the vorks of each of the best Greek authors should he delivered to him; and among them vere the vorks of Ptolemy, of which he procured an Arahic translationn. Almamoun also observed the obliquity of the ecliptic, and measured the length of a degree in the plains of Mesopotamia. Among the astronomers protected by this prince and his successors, Albategni vas the most eminent. He ascertained with great accuracy, in 850, the eccentricity of the solar motion, and discovered the change of the place of the suns apogee, or of the earth's aphelion. Ibn Junis made his ohservations at Cairo, about the year 1000; he vas a very assiduous astronomer, and determined the length of the year within 2 seconds of the truth. At this time the Arabians were in the habit of employing, in their observations, the vibrations of a pendulum. The Persians soon after applied themselves to astronomy; and in the eleventh century they invented the approximation of reckoning 8 hissextiles in 33 years, which was aſterwards proposed by Dominic Cassini as an improvement of the Gregorian calendar. The most illustrious of this nation vas Ulugh Beigh, who observed in his capital Samarcand, about the year 1187, vith very elaborate instruments. In the mean time Cocheouking had made in China, some very accurate observations, which are valuable for the precision with which they ascertain the obliquity of the ecliptic: their date is about 1978. It was not long aſter the time of Ulugh Beigh, that Copernicus laid the foundation of the more accurate theories which modern improvements have introduced into astronomy. Dissatisſied with the complicated hypotheses of the Ptolemaean system, he examined the vorks of the ancients, in quest of more probable opinionss. He found from Cicero that Nicetas and other Pythagoreans had maintained, that the sun is placed in the centre oſ the system, and that the earth moves round him in common vith the other planets. He applied this idea to the numerous observations which the diligence of astronomers had accumulated, and he had the satisfaction to find them all in perfeet conformity with this theory. He quickly discarded the Ptolemaean epicycles, imagined in order to explain the alternations of the direct and retrograde motions of the planets; in these remarkable phenomena, Copernicus saw nothing but the consequences necessarily produced hy the combination of the motions of the earth and planets round the sun; and from a minute examination of these circumstances he calculated the relative distances of the planets from the sun, which till then had remained unknown. In this system, every thing had the marks of that beautiful simplicity which pervades all the works of nature, and which, when once understood, carries with itself sufiicient evidence of its truth. Copernicus was born at Thor, in Polish Prussia, in the year 1475; he studied in Italy; he taught mathematios at Rome, and afterwards settled on a canonicate at Frauenberg, where, in 36 years of retirement and meditation, he completed his work on the celestial revolutions, which vas searcely published when he died. About this time, William the Fourth, Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, not only enriched astronomy by his own observations, but also exerted his inſluence vith Frederie, King of Denmark, to ohtain his patronage for the celebrated Tycho Brahe. Trederic agreed to give him the little island Huen, at the entrance of the Daltic, where Tycho built his observatory oſ Uraniburg, and, in a period oſ œ years, made a prodigious collection of accurate observations. Aſter the death of his patron, his progress was impeded, and he sought an establishment at Prague, under the emperor Rudolph. Here he THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY. 597 died soon aſter, at the age of 55. Struck ith the objections made to the system of Copernicus, principally such as were deduced from a misinterpretation of the seriptures, he imagined a new theory, which, although mechanically absurd, is still astronomically correct; for he supposed the earth to remain at rest in the centre, the sturs to revolve round it, together with the sun and all the planets, in a sidereal day, and the sun to have, hesiles, an annual motion, carrying with him the planets in their orhits. Ilere the apparent or relative motions are precisely the sume as in the Coperniean syStem; the argument that Tycho Brahe drew from the seriptures in ſtvour of his theory was, thereſore, every vay injudicious; for it is not 10 he imagined that any thing but relative motion or rest could be intended in the scriptures, when the sun is said to move, or to stand still. But in the Coperiican system, there was an evident regularity in the periods of all the planets, that of the earth being longer than that of Venus, and shorter than that of Mars, which vere the neighbouring planets on each side; and when Tycho imagined the sun to move round the earth, this analogy vas entirely lost. Tycho Brahe was the discoverer of the variation and of the annual equation of the moon, the one being an irregularity in its velocity, dependent on its position with respect to the sun, the other a change in the magnitude of all the perturbations produced by the sun, dependent on his distance from the carth. (Plate XXXVIII. Fig 529.) Kepler was the pupil and assistant of Tycho, whose observations were the basis of his important discoveries: he succeeded him in his appointments at Prague, and enjoyed the tſitle of Imperial Mathematician. Adopting the Copernican system, which was then hecoming popular, he proceeded to examine the distances oſ the celestial bodies from each other at various times; and after many fruitless attempts to reconcile the places of the planets vith the supposition of revolutions in eccentric circles, at lust discovered that their orbits are ellipses, and demonstrated, chieſly ſrom his observations on the planet Mars, that the revolving radius, or the line dravn from the sun to the planet, alvays deseribes equal areas in equal times. By comparing the periods and the mean distances of the diſſerent planets with each other, he found, after 17 years calculation, that the squares of the times of revolution are always proportional to the cubes of the mean distances ſrom the sun. VOL. I. A E Kepler died in 1630: before his death he had the satisſfaction of applying his theory to the motions of the satellites o Jupiter, which, as vell as the phases of Venus, and the spots of the sun, had lately been discovered in Italy by the telescopic observations of Gulileoo This great man, celebrated as well for his theory of projectiles, as for his ztalous deſence of the Copernican system, was born at Pisa in 1564, and lived to the age of 75, full of that enthusiasm which made him despise the threats of the Inquisition, and submit putiently to its persecutions. He died in 1642, the year in which Newton was horn. The invention of logarithms, by Baron Napier, requires to be noticed for its importance to practical astronomy, and the lahorious observations of Ievelius deserve also to be mentioned vith commendation. The discoveries of the form of the ring of Saturn, and of one of his satellites, by Huygens, and of four more, together with the belts and rotation of Jupiter, by Dominic Cassini, vere among the early improvements derived from the introduetion of the telescope. But, without dwelling on any of these suhjects, we hasten to the establishment of the system of gravitation, which has immortalised the name of Newton, and done unrivalled honour to the country that gave him birth. The mutual attraction of all matter seems to have been suspected by the Epicureans, but Lueretius never speaks of it in such terms as are suſficient to convey by any means a distinct idea oſ a reciprocal forcee Gregory, in the preface oſ his Astronomy, has endeavoured to prove that Pythagoras must have been acquainted even vith the law of the decrease of gravitation; and Lalande appears to assent to his arguments; hut they rest only on the bare possibility that Pythagoras might have deduced an analogy from the tension of chords, which we have no reason to suppose that he even completely understood: and this merely because he fancifully imagined, that there was a correspondence between the planets and the strings of a lyree But the nature of gravitation had long been in some measure suspected; Plutarch had asserted that the moon is retained by it in her orbit, like a stone in a sling; and Bacon, Copernicus, Kepler, Fermat, and Roberval were aware of its eſiicacy. Bacon, in his Novum organum, calls the descent of heavy bodies the motion oſ ſ general congregation, and attributes the tides to tle attraction of the moon. Kepler mentions also the perſect reciprocality of the action of gravitation, and considers the lunar irregularities as produced by the attraction of the sun. But our most ingenious countryman, Dr. Hooke, vas still more decided in attributing the revolutions of the planets to the combination of a projectile motion vith a centripetal force; he expresses his sentiments on the suhject very clearly in his Attempt to prove the motion of the earth, published in 1674, and had his sill in mathematics been equal to his practical sagacity, he would probably have completed, or at least har⸗ published, the discovery before his great cotemporary. It must be confessed that Newtons good fortune was equal to his talents and his application; for had he lived earlier, he might probably have confimed his genius to speculations purely mathematical; had he been later, his discoveries in natural philosophy might have been anticipated by others; and yet Newton would perhaps have improved still more on their labours than they have done on his. It was in 1676, vhen he was 34 years old, that he ſirst demonstrated the necessary connexion of the planetary revolutions in elliptic orbits, with an attractive ſorce varying inversely as the square of the distance. But he had enllected the law of the force, from the discoveries of Kepler respecting the periods of the different planets, some time beſore 1671, as he asserts to Dr. Halley, and, to the best of his recollection, about ſ6õ8, although in his Principia he allows, with the most laudable candour, to Wren, Hooke, and Halley, the merit of having made the same discovery, without any connexion vith each others investigations, or with his ovn. The manner, in which Newton vas led to attend particularly to the subject, is thus related by Pemberton, in the preface to his View of Sir Isaac Newton's philosophy. ' The first thoughts, says Pemberton, which gave rise to his Principia, he had, vhen he retired from Cambridge in 1666, on account of the plague. As he sat alone in a garden, he fell into a speculation on the power of gravity: that as this power is not found sensibly diminished at the remotest distance from the centre of the earth, to which we can rise, neither at the tops oſ the loftiest buildings, nor even on the summits of the highest mountains; it appeared to him reasonable to conclude, that this power must extend much further than was usually thought; why not as high as the moon; said he to himself; and if 50, her motion must be influenced by it; perhap, she is retained in her orbit thereby. However, though the power of gra vity is not sensibly weakened in the little change of distance, at which we can place ourselves from the centre of the earth; yet it is very possible that so high as the moon this power may differ much in strength from vhat it is here. To make an estimate, vhat might be the degree of this diminution, he considered with himself, that if the moon be retained in her orbit by the force of gravity, no doubt the primary planets are carried round the sun by the like power. And by comparing the periods of the several planets with their distances from the sun, he found, that if any pover like gravity held them in their courses, its strength must decrease in the duplicate proportion of the increase of distance. This he concluded by supposing them to move in perfect cireles concentrical to the sun, from Vhich the orbits of the greatest part of them do not much differ. Supposing, therefore, the power of gravity, when extended to the moon, to decrease in the same manner, he computed whether that force would he sufficient to keep the moon in her orbit. In this computation, being absent from books, he took the common estimate in use among geographers and our seamen, before Norwood had measured the earth, that 60 English miles were contained in one degree of latitude on the surface-of the earth. Dut as this is a very faulty supposition, each degree containing about 69; of our miles, his computation did not ansver expeetation; whence he concluded that some other cause must at least join with the action of the power of gravity on the moon. On this account he laid aside for that time any further thoughts upon this matter. But some years aſter, a letter, vhich he received from Dr. Hooke, put him on inquiring vhat vas the real ſigure, in which a body let fall from any high place descends, taking the motion of the earth round its axis into consideration. Such a body, having the same motion, vhich hy the revolution of the earth the place has from whence it falls, is to be eonsidered as projected forwards, and at tlie same time drawn down to the centre of the earth. This gave occasion to his resuming his former thoughts concerning the moon; and Picart, in France, having lately measured the earth, by using his measures, the moon appeared to be kept in her orbit purely by the pover of giavity; and consequently, that this power deereases as you recede from the centre of the earth, in the manner our author had formerly conjecturedl. Upon this principle he found the line deseribed by a falling body to be an ellipsis, the centre of the earth being one focus. And the primary planets moving in such orbits round the sun, he had the satisfaction to see, that this inquiry, which he had undertaken merely out of curiosity, could be applied to the greatest purposes. Hereupon he composed near a dozen propositions relating to the motion of the primary planets about the sun. Several years aſter this, some discourse he had with Dr. Halley, who at Cambridge made him a visit, engaged Sir Isaac Newton to resume again the consideration of this subject; and gave occasion to his writing the treatise which he published under the title of Mathematical principles oſ natural philosophy. This treatise, full of such variety of profound inventions, vas composed by him, from scarce any other materials than the few propositions beſore mentioned, in the space of one year and a half. The astronomers of Great Britain have not been less diligent in the practical, than successful in the theoretical part of the science. The foundation of the observatory at Greenvich vas laid in 1675, some years hefore the completion and publication of the discoveries of Newton. It is with the erection of this ediſice that the modern refinements in practical astronomy may be said to have commenced; its immediate object vas Io assist in the perfection of the science of navigation, and the series oſ observations, which have been made in it, has aſforded an invaluable fund of materials to astronomers of every country. A revard had been proposed, more than half a century beſore, by Philip the Third, of Spain, for the discovery of a mode of determining the longitude of a ship at sea; and the states of Iolland had followed his example: a large revard was also oſſered by the French government in the minority of Louis the Fifteenth. In 1674, Mr. St. Pierre, a Frenchman, had undertaken to determine the longitude of a place from observations of the moons altitude, und King Churles the Second had been induced to appoint a commission to examine his proposalss. Mr. Flamsteed vas consulted by the commissioners, and was added to their number: he showed the disadvantages of the method proposed by Mr. St. Pierre, and the inaccuracy of the existing tables of the lunar motions, as well as of the catalogues of the places of the stars, but expressed his opinion, that, if the tables were improved, it would be possible to determine the longitudes of places with suſſicient accuracy by lunar observations. The king, being informed of Flamsteeds repre- sentations, is said to have replied with enrnestness, that he must have the pluces oĩ the stars anew observed, examined, and corrected, for the use of his seamen; upon this Flamsteed was appointed Astronomer Royal, with a salury of 100 a year, and it was proposed to have an observatory huilt either in Iſyde Park, or at Chelsea college; but, upon Sir Christopher Wrens recommendation, the situation of Greenwich Park was preferred. In the year 1714, the DBritish Parliament offered £20 000 for a determination of the longitude oſ a ship at sea, without an error of 30 miles, and a smaller sum for a less accurate method, appointing at the same time a Board of Longitude for the examination of the methods which might be proposed. Under this act several rewards were assigned, and in 1774, it was superseded by another, which offers £5000 for the invention of any timekeeper, or other method, capable of determining the longitude of a place within I degree, and 10000 if within 30 miles; and a revard of £5000 to the author of any lunar tahles, which should he found within 15 seconds of the truth; alloving the Board also the pover of granting smaller sums at their diseretion. Timekeepers are at present very commonly employed in the British navy, and some of them have been capable of determining the longitude within half a degree, aſter having been two or three months at sea. The lunar tables, which have been employed for the Nautical Almanacs, are those of Professor Mayer, vho adopted the methods of calculation invented by Leonard Euler; but the tables of Mr. Burg, of Vienna, are still more accurate, and are said to be always within about ten seconds of the truth. The progress of astronomy, since the death of Newton, in 1727, has been fully adequate to what its most sanguine votaries could have hoped. The great discoveries oſ the aberration of the ſixed stars, and of the nutation of the earths axis, were made by our countryman Bradley, with the assistance of the instruments for vhich he was indebted to the delicate workmanship of our artists. Among these the names o Bird, Short, Sisson, Graham, Dollond, Harrison, and Ramsden have long been celebrated throughout Europe. The geographical operations, which have been performed in every part of the globe, have been chieſly condueted by the liberality of the French and English governments, although other countries have not been deficient in taking their share of the labour. The observations of the transit of Venus were twice made in the south seas by British navigators, vhom the munificence of our present sovereign enabled to undertake so arduous a voyage for this express purpose; and ve are indebted to the fund vhich vas granted on the occasion, as vell as to the zeal of the Astronomer Royal, for the experiments on the attraction of mountains, vhich were instituted after their returnn. In this country also, Dr. Herschel, besides many other important additions to our astronomical knovledge, has discovered a primary planet, and eight secondary ones, unknown beforee The astronomers of Sicily and Germany have, however, the honour of the ſirst discovery of the three humbler. members oſ the solar system which have been last introduced to our acquaintance, Ceres by Piazzi, Pallas by Olbers, and Juno hy Harding: and the mathematicians of France have excelled all their predecessors in the elaborate and refined application of the theory of gravitation, to the investigation of the most minute and intricate details of the celestial motions. l CHRONOLOGY OF ASTRONOMERS. PYTHAGORAS. HIPPARCH US. i 1300 U LUGH BETGNH T5:P E”NTCT US. WILLIAM H. TYCHOBRAH NAPI LECTURE XLIX. ON THE ESSENTIAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER. TuE ohjects, which have lately occcupied our inquiries, are the most sublime and magniſicent that nature any where exhibits to us, and the contemplation of them naturally excites, even in an uncultivated mind, an admiration of their dignity and grandeur. But all magnitude is relative,; and if ve examine with more calm attention,we shall find still greater scope for our investigation and curiosity, in the microscopic, than in the telescopic world. Pliny has very justly observed, that nature no where displays all her powers with greater activity, than in the minutest objects perceptible to our senses; and we may judge how wide a field of research the corpuscular affecti ons of matter afford, from the comparatively small progress that has hitherto been made in cultivating it. For while the motions of the vast bodies, which roll through the heavens, have been completely subjected to the most rigorous caleulations, we know nothing, but ſrom experience only, of the analogies by which the minute actions of the particles of matter are regulated. It is probable, however, that they all depend ultimately on the same mechanjcal principles. We have seen, for example, that the widely extended elevations and depressions of the ocean, which are raised by the attractive povers of the two great luminaries, and cover at once a half of the globe, are governed and combined according to the same laws, which determine the motions of the smaller waves excited hy different causes in a canal, the rapid tremors of a medium transmitting sound; or the inconceivably diminutive undulations which are capable of accounting for the phenomena of light, and which must be exerted in spaces as much smaller than those of sound, as a grain of sand is smaller than a mountain. Thus the annihilation of the eſſects of the semidiurnal changes of the tide; and the preservation of the diurnal change, in the harbour of Batsha, may be explained precisely in the same manner as the reſlection of red light frum a transparent substance, of such a VOL. I. 4 r thickness, as to be capuble of destroying a portion of violet light under the same circumstances. We are at present to descend from the affections of the large masses of matter, which form the great features of the universe, to the particular properties of the matter vhich constitutes them, as far as they are common to all matter in general; but those properties which are peculiar to certain kinds of matter only, being the subjects of chemical science, are not to be included in the discussion. IF we are asked for a definition of matter, it will be somewhat difficult to avoid all circuitous expressions. We may make gravitation a test of matter, but then we must say, that whatever is attracted by other matter, is also to be denominated matter, and this supposes the subject of our deſinition already known; besides that the property of attraction may also pussibly belong to substances not simply material; for the electrieal ſluid, if such a fluid exists, is probably attracted by matter, and yet it scems to be different in most respects from any modiſication of common matten. A similar diſiculty would occur if we attempted to define matter by its impenetrability or mutual repulsion, or if we considered every thing as material that is capable of affecting the senses We must, therefore, take it for granted ſhat matter is known without a deſinition, and we may deseribe it as a substance occupying space, or as a gravitating or ponderable substance. It cannot be positively determined vhether matter ĩs originally of one kind, owing its different appearances only to the form and arrangement of its parts; or whether there are various kinds of simple mutter, essentially distinct from each other; but the probability appears to he in favour of the former suppositionn. However this may he, the properties of mutter are by no means so simple in their nature, nor so easily reducible to general luvs, s the more mathematical doctrines oſ space and motion; and since our knowledge of them depends more on experience than on abstract principles, they may properly be considered as belonging to particular physies. We have found no inconvenience from the omission of the doctrine oſ matter as a part of the subject of mechanics; although, in treating of the strength of muterials, as subservient to pructical mechanics, it was necessary to consider the eſicets of some of these properties as deduced from experiment; but ĩt will appear that it was impossible to examine their origin and mutual connexion, without ; supposing a previous knowledge of many other departments of natural philosophy. We may distinguish the general properties of matter into two principal classes, those which appear to be inseparable from its constitution, and those which are only accidental, or which are not alvays attached to matter of all kindss The essential properties are chieſly extension and divisihility, density, repulsion, or impenetrability, inertia, and gravitation; the accidental properties are in great measure dependent on cohesion, as liquidity, solidity, symmetry of arrangement, cohesive elasticity, stiſfness, toughness, strength, and resilience. The extension of matter can scarcely be considered as a property separate from its impenetrability, unless we conceive that it can occupy space, without excluding other bodies from it. This opinion has indeed been maintained by some philosophers, vho have imagined that the minute particles which they suppose to constitute light, may penetrate the ultimate atoms of other matter without annihilating or displacing them; and iĩf this hypothesis vere admitted, it wvould be necessary to consider each particle of matter as a sphere of repulsion, extended without being impenetrable. The divisibility of matter is great beyond the power of imuagination, but we have no reason for asserting that it is inſinite; for the demonstrations, which have sometimes heen adduceid in favour of this opinion, are obviously applicable to space only. The inſinite divisibility of space seems to be essential to the conception that we have of its nature; and it may be strietly demonstrated, that it is mathematically possible, to draw an inſinite number of cireles between any given circle and its tangent, none of which shall touch either of them, except at the general point of contact; and that a ship, following always the same oblique course with respect to the meridian, ſor example, sailing north eastwards, would continue perpetually to approach the pole without ever completely reaching it. But when we inquire into the truth of the old maxim of the schools, that all matter is inſinitely divisible, we are by no means able to decide so positively. Newton observes, that it is doubtful vhether any human means may be suſficient to separate the particles of matter beyond a certain limit; and it is not impossible that there may be some constitution of atoms, or single corpuscles, on which their properties, as matter, depend, and vhich vould be destroyed if the units vere further divided; but it appears to be more prohuhle that there are no such atoms; and even if there are, iĩt is almost certain that matter is never thus annihiIated in the common course of nature. It remains to be examined how far we have any experience of the actual extent of the divisibility of matter; and we shall ſind no apprarance of any thing like a limit to this property. The smallest spherical nbjecet, visible to a good eye, is about '/ of an inch in diameter; hy the assistance of a mieroscope, ve may perhaps distinguish a body one hundredth purt as large, or æ of an inch in diameter. The thickness of gold lea is less than this, and the gilding of lace is still thinner, probably in some cases not above one ten millionth of an inch; so that, , of a grain would cover a square inch, and a portion, barely large enough to be visible by a microscope, might veigh only the 80 million millionth part of a grain. A grain of musk is said to be divisible into 320 quadriions of parts, each of whieh is eapable oſ afieeting the olfactory nerves. There are even living beings, visible to the microscope, of which a million million would not make up the hulk of a common grain of sand. But it is still more remarkable, that, as far as ve can discover, many of these animalcules are as complicated in their strueture as an elephant or a whale. It is true that the physiology of the various classes oſ animals is somewhat more simple as they deviate more ſrom the form of quadrupeds, and from that of the human species; the solid particles of the blood do not by any means vary in their magnitude in the same ratio with the bulk of the animal; and some of the lower elasses appear to approximate very much to the nature of the vegetable vorld. But there are single instances that seem vholly to destroy this gradation: Lyonnet has discovered a far greater variety of parts in the caterpillar of the willow butterſly, than we can ohserve in many animals oſ the lurgest dimensions; and among the microscopie insects in particular, we see a prodigality of machinery, subservient to the varivus purposes of the contracted life of the little animal, in the structure oſ which nature appears to be ostentatious of her power of giving perfection to her minutest works. If Nevtons opinion, respeeting the origin oſ the colours of natural bodies in general, vere suſſiciently established, it would afſord us a limit to the di- visibility oſ matter with respect to coloured substances; for the colours of thin transparent substances, which he considers as resembling those of most other substances, are no longer observable, in any known medium, when the thickness is less than about 445 of an inch. But we have positive evidence that eoloured substances may be reduced to dimensions far below this limit; besides the instance of the gilt wire, which has already been mentioned, a particle of carmine may still retain ĩts colour, when its thickness is no more than one thirty millionth of an ineh, or one sixtieth part of the limit deduced from the supposition of Newton; and it is therefore scarcely possible that the colours of such substances can precisely resemble those of thin plates, althongh they may perhaps still be in some measure analogous to them. Impenetrability is usually attributed to matter, from the common observation that two hodies cannot occupy the same place at once. And it is thus that ve distinguish matter from space; for example, vhen we dip an inverted jar into mercury, the air contained in the jar depresses the surface of the mercury, and prevents its occupy ing the space within the jar: but if the jar had been void of matter, like the space above the mercury of a barometer, nothing would have prevented its being ſilled by the mercury, as soon as either its weight, or the pressure of the atmosphere, urged it to enter the jar. i But it does not appear that our senses are ſully competent to extend this proposition to all substances, whether material or not. We cannot prove experimentally that the inſluence of gravitation is incapable of pervading even the ultimate particles of solid matter, for this power appears to suffer no diminution nor modification, vhen a third body is interposed between the two gravitating masses. In the same manner, a magnet operates as rapidly on a needle, through a plate of glass or of gold, whatever its thickness may be, as if a vacuum only intervened. It may, however, be inquired if the gold or the glass has not certain passages or pores, through which the inſluence may be transmitted: and it may be shown, in many instances, that substances, apparently solid, have abundant orifices into which other substances may enter; thus mercury may easily be made to puss through leather, or through vood, by the pressure oſ the atmosphere, or hy any other equal force: and, however great we may suppose the proportion of the pores to the solid matter, ĩt may be observed, that it requires only a more or less minute division of the matter, to reduce the magnitude of the interstices hetween the neighbouring particles within any given dimensions. Thus platina contains, in a cubic inch, above 200 thousand times as many gravitating atoms as pure hydrogen gas, yet both of these mediums are free ſfrom sensible interstices, and appear to be equally continuous; and there moy possibly be other substances in nature that contain in a given space 200 thousand times as many atoms as platina; although this supposition is not positively probable in all ĩts extent; for the earth is the densest oſ any of the celestial budies with which we are fully acquainted, and the earth is only one fourth as dense as if it vere composed entirely of platina; so that ve have no reason to believe that there exists in the solar syStem any considerable quantity of a substance even so dense as platina. Besides this porosity, there is still room for the supposition, that even the ultimate particles of matter may be permeable to the causes of attractions of various kinds, especially if those causes are immaterial: nor is there any thing in the unprejudiced study of physical philosophy that can induce us to doubt the existence of immaterial substunces; on the contrary we see analogies that lead us almost directly to such an opinion. The eleetrical fluid is supposed to he essentĩally diſferent from common matter; the general medium of light and heat, according to some, or the principle oſ caloric, according to others, is equally distinct from it. We see forms of matter differing in subtility and mobility, under the names of solids, liquids, and gases; above these are the semimaterial existences which produce the phenomena of electricity and magnetism, and eĩther caloric or a universal ether; higher still perhaps are the causes of gravitation, and the immediate agents in attractions of all kinds, which exhibit some phenomena apparently still more remote from all that is compatible with material bodies; and of these different orders of beings, the more reſined and immaterial appear to pervade freely the grosser. It seems therefore natral to believe that the analogy may be continued still further, until it rises into existences absolutely immateriul and spiritua. We knov not but that thousands of spiritual worlds may exist unseen for ever by human eyes; nor have we any reason tę suppose that even the presence of matter, in a given spot, necessarily excludes these existences from it. Those who maintain that nature always teems vith life, wherever living beings can be placed, may therefore speculate with freedom on the possibility of independent worlds; some existing in different parts of space, others pervading each other, unseen and unknown, in the same space, and others again to which space may not be a necessary mode of existence. . Whatever opinion we may entertain with respect to the ultimate impenetrability of matter in this sense, it is probable that the particles of matter are absolutely impenetrable to each other. This impenetrability is not hovever commonly called into eſſect in cases of apparent contact. If the particles of matter constituting vater, and steam, or any other gas, are of the same nature, those of the gas cannot be in perſect contact; and when vater is contracted by the efſect of cold, or when two ſluids have their joint bulk diminished by mixture, as in the case of alcohol, or sulfuric acid, and vater, the particles cannot have been in absolute contact before, although they vould have resisted with great force any attempt to compress them. Metals too, of all kinds, which have been melted, become permanently more dense when they are hammered and laminatedl. A still more striking and elegant illustration of the nature of repulsive force is exhibited in the contact of two pieces of polished glass The colours of thin plates afford us, by comparison vith the observations of Newton, the most delicate micrometer that can be desired, for measuring any distances less than the ten thousandth of an inch: it was remarked by Newton himself, that when two plates oſ glass are within about this distance oſf each other, or somewhat nearer, they support each other's weight in the same manner as if they vere in actual contact, and that some additional force is required, in order to make them approach still nearer; nor does it appear probable that the contact ĩs ever perfect, orherwise they might be expected to cohere in such a manner as to become one mass. Professor Robison has ascertained by experiment the foree necessary to produce the greatest possible degree of contact, and ſinds it equivalent to a pressure of about a thousand pounds for every square inch of glass. Tt is therefore obvious that in all common cases of the contact of two distinct bodies, it must be this repulsive force that retains them in their situation. I have found that glass, placed on a surface of metal, exhibits this force nearly in the same degree as i? placed on another piece of glass; it is also independent of the presence of air; but under vater it disappears. existence of a repulsive force, extending beyond the actual surface of a material substance, being proved, it has heen conjectured by some that such a force, unconneeted with any central atom, may be suſficient for producing all the phenomena of matter. This representation may be admitted vithout much difficulty, provided that it be allowed that the force becomes infinite at or near the centre; but it has been sometimes supposed that it is every where less than inſinite, and consequently that matter is not absolutely impenetrable; such a supposition appears however to lead to the necessity of believing that the particles of matter must sometimes be annihilated, vhich is not a very probable opinion. The magnitude of the repulsive force, by which the particles of any single body are enabled to resist compression, increases nearly in proportion to the degree of compression, or to the decrease of the distances between the particles. This is almost a necessary consequence of any primary law that can be imagined, for the immediate actions of the particles: for instance, if the repulsion increased either as the square or as the cube of the distance diminished, the effect oſ a double change of dimensions vould alvays he nearly a double change of the repulsive force; that is, if an elastic substance were compressed one thousandth part of its bulk, it would in either case resist twice as much as if it were only compressed one two thousandth. It is obvious that if the particles of matter are postessed of a repulsive force decreasing in any regular proportion with the increase of distance, they can never remain at rest without the operation of some external pressure, but will always retain a tendency to expand. This is the case of all elastic ſluids, the density of which is found to vary exactly as the compressing force, whence it may be demonstrated, that the primary repulsive force of the particles must increase in the same proportion as the distance decreases. It follows also that this force can only be exerted between such particles as are either actually or very nearly in contact with each other; since it requires no greater pressure, acting on a given surface, to retain a gallon of air in the space of half a gallon, than to retain a pint in the space of hal? a pint; which could not be, if the particles exercised a mutual repulsion at all possible distances. Mr. Dalton has proposed a singular theory respecting the constitution and mutuai repulsion of elastic ſluids; he imagines that when any two gases of different kinds are mixed, the particles of each gas repel only the similar particles of the same gas, without exerting any action on those of the other gas, except when the ultimate solid atoms chanee to interferee The idea is ingenious and original, and may perhaps be oſ use in connecting some facts together, or m leading to some other less improbable suppositions; but iĩt may easily be shown, that Mr. Dalton's hypothesis cannot possibly be true in all its extent, since it would follow from it, that two portions of gases, of diſfferent kinds, could not exist, for a sensible time, in the same vessel, without being uniformly diffused throughout it, while the fact is elearly otherwise; for hydrogen gas remains, vhen left completeſy at rest, a very considerabſe time above, and carbonic acid gas below, a portion of common air with which it is in contaet; nor is there any circumstance, attending the mixture of gases, which may not be explained without adopting so paradoxical an opinionn Mr. Dalton thinks that, from the laws of hydrostaties, no two guses, not chemically united, could remain mixed, if their particles acted mutually on cach other: but the laws of hyarostaties do not apply to the mixture of single particſes of ſluids of different kinds; since they are only derived from the supposition of a eollestion of purticles of the same kind. In liquids and in solius this repulsive force appears at first sight to be vanting; but when we consider that the particles both of liquids and of solids are actuated by the attractive force of cohesion, we shall see the necessity of the presence of a repubive foree; in order to balance ĩt; it is, therefore, probable that the particles of aeriform ſluids still retain their original repulsive powers,. when they are reduced to a state of liquidity or of solidity, by being subjected to the action of a second force, which causes them to cohere. : The mutual repulsion of the particles of mattẽr is a reciprocal force, acting equally, in opposite directions, on each of the bodies concerned. It scarcely requires either experiment or argument to show, that if tvo bodies repel each other, neither of them will remain at rest, but both of them will move, vith equal quantities of motion. Thus, if a portion of condensed air he made to act upon the hullet of an air gun, it will force the gun hackwards with as much momentum as it impels the bullet forwards. VOL. I. 4 Inertia is that property of matter, by which it retains its state of rest or of uniform motion, with regard to a quiescent space, as long as no foreign cause occurs to change that state. This property depends on the intimate constitution of matter; it is generally exhibited by means of the force of repulsion, which enables a body in motion to displace another, in order to continue its motion, or hy means of some attractive force, which causes tvo bodies to approach their common centre oſ inertia with equal momenta. Another universal property of matter is reciprocal gravitation, of whieh the force is directly in the joint proportion of the quantities of matter attracting each other, and inversely as the square of their distance In order to prove that the gravitation towards a given substance, for instance, the veight of a body, or its gravitation towards the earth, is precisely in proportion to the mass or inertia of the moveable matter of which it consists, Sir Isaac Newton made two equal pendulums, with hollow balls of equal size: in order that the resistance of the air might he the same with respect to both, he placed successively within the balls a variety of different substances, and found that the time of vibration remained always the same; whence he inferred that the attraction was proportional in all cases to the quantity of matter possessing inertia. For if any of these substances had contained particles, capable of receiving and communicating motion, yet without being liable to gravitation, they vould have retarded the vibrations of the pendulum, by adding to the quantity of matter to be moved, without increasing the moving foree. The law of gravitation, which indicates the ra ĩo of its increase with the diminution of the distauce, is principally deduced from astronomical observations and computations: it is the simplest that can be conceived for any inſluence, that either spreads from a centre, or converges towards a centre; for ĩt supposes the force acting on the same substance to be always proportional to the angular space that ĩt occupies. Newton appears to have considered these laws of gravitation, which he first discovered, rather as derivative than as original properties of matter; and although it has often been asserted that we gain nothing by referring them to pressure or to impulse, yet it is undouhtedly advancing a step in the explanation of natural phenomena, to lessen the number of general prineĩples; and if it were possible to refer either all attraction to a modification of re- pulsion, or all repulsion to a modification of attraction, we should make an improvement of the same kind, as Newton made, vhen he reduced all the diversiſied motions of the heavenly bodies to the universal laws of gravitation only. WE have, however, at present, little prospect of such a simpliſication. lllE It has heen of late very customary to consider all the phenomena of nature as derived from the motions of the co rpuscles of matter, agitated hy forces varying according to certain intricate laws, which are supposed to be primary qualities, and for which it is a kind of sacrilege to attempt to assign any ulterior cause. This theory was ch iefly introduced by Boscovich, and it has prevailed very widely among algebraical philosophcrs, ho have been in the habit of deducing all their quantities from each other by mathe matical relations, making, for example, the force a certain function or power of the distance, and then imagining that its origin ĩs suſiciently explained; and vhen a geometrician has translated this language into his own, and converted the formula into a eurve, vith as many flexures and reflections as the labyrmth of Daedalus, he imagines that he has depicted to the senses the whole procedure of nature. Such methods may often be of temporary advantage, as long as ve are contented to consider them as approximations, or as classiſications of phenomena only; but the grand scheme of the universe must surely⸗ amidst all the stupendous diversity oſ parts, preserve a more digniſied sim. plicity of plan and of principles, than is compatible with these complicated Buppositionss i  To sho, says Newton, in the preface to the second edition of his Opties, that I do not take gravity for an essential property oſ bodies, I have added one question concerning its cause, choosing to propose it by way of a question, because I am not yct satisſied about it, for want of experiments In the query here mentioned, he proceeds from the supposition oſ an elastic medium, pervading all space; a supposition, vhich he ad vances with considerable conſidence, and which he supports by very strong arguments, deduced as well from the henomena of light and heat, as from the analogy of the eleetrical and magnetic inſluences. This medium he supposes to be much rarer within the dense bodies of the sun, the stars, the planets, and the comets, than in the empty celestial spaces between them, and to grow more and more dense at greater distances from them, so that all these bodies are naturally forced towards each other by the excess of pressure. The eſfects of gravitation might be produced by a medium thus constituted, if ĩts particles were repelled by all material substances with a force decreasing, like other repulsive forces, simply as the distances increase; its density would then be every where such as to produce the appearance of an attraction varying like that of gravitation. Such an ethereal medium vould therefore have the advantage of simplicity, in the original law of its action, since the repulsive foree which is known to belong to all matter, would Le suſficient, vhen thus modiſied, to aceount for the principal phenomena of attraction. It may be questioned vhether a medium, eapable of producing the eſfects of gravitation in this manner, vould also be equally susceptible of those modiſications which we have supposed to be necessary for the transmission oſ light, In cither case it must be supposed to pass through the apparent substance oſ all material bodies with the most perfect freedom, and there would, thereſore, be no occasion to apprehend any diſſiculty from a retardation of the celestial motions; the ultimate impenetrable particles of matter being perhaps scattered as thiuly through its external form, as the stars are scattered in a nebula, vhich has still the distant appearance of a unifſorm light and of a continuous surface: and there seems no reason to douht the possibility of the propagation of an undulation through the Newtonian medium vith the actual velocity of light. It must he remenibered that the difference of its pressure is not to be estimated ſfrom the actual bulk of the earth or any other planet alone, but from the eſeet of the sphere of repulsion of vhich that planet is the centre; and ve may then deduce the force of gravitation from a medium of no very enormous elasticity. t : We shall hereaſter ſind that a similar combination of a simple pressure with a variable repulsion is also observable in the force of cohesion; and supposing two particles of matter, floating in such an elastic medium, capable of producing gravitation, to approach each other, their mutual attraction would at once be changed from gravitation to eohesion, upon the exelusion of the portion of the medium intervening between them. This supposition is, however, direetly opposite to that which assigns to the elastic medium the pover of passing freely through all the interstices of the ultimate atoms of matter, since it could never pass between two atoms cohering in this manner; we cannot therefore, at present, attempt to assert the identity of the forces of gravitation and cohesion so strongly, as this theory would allow us to do, if it could be established. In short, the whole of our inquiries, respecting the intimate nature of forces of any kind, must be considered merely as speculative amusements, which are of no ſurther utility than as they make our views more general, and assist our experimental investigations. LECTURE L. ON COHESION. THOSE properties of matter, which we have lately examined, if they are not absolutely inseparable ſrom its constitution, are, at least, always found attached to such matter as ve are able to submit to our experiments. There are, however, many other general aſfections, to which all matter appears to be liable, although none is perpetually subjected to them, and these are principally, if not entirely, dependent on the force of cohesion. In order that any two particles of matter may cohere, it is necessary that they be within a very small distance of each other, and the density of any substance, composed of cohesive particles, must probably always be more than half as great as that of water. There are indeed some solids apparently a Iittle lighter than this, but they appear to be extremely porous; and perhaps the solid substances of some of the celestial hodies may also he a little more rare. It frequently happens, that the compression of an elastic fluid alone is sufficient to cause the foree of cohesion to tuke place between its particles; thus, if common steam be exposed, in a close vessel, to a pressure greater than that of the atmosphere, it will be wholly condensed into vater, provided that no elevation of temperature be alluwed; and the same has been experimentally shown of many other aeriform fluids, vhich may be reduced to liquids by pressure; but others of these ſluids retain their elasticity, notvithstanding any foree which human art can apply to them. It is probable that as soon as the particles of any elastic fluid are brought vithin the reach of the force of cohesion, it commences at once in its full extent, s0 as to cause them to rush together, until ĩt is bulanced by that of repulsion, which continually increases as the particles approach nearer to each other; they must then remain, perhaps after some vibrations, in a state of equilibrium; and if any cause should tend to separate them, or to bring them nearer together, they would resist it, in either case, ith a foree proportional to the degree of extension or compression. The distance, at which the force of cohesion commences, is not the same for all kinds of matter, nor even for the same substance at different temperatures; it is smaller for vapours of all kinds, in proportion as their temperature is higher, the cohesion itself being also smaller. If the experiments on the density oſ steam have been correct, it follows that the force of repulsion must inerease more rapidly than the distances diminish, for the elasticity of water is nearly ten times as great as that which would be inferred from the compression of steam into a substance of equal density: this supposition agrees also with the experiments on the mean density of the earth, which is probably not so great as it would be if the foree of repulsion increased in the simple ratio oſ the density. The lav of repulsion appears also to he in some degree modiſied by the effect of heat, vhieh inereases its force at greater distances more considerably than at smaller. It appears indeed, ſrom the diminution of the elasticity of a spring by heating it, that the repulsive force of the particles of bodies at very small distances is even diminished by heat, unless the force be again supposed to decrease much more rapidly than the distance diminishes: thus the diminution of the elasticity of iron by heat is about thirty times as great as the increase of the distance of its particles; so that the original repulsive force must probably be somewhat diminished, although less than the cohesive force. At greater distances, however, the ſorce of repulsion ĩs certainly increased; for the elasticity of vapours and gases of all kinds is evidently greater as the temperature is higher. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 550.) The cohesion of two or more particles of matter to each other does not interſere with their power of repelling other particles situated in a different direction: thus, two pieces of glass require to be brought together with considerable force, and generally with some frietion, before they can hegin to cohere; and a small drop of vater, falling lightly on the surface of a pond, may remain for some instants without coming into perfect contact with it: the same cireumstance is also still more observable in spirit of vine a little varmed. The first and simplest eſſeet of eohesion is to produce liquidity. That all liquids possess some cohesion, is very obvious, from their tendency to assume a spherical form vhen they are suſficiently detached from other sub- stances, and from the suspension of a drop ſrom any solid, to which its upper surface adheres with suſlicient forcee Without cohesion, indeed, a liquid would he only a very ſine powder, except that the particles of powders have not the pover of moving vith perfect freedom on each other, which constitutes ſluidity. The apparent weakness of the cohesion of liquids is entirely owing to this mobility, since their form may he changed in anv degree without considerably inereasing the distances of their purticles, and ĩt is only under particular circumstances that the effeets oſ their cohesion can become sensible. i When a liquid is considered as unlimited in ĩits extent, the repulsion of its particles, situated in all possible dircctinns vith regard to each other, may be supposed in all cases preciscly to halance the eohesion, which is derived from the actions of particles similarly situated; and this must also be the state of the internal parts of every detached porſion of a liquid. where they are so remote ſfrom the surſace as to be bevond the minute distance which is the limit of the action of these forces. Dut the external parts of the drop will not remain in the same kind of equilibrium: they may be considered as a thin cuating of a liquid surrounding a substance vhieh resists only in a direction perpendicular to its surface, and does not interfere with the mutual actions of the particles of the liquid. Nov since the repulsive force increases as the distance diminishes, it must be exerted more powerfully by the nearest particles, while the cohesion is directed equally towards all the particles within a certain distance, and wherever the surface ĩs curved, the joint cohesive force vill be directed to a remoter part of the curve tham the repulsive force opposed to it, so that each partiele will be urged, by the combination of these forces, tovards the concave side of the curve, and the more as the curvature is greater; hence the coating of the liquid, thus constituted, must exert a force on the parts in contact with it, precisely similar to that of a ſlexible surface, vhich is every where stretched hy an equal force; and from this simple principle ve may derive all the efſeets produced by a eohesion of this kind, vhich, from its being most commonly ohserved in the ascent of vater in capillary tubes, has been denominated capillary attraction. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 531.) It is, therefore, a general law, that the surface oſ every detached portion of a ſluid must every where have such a curvature, as to be able to withstand the hydrostatical pressure which acts against it; and hence we may calculate in many cases the properties of the curve which it must form; but in other cases the exact calculation becomes extremely intricate, and perhaps impracticable. A drop descending in a vacuum would be perfectly spherical; and if its magnitude were inconsiderable, it would be of the same form when descending through the air; a small bubble rising in a liquid must also be spherical; but where the drop or the bubble is larger, its curvature will be greatest where the internal pressure js greatest, or where the external pressure is least, and in different cases this pressure may be differently distributed. Where a drop is suspended from a solid, its length may be such that the pressure at its upper part may become negative, and its surface vill then be concave instead of convex: and vhen a bubble rises to the surface of a liquid, it often carries vith ita film of the liquid, of which the weight is probably smaller than the contractile force with which the surface resists the escape of the air, so that, from the magnitude of the contractile force, ve may determine the greatest possible veight of a bubble of given dimensions. A slight imperfection of ſluidity prubably favours the formation of detached bubbles, by retarding the ascent of the air, but it has a still greater effect in prolonging their duration when formed. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 552.) In order to determine the forms of the surfaces of liquids in the cases vhich most commonly occur, it is necessary to examine how they are affected by the action of other liquids, and of solids of different descriptions. Supposing the horizontal surface of a liquid to be in contact with a vertical plane surface of a solid of half the attractive pover, it will remain at rest in consequence of the equilibrium of attractions; for the particles situated exactly at the junction of the surfaces may be considered as actuated hy three forces; one deduced from the effect of the liquid, the other two from that of the two equal portions of the solid above and below the surface of the ſluid; and it may be shown that the combinatioũ of these three forces will produce a joint result in the direction of gravity; consequently the direction of the surface must remain the same as when it is subjected to the force of gravity alone, since the surface of every ſluid at rest must be perpendicular to the joinb direction of all the forces acting on it. But if the attractive power of the solid he more than half as great as that of the liquid, the result of the forces will be inclined tovards the solid, and the surface of the liquid, in order to be perpendicular to it, must be more elevated at the side of the vessel than ælseVOL. I. 4 n where, and thereſore concave; consequently the ſluid must ascend until ĩt arrives at a position capubl|æ oſ antording an equilibrium in this manner: if, on the contrary, the attractive power of the solid be weaker, the liquid vill descend, and its surſace vill be convex. (Plate XXXIX. F ig. 5508.) It may also be shown, that if the attractive power of the solid be equal to that of the liquid, or still greater, it vill be wetted by the liquid, which vill rise until its surface acquires the same direction with that of the solid; and in other cases the angle of contact will be greater in proportion as the solid is less attractivee These conclusions are obtained by comparing the common surface of the liquid and solid with the surface of a single liquid, of vhich the attractive power is equal only to the difference of the respective povers of the substances concerned; and the comparison is equally applicable to the contact of two liquids of different densities. . The magnitude of the superſicial cohesion or contractility of a liquid may be expressed, for a certain extent, by a certain weight; thus every inch of th e surface of water is stretched each way by a force equal to the weight of the hundredth part of a cubic inch of water, or to two grains and a half: and for each ineh of the surface of mercury, the force is equivalent to 17 grains, hich is the weight of /4 of a cubic inch of mercury. Thus if a solid of any form, of which the surfaces are vertical, and vhich is capable of being wetted by either of these ſluids, be immersed into a reservoir containing it, the ſluid vill be elevated around ĩit to such a height, that 2 or 17 graius, for each inch of the circumference of the solid, vill remain above the general level of the reservoir, the surface assuming nearly the same form as a very long and slender elastic rod, ſixed horizontally at one end, and bearing a large weight at the other. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 554) The elevation oſ the summit of an extended surface of water, in contact with the ſlat and upright surface of a solid which is wetted by it, is one seventh of an inch: but when two such surfaces, for instance, two plates of glass, are brought near to each other, the elevation of the water between them must be greater than this, in order that each inch of the line of contact may support its proper veight: thus, if the distunce vere one fiftieth of an inch, the elevation would be a whole inch; and if the distance vere smaller than this, the elevation would be greater in the sume proportion; so that when two plates are placed in such a manner as to touch each other at one of their upright edges; the outline of the vater raised between them assumes the form of a hyperbola. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 535.) The weight supported by the cohesion of the water in a tube may be determined, in a similar manner, from the extent of the circumſerence; the height being an inch in a tube one twenty ſiſth of an inch in diameter, or as much greater as the diameter of the tube is smaller: and in a tube wetted vith mereury the height would be half as great. It is obvious that iſ the lower part of the tube he either contracted or dilated, the height oſ the ſluid vill remain unaltered, while its weight may be varied without limit; ſor the hydrostatical pressure on the surface is the same, in both these cases, as iſ the diameter oſ the tube were equal throughout its length. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 536.) The attractive force of glass to mercury iĩs less than half as great as the mutual attraction of the particles of mercury. and the surface of mercury in a dense gluss vessel becomes, therefore, convex and depressed; the angle of contact being about 140°, and the depression one 17th of an inch. Between two plates oſ glass, the depression of mercury is an inch when their distance is 4 and in a tube,, when its diumeter is  of an inch. late XXXIX. Fig. 587, 588.) A liquid may also adhere to a horizontal surface which is gradually raised ſrom it, until the hydrostatical pressure becomes sufficient to overpower the cohesion of its superſicial parts; the internal part of the fluid being usually raised, not immediately by the force of cohesion, but by the pressure of the atmosphere. The solid hears the whole veight of the liquid which is elevated above the surface; and vhen the surface is perfectly wetted, this weight is equal, at the moment of separation, to the hydrostatical pressure, or rather sucetion, corresponding to the height; but in other cases the weight may be somewhat greater than the hydrostatical pressure on the surface of the solid, on account of the elevation which surrounds the body, and which is not compensated by the excavation immediately under it. A surface thus raised from water will elevate it to the height of one fifth of an inch, and vill require a force of 504 grains for each square inch, in order to overcome the apparent attraction of the water; and for mercury the utmost height is about one seventh of an inch. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 539, 540.) A detached portion of a liquid may stand on any surface, which it is not capuble of vetting, at a height which is different according to its magnitude, and to the attraction of the surface. If the drop is very small, ĩts form may be nearly spherical; but when its extent becomes considerable, its height must always be less than that at which the liquid would separate from a horizontal surface; and it vill approach the nearer to this limit, as its attraction to the surface on which iĩt stands is veaker. Thus a wide portion of mercury stands on glass at the height of4 of an inch, and on paper nearly at ;; and a portion of water will stand on a cabbage leaf, or on a table streved vith the seeds of lycopodium, nearly at the height of one fifth of an inch. Plate XXXIX. Fig. 541.) For the operation oſa powder like lycopodium, ĩt appears to be only necessary, that it should possess a weaker power of attraction than water, and should, therefore, be incapahle of being readily wetted by it: each particle of the powder, being then but partially in contact with the water, will project beyond its surface, and prevent its coming into contact with any of the surrounding bodies, while the surface assumes such a curvature as is suſficient to withstand the pressure of the internal parts. (late XXXIX. Fig. 549.) When a dry and light substance of any kind is placed on the surface of vater, its weight is not suſſicient to bring it within the distance at which cohesion commences, and it floats, surrounded by a slight depression. Any substance of this kind, or any other substance surrounded hy a depression as a ball of glass or iron floating on mercury, appears to be attracted by another similar substance in its neighbourhood; for the depression between the two substunces is increased, and the pressure of the ſluid on that side is consequently lessened, s0 that they are urged together, by a foree which varies inversely as the square of the distancee And in the same manner, when two bodies, surrounded by an elevation, approach each other, they exhibit an attractive force of a similar nature, the pressure of the atmosphere being diminished by the weight of the water, which is raised between them to a greater height than on the opposite sides. But when a body, surrounded by a depression, approaches another, which is surrounded by an elevation, they seem to repel each other, the pressure of the water urging the one, and that of the atmosphere the other, in opposite directions. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 548.) IF two smooth plates of any kind are perfectly vetted by a ſluid, and brought into contact, they exhibit an appearance of cohesion, which is so much the greater as the quantity of fluid is smaller: if we attempt to separate them, the ſluid is drawn inwards, 30 as to have its surface made concave, and it resists the separation of the plates with a certain force, which acts vith a hydrostatic advantage so much the greater, as their distance is smaller, and hence produces the appearance of a cohesion varying in proportion to the distance. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 544.) Supposing the two plates to he separated at one end, and the fluid between them to assume the form oſ a drop, one of the marginal surfaces of the drop, being narrower than the other, will act with a greater advantage, like a tube of smaller diameter, and will tend to drav the drop tovards it; and the apparent attraction towards the line of contact of the glasses will increase in proportion as the square oſ the distance decreases. This result was experimentally observed almost a century ago, but it has' been usually explained on mistaken grounds. (Plate XXXIX. Fjg. 545.) The attractive power of vater being greater than that of oils, a small portion of oil thrown on water is caused to spread on ĩit with great rapidity by means of the force of cohesion; for it does not appear that auy vant of chemical affinity, between the substances concerned, diminishes their cohesive power; water readily adheres to tallow when solid, and prohably essential oils would adhere still more readily to icee There is, however, some difficulty in understanding how these oĩls can so suddenly come vithin the Iimit of the cohesive force of water, while the drops of vater themselves sometimes remain for a few seconds beyond it. A sponge afſords us a familiar instance of the application of capillary atI traction to useſul purposes: it is well known, that in order fo ĩts speedy operation, it requires to be previously moĩũtened, by the assistance of a little pressure, othervise it exhibits the same appearance of repulsion that is observable in many other cases where the coutact is imperfect. The absorption of moisture hy sugar depends on the same principle, and here the tubes are so minute, that the height oſ ascent appears to be almost unlimited The magnitude of the cohesion between ſluids and solids, as vell as of the particles of ſluids with each other, is more directly shown hy an experiment on the continuance oſ a column of mercury, in the tube of a barometer, at a height considerably greater than that at which it usually stands, on account of the pressure of the atmosphere. If the mercury has been vell boiled in the tube, it may be made to remain in contact with the closed end, at the height of 70 inches or more; and by agitation only it may be made to cohere so strongly, as to occupy the whole length of the tube of a common barometer, which ĩs several inches more than the height at which the pressure oſ the atmosphere sustuins it. A small siphon may also convey mercury from one vessel into another in the vacuum of an air pump: and in both these cases it is obvious that no other force than cohesion can retain the upper surface of the mercury in contact with the glass, or jts internal parts iu contact with each other. JEE The force of eohesion may also be exerted-by solid substances on other solids, either of the same kind, or oſ different kinds. Thus two masses oſ Iead, when once united by pressure, assisted by a little frietion, require a very considerable force to sepurate them, and it may be shown either by measuring this force, or by suspending the lead in the vacuum of the air pump, that the pressure of the atmosphere is not materially concerned in producing this appearance of cohesion, since its magnitude much excecds that of the atmospherical pressure. A cohesion of this Kind is sometimes of practical utility in the arts; little ornaments of laminated silver remaining attached to iron or steel, with which they have heen made to cohere by the poverful pressure of a blow, s0 as to form one mass vith jt. The contact of two pieces of lead, although intimate enough to produce a considerable cohesion, is hy no means so complete as to unite the parts into one mass; the union, however, appears to be nearly of the same kind as the common cohesion of aggregation; and iſ the lead were softened into an amalgam by the addition of mereury, the coliesion of the two masses vould become preciscly the same as the internal cohesion of each mass. Harder substances such as marble or glass, cohere but weakly, perhaps hecause their surfuces are never so perfectly adjusted to each other as to touch throughout. The interposition of a ſluid usually increases the apparent attraction oſ such substances, but this circumstance has already been explained from the eſſect of the capillary contraction of its surface; and when the substances are Mbolly i immersed in a ſluid, the cohesion is little if at all increased?c The immediate cause of solidity, as distinguished from liquidity, ĩs the lateral adhesion of the particles to each other, to which the degree of hardness or solidity is always proportional. This adhesion prevents any change of the relative situation oſ the particles, so that they cannot he withdrawn from their places, without experiencing a considerable resistance from the force of cohesion, while those of liquids may remain equally in contact vith the neighbouring particles, notwithstanding their change of form. Vhen a perſect solid is extended or compressed, the particles, being retained in their situations hy the force oſ lateral adhesion, can only approach directly to each other, or be withdrawn further from each other, and the resistance is nearly the same, as if the sume substance, in a fluid state, vere inelosed in an unalterable vessel, and foreibly compressed or dilated. Thus the resistance of ice to extension or compression is found by experiment to diſfer very little from that of water contained in a vessel; and the same eſſect may be produced even when the solidity is not the most perfect which the substunce admits; for the immediate resistance of iron or steel to ſlexure is the same whether it may be harder or softer. It often happens, however, that the magnitude of the lateral adhesion is so much limited as to allow a greater facility of extension or compression, and ĩt may yet retain a power of restoring the bodies to their original form by its renetion. This force may even he the principal or perhaps the only source oſ the hody's elasticity: thus vhen a piece of elastic gum is extended, the mean distance oſ its particles is not materially inereased, for it is aid to beeome rather more than less dense during its extension; consequently the ehange of form is rather to be attributed to a displacement of the particles, than to their separation to a greateſ distance from each other, and the resistance must be derived from the lateral adhesion only: some other substances also, approaching more nearly to the nature of liquids, may be extended to many times their original length, with a resistance continually increasing; and in such cases there can scarcely be any material change of the speciſic gravity of these substances. Professor Robison has mentioned the juice of bryony as affording a remarkable instance of such a viscidity. It is probable that the immediate cause of the lateral adhesion of solids is a symmetrical arrangement of their constituent parts: it is certain that almost all bodies are disposed, in becoming solid, to assume the form of crystals, which evidently indicates the existence of such an arrangement; and all the hardest bodies in nature are of a crystalline form. It appears, therefore, consistent both with renson and vith experience to suppose that a crystallization more or less perfect is the universal cause of solidity. We may imagine that when the particles of matter are disposed without any order, they can afford no strong resistance to a motion in any direction, but when they are regularly placed in certain situations with respeet to each other, any change of form must displace them in such a manner, 4ò to increase the distance of a whole rank at once; and hence they may be enabled to cooperate in resisting such a change. Any inequality of tension in a particular part of a solid is also probably so far the cause of hardness, as it tends to increase the strength of union of any part of a series of particles which must be displaced by a change of form. The immediate resistance of a solid to extension or compression is most properly called its elasticity; although this term has sometimes heen used to denote a facility of extension or compression, arising from the weakness oſ this resistance. A practical mode of estimating the force of elasticity has already been explained, and according to the simplest statement of the nature of cohesion and repulsion, the weight of the modulus of elasticity is the measure of the actual magnitude of each of these forces; and it follows that an additional pressure, equal to that of the modulus, would double the force of cohesion, and require the particles to be reduced to half their distance in order thęt the repulsion might balance it; and in the same manner an extending force equal to the weight of half the modulus vould reduce the force of cohesion to one half, and extend the substance to twice its dimensions. But, if, as there is some reason to suppose, the mutual repulsion of the purticles of solids varies a little more rapidly than their distance, the modulus of elasticity will be a little greater than the true measure of the whole eohesive and repulsive force: this difference will not, however, aſfect the truth of our calculatſons respeeting the properties oſ elastic bodies, founded on the magnitude of the modulus as already determined. The stiffness of a solid is measured by its immediate resistance to any force tending to change its form; in this sense, if the force be applied so as to extend or to compress it, or to overcome its Iateral adhesion by the eſfect vhich we have ſormerly called detrusion, the primitive elasticity and rigidĩty of the substance, together with its magnitude, will determine its stifſness: but iĩf the force be otherwise applied, so as to produce flexure or torsion, the form of the body must also be taken into the calculation, in the manner which has already been explained in the lecture on passive strength. The stiffness oſ a body with respect to any longitudinal force is directly as its transverse section, and inversely as its length; for the same force will compress or extend a rod 100 yards long s0 as to change its length an inch, that will produce a change of only half an inch in a rod 50 yards long. We have seen that the space through which a body may be extended or compressed, without any permanent alteration of form, constitutes its toughness: that its strength, or the ultimate resistance vhich it aſſfords, depends on the joint magnitude of its toughness and elasticity or stifſness, and that its resilience, or the power oſ overcoming the energy or impetus of a body in motion, is proportional to the strength and toughness conjointly. Soſtness, or want of solidity, is in general accompanied by a proportional susceptibility of permanent alteration of form without fracture; sometimes, hovever, from a want of cohesioh, a soft body is at the same time britũe. Soſt substances, which are capable of direct extension to a considerable degree are called viscous or tenacious; of these, birdlime, seuling wux, and glass suſſiciently heated, are some of the most remarkablee IIurder substances vhieh have the same property are called ductile, and when the alteration is made by percussion and compression, they are termed malleablee OF all substances gold is perhaps the most ductile; the thinness oſ lea g ld and of the gilding of silver wire has already heen mentioned; and ĩt is said that VOL. I. 41 a single grain of gold has been dravn into a wire 500 yards in lengih, and consequently little more than ææ of an inch in diameter. The ductility or tenacity of a spider's web is of a different kind, it is particularly shown by its capability of being twisted, almost without limit, and of accommodating itself to its new position without any efſort to untvist. Vith respect to the ultimate agent by which the effects of cohesion are produced, if it is allovable to seek for any other agent than a fundamental property of matter, it hus already been observed, that appearances extremely similar might be derived from the pressure of a universal medium of great elasticity; and we see some eſſects, so nearly resembling them, vhich are unquestionably produced by the pressure of the atmosphere, that one can scarcely avoid suspecting that there must he some analogy iu the causes. Two plates of metal, vhich cohere enough to support euch other in the open air, will oſten separate in a vacuum: vhen a boy dravs along a stone by a piece of wet leather, the pressure of the atmosphere appears to be materially concernedl. The well known experiment, of the two exhausted hemispheres of Magdehurg, aſfords a still more striking instance of apparent cohesion derived from atmospherical pressure; and i ve place between them a thick ring of elustic gum, we may represent the natural equilibrium between the forces of cohesion and of repulsion; for the ring would resist any small additional pressure vith the same force as would be required for separating the hemispheres so far, as to allow it to expand in an equal degree: and at a certain point the ring would expand no more; the air vould be admitted, and the cohesion destroyed, in the same manner as when a solid of any Eind is torn asunder. But all suppositions founded on these analogies must be considered as merely conjectural; and our knowledge of every thing which relates to the intimate constitution of matter, partly ſfrom the intricacy oſ the subjeet, and partly for want oſ suſlicient experiments, is at present in a state of great uncertuinty and imperſeetion. One of the most powerful agents, in changing and modiſying the forms of matter, is the operation of heat, by which the states oſ solidity, liquidity, and elastic ſluidity are often produced in suecession; and the investigation of the nature and eſſects of heat will constitute the subject of the two next lectures. LECTURE LI. ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT. IT may appear doubtful to some whether the subject of heat belongs most properly to mechanical or to chemical philosophy. Its influence in chemistry is unquestionable and indispensable; but its mechanical efſects are no less remarkable: it could not therefore with propriety be omitted either in a course of chemical or of physical lectures, especially hy those who are persuaded that vhat we call heat is, in its intimate nature, rather a mechanical affection of matter than a peculiar substance. We shall first inquire into the nature of the principal sources of heat, and next into the mode of its communication, and its most common eſſects, whether temporary or permanent: the measures of heat, and the most probable opinions respeeting its nature, vill aſterwards be separately considered. Heat is an inſluence capable of affecting our nerves in general with the peculiar sensation which bears its name, and oſ which the diminution produces the sensation denominated cold. Any considerable inerease of heat gives us the idea of positive warmth or hotness, and its diminution excites the idea of positive cold. Both these ideas are simple, and each of them might be derived either from an increase or from a diminution of a positive quality: but there are many reasons for supposing heat to be the positive quality, and cold the diminution or absence of that quality; although we have no more experience of the total absence of heat, than of ĩts greatest possible accumulation, which might be called the total absence of cold. Our organs furnish us, in some cases, vith very delicate tests oſ any increase or diminution of heat; but it is more usually recognised by the enlargement of bulk, generally produced in those bodies to which heat is attached in an increased quantity, and the contraction of those from which it is subtracted. The simplest modes of exciting heat appear to be the compression of elastic ſluids, and the collision or ſriction of solid bodies; although a more usual and a more poverful source of heat is found in various chemical combinations and decompositions, vhich are produced by the peculiar elective attractions of diſſerent substances for each other, or from the influence of the solar rays, which are probably emitted in consequence of the chemical processes that continually take place at the surface of the sun. The effects of the condensation and rarefaction oſ elastic fluids are shown by the cendenser and the air pump; when an exhaustion is made vith rapidity, the thermometer, placed in the receiver of the air pump, usually sinks a degree or two; and when the air is readmitted abruptly into a partial vacuum, the sudden condensation of the rareſied air raises the mercury: and a similar elevation of temperature is produced by the operation of the condenser. Much of this heat ĩs soon dissipated, but by observing the velocity with vhich the thermometer rises, Mr. Dalton has estimated that air, compressed to half its dimensions, has its temperature elevated about 50 degrees of Fahrenheit; and sume of his experiments indicate, vhen accurately examined, a still greater change. For the present we may deſine the sense of the term degree, in Fahrenheit's scale, as corresponding to an expansion of a portion of mercury amounting to one ten thousandth purt of its bulk; and a degree of Recaumur originally corresponded to an expansion oſ a weak spirit of wine, amounting to one thousandth part of its bulk. It may be inferred from the velocity oſ sound, supposing hat the excess of its velocity, above the common calculation, is wholly derived from the heat and cold produced by condensation and expansion, that a condensation amounting to 4 of the bulk of any portion of air will raise its temperature one degree of Fahrenheit. When air is very rapidly compressed in the condenser of an air gun, iĩt is sometimes so much heated as actually to set on ſire a small portion oſ tow, placed near the end of the barrel The produetion of heat by friction is too well known to require an experimental prooſ; but Count Rumford has taken particular pains to ascertain cvery circumstance which can he supposed to be concerned in the operation of this cause; and the results of his experiments are so striking, that they de- serve to be brieſly related. He took a cannon, not yet bored, having a projection of two feet beyond its muæ⸗le, a part which is usually cast vith the piece, in order to insure the solidity of the metãl throughout, by the pressure vhich its weight occasionss. This piece was reduced to the form of a eylinder, joined to the cannon by a smaller neck, and a lurge hole was bored in it: the whole cannon vas then made to revolye on its axis by means of the foree of horses, while a hlunt steel hborer was pressed against the bottom of the hollow cylinder, by a force equal to about I0 000 pounds avoirdupois; the surface of contact of the borer with the bottom of the cylinder being about à square inches. This apparatus was wrapped up in ſlannel, when its temperature was about 60°. In half an hour, vhen the cylinder had made ꝗ60 turns, the horses being stopped, a mercurial thermometer was introduced into a perforation in the hottom of the cylinder, extending from the side to the axis, and it stood at 130°, which Count Rumford considers as expressing very nearly the mean temperature of the cylinder. The dust or scales, abraded hy the borer, weighed only 837 grains, or about  of the whole weight of ihe cylinder. In another experiment, the cylinder was surrounded hy a tight deal box, ſitted with collars of leather, so as to allow it to revolve freely, and the interval between the cylinder and the box was ſilled with I9 pounds of cold water, vhich was excluded from the hore of the cylinder by oiled leathers fixed on the horer; and after two hours and a half, the water was made to boil. Hence Count Rumford calculates that the heat produced in this manner, by the operation of frietion, was equal to that of 9 wax candles, each three quarters of an inch in diameter, continuing to burn for the same time. A still more rapid increase of temperature may be obtained, vhere the relative velocity of the bodies is more considerable, or where they strike each other with violencee Thus a soft nail may be so heated, by three or four blows of a hammer, that ve may light a match vith it; and by continuing the operation, it may he made red hot: two pieces of wood may also be set on fire by means of a lathee When a waggon takes fire, for vant of having its wheels properly greased, the friction is probably increased by the tenacity of the hardened tar, which perhaps becomes the more combustible as it dries. 634 LECTURE LI. One of the most remarkable circumstances, attending the produetion of heat by friction, is the discovery of Professor Pictet, that it is oſten much more poverfully excited by soſt substances than by harder ones. In making some experiments in a vacuum, in order to examine how far the presence of air might be concerned in the effects of frietion, he accidentally interposed some cotton between the bulb of his thermometer and the cup, which was subjected to the frietion of various substances as ĩt revolved; and he found that the soſt filaments of the cotton excited much more heat, than any other of the substances employed. The chemical production of heat is of greater practical importance than its meehanical excitation; but by what means chemical changes operate in exciting heat, we cannot attempt to determine. There is certainly no general law of composition or decomposition that can be applied to all such cases: most commonly heat is produced when oxygen exchanges an aeriform for a solid state, or enters into a new combination, and stĩll remains elastic; but in the case of gunpowder, heat ĩs disengaged vhile an elastic ſluid is produced from a solid; and in some other cases the oxygenous principle is wholly unconcerned. It appears on the whole, that however heat may be excited, the corpuscular powers of cohesion and repulsion are always disturbed and called into action, their equilibrium being destroyed and again restored, whether by mechanical or by chemical means. A vax candle, 3 of an inch in diameter, loses a grain of its weight in 57 seconds, and consumes about three grains, or cubic inches, of oxygen gas, producing heat enough to raise the temperature of about 15 000 grains of water a single degree. According to the experiments of Mr. Luvoisier and Mr. Laplace, the combustion of ten grains of phosphorus requires the consumption of 15 grains of oxygen, the combustion oſ ten grains of charcoal 26, and of hydrogen gas 56; and hy the heat produced during the combustion of a pound of phosphorus, 100 pounds of ice may be melted, during that of a pound of charcoal 9õ;, of hydrogen gas 2953, of vax 139, and of olive oil 149; and during the deſlagration of a pound of nitre with about one sixth part of its weight of charcval, twelve pounds of ice may he melted. The manmer in which heat, vhen excited or extricated by any of these means, pusses ſrom one hody to another, requires to be very particularly exa- mined. We shall find that this communication happens in one or hoth of tvo vays, by contact, or by radiation; and that it may also differ both with respect to the quantity of heat concerned, and to the time occupied by the process. Whatever heat may be, we may safely conclude that in substances of the same kind, at the same temperature or apparent degree of varmth or coldness, its quantity must be proportional to the mass or weight; for instance, that a quart of the vater of a given cistern contains twice as much heat as a pint; and vhere this is true oſ the different parts of any substance, they must remain in equilibrium with respect to heat. But if two equal portions of the same substance, containing different quantities of heat, be in contact, they will aſfect each other in such a manner as to have their temperatures equalised, and the more rapidly as the contact is more perfeet. Thus, if two portions of a fluid at difſerent temperatures he mixed together, they will acquire immediately an intermediate temperature; and when two solids are in eontact, the quantity of heat, communicated hy the hotter to the colder in a given time, is nearly proportional to the difference of the temperatures. Ience it would follow, that they could never become precisely of the same temperature in any ſinite time; but in fact the diſſerence of temperature is rendered, in a moderate time, too small to be perceptible The nature of the substances concerned has also a material effect on tlie velocity with which heat is communicated through their internal parts; metallic bodies in general conduet iĩt the most readily, earthy and vitreous bodies, the least; but the various metals possess this pover in different degrees; silver and copper conduet heat more rapidly than iron, and platina transmits it hut very slowly. Professor Pictet supposes that heat ascends vithin solid hodies more readily than it descends; but the eſfect of the air remaining in the imperfeet vacuum of the air pump may be suſſicient to explain his experiments; the difſerence of temperature producing an ascending current in the neighhourhood of the heated body, by means of which the cold air continually approuches its lower parts, and carries the heat upwards: and ĩt has been found that the rarefaction of air does not by any means diminish its pover of condueting heat, in proportion to the diminution of its density. l Count Rumſord's experiments have shown that all ſluids are very imperfeet conductors oſ heat by immediate contaet, although it ĩs scareely eredible that they can be absolutely nonconductors; but heat is usually communicated hetween different portions of the same ſluid, almost entirely by the mixture of their particles: hence a ſluid heated on ĩts surſace transmits the heat very slowly downwards, since the parts which are first heated, heing rendered specifically lighter, retain their situation above the colder and heavier parts; vhile, on the contrary, any cause of heat, applied at the bottom of a vessel, very soon reduces all ĩts contents to a uniform temperature. It appears also, from some late experiments, that the immediate transmission of heat vithin the internal parts of solids is much slower than has commonly been supposed; and it has been found almost impossible to keep a thermometer, at the centre of a large and solid globe of metal, at the same temperature with that of its superſicial parts. Besides the communication of heat by contact, it is usually, if not always, emitted from the surfaces oſ bodies in the form of radiant heat, which is thrown off in all directions, wherever it meets no obstacle from a substance impervious to it, and is propagated nearly in the same manner as light, and probably with the sume velocity, without producing any permanent eſſect on the temperature of the medium transmitting it. Thus, a thermometer. suspended by a fine thread under the receiver of an air pump, or in the Torricellian vacuum, vill continue to vary its temperature with that of the surrounding bodies: and in this case the whole of the heat must be communicated by radiation. Mr. Leslie has discovered that the quantity of heat thus emitted depends not only on the temperature, but also on the nature of the surface concerned, a polished surface of tin emitting only &, or less than one eighth part as much, as the sume surface hlackened. A surface of tin seraped with a file in one direction has its powers of radiation more than doubled; but by crossing the scratehes, they are reduced nearly to their original state; and a conting of isinglass, resin, or writing paper, or a glassy surface of any kind, produces an eſfeet nearly approuching to that of black paint. This radiation from a heated surſace, like that oſ light, takes place in almost equal degrees in every direction; and ĩts magnitude is nearly independent of the nature of the ſluid in contact with the surface, provided hovever that it be an elastie ſluid; for water does not seem to transmit every kind of radiant heat with freedom. It appears that the radiant heat emitted by a surface of glass, or of black paint, is about one third greater than that vhich is at the sume time carried off by the atmospheric air; but that the radiation from a metallic sur- face is only one sixth of that which the air receives. Mr. Leslie has also found that the same surfaces which emit heat the most freely, are also the readiest to receive it from the radiation of other bodies. The solar heat radiates freely through air, glass, water, ice, and many other transparent mediums, without producing any sensible eſſect on their temperatures, and even vhen it is concentrated hy the effect of a burning mirror, it scarcely affects the air through which it passes, and other transparent mediums but littlee. But the heat of a fire varms a piece of common glass very rapidly, and its further progress is almost entirely interrupted by the glass, although probably a certain portion still continues to accompany the light in all cases. Hence a screen of glass is sumetimes practically convenient for allowing us the sight of a ſire, and protecting us at the same time ſrom its too great heat. Mr. Lambert showed that eulinary heat vas much more strongly reſlected by mirrors of metal than of glass, although little difference was observable in the quantity of light, and he very justly attributed this difference to the interception of a purt of the heat by the glass; vhich operated with respect to it like an opaque substance, although it transmitted the light with freedom. Opaque substances in general appear to be vholly impervious to radiating heat of all kinds; but Dr. Herschel has ſound that dark red glass, vhich transmits a very small portion of light only, suſfers some kinds of radiant heat to pass through ĩit with very little interruption. In other respects, radiating heat is subject, in all cases, to the optical laws which govern the reflection and refraction of lightt. Dr. Hoffmann appears to have been the ſirst that collected the invisible heat of a stove into a focus by the reſlection of one or more concave mirrors. Buſfon, Saussure, Pictet, and Mr. King, made afterwards similar experiments on the heat of a plate of iron and of a vessel of hoiling water. Mr. Pictet, as well as Hoffmann, employed two mirrors facing each other; and by means of this arrangement the experiment may be performed vhen the thermometer is placed at a consideraIe distance from the heated hody. The temperature of the air, not being aſfected hy the radiation of heat, ĩs probably in all respects indiſſerent to ĩts emission in this manner; and as the rays oſ light cross each other freely in all possible directions, so it appeais VOL. I. l 4x5 that heat may ſlow in diſſerent directions through the same medium without heing interrupted; nor does there seem to be a ny more reason that a hot hody should cease to emit heat vhile it is receiving heat from another bo dy, than that a luminous body should cease to afford light when another body shines on it. This continual interchange of heat, constituting in common cases a kind of equilibrium of motion, appears t ohave been ſirst suggested hy Mr. Prévost, as an explanation of an experiment on the reſlection of cold, revived by Mr. Picetet, but originally made some centuries before, hy Plempius, and by the Academicians del Cimento. A thermometer, for example, must he supposed to retain its temperature hy means of the continual accession of radiant heat from the surrounding bodies, supplying the place of that which is continually thrown off in all directions towards those bodiess. Supposing the thermometer to be placed near the ſocus of a metallic speculum, not much less than a hemisphere, about one half of the heat, which the thermometer would otherwise have received from the surrounding bodies, must be intercepted by the mirror, which, being metallic, emits itself but little radiant heat, but reſlects, notwithstanding, an equal quantity of heat from the ohjects on the op posite side, so that the temperature of the thermometer remains unaltered. But all the heat, which falls on the thermometer from the mirror, must have passed through the conjugate or corresponding focus; and if a hody at the same temperature be placed in that focus, the radiation will still be the same: but if a substance absolutely cold were placed there, the whole of the heat before reſlected hy the mirror would be intercepted, that is, almost half of that vwhich vas received by the thermometer from the surrounding bodies; and if a piece oſ ice be put in the conjugate focus, a delicate thermometer will instantly show its effect in depressing the temperature; as if the cold were absolutely reſlected in the same manner as heat or light. Dr. Herschel's experiments have shown that radiant heat consists of various parts, which are differently refrangible, and that in general, invisible heat is. less refrangible than light. This discovery must he allowed to be one of the greatest that has been made since the days of Newton, although the theories of sume speculative philosophers might have led to it a few years earlier. Dr. Herschel was occupied in determining the properties of various kinds of coloured glass, which rendered them more or less ſit for enabling the eye to view the sun through a telescope; and for this purpose it was necessary to inquire ON THE S0URCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT. 639 which of the rays would furnish the greatest quantity of light, without subjecting the eye to the inconvenience of unnecessary heatt. He ſirst observed that the heat hecame more and more considerable as the thermometer approached the extreme red rays in the prismatic spectrum; and pursuing the experiment, he found not only that the heat continued beyond the visible spectrum, but that it was even more intense when the thermometer was at a little distance without the limits of the spectrum, than in any point within it. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 546, 547.) Sir Henr7 Eng leſield has repeated these experiments with many additional precautions, aud Mr. Davy was a witness of their perfect accuracy: the excess of heat heyond the spectrum was even considerable enough to be ascertained by the sense of warmth occasioned by throwing it on the hand. The skin appears, when compared with a thermometer, to have its sensibility more adapted to the perception of radiant heat than to that of heat imparted hy contact, perhaps because a much smaller quantity of heat is suſſicient to raise the temperature of the thin cuticle very considerably, than would be required in ꝑrder to affect any thermometer in the same degree. It was ſirst observed in Germany by Ritter, and soon afterwards in England by Dr. Wollaston, that the muriate of silver is blackened by invisihle rays, which extend beyond the prismatic spectrum, on the violet side. It is thereſore probable that these black or invisible rays, the violet, blue, green, perhaps the yellow, and the red rays of light, and the rays of invisible heat, constitute seven different degrees of the same scale, distinguished from each other into this limited number, not by natural divisions, but by their effects on our senses: and we may also conclude that there is some similar relation between heated and luminous hodies of different inds. The effects of heat, thus originating, and thus communicated, may be divided into those vhich are temporary only, and those vhich are permanent. The permanent effects are principally eonſined to solids, but the temporary effects are different with respect to substances in different states of aggregation, und they also frequently comprehend a change from one of these states to another. The effect of heat on an elistie ſluid is the simplest of all these, being merely an expansion of about one five hundredth of its bulk for each degree of Fahrenheit that the temperature is raised; or an equivalent aug- mentation of the elasticity when the fluũd is conſined to a certain space. This expansion is very nearly the same for all gases and vapours, amounting to  for euch degree, at the common temperature of 56 of Fahrenheit, hut at higher temperatures it ĩs less than 4 of the bulk of the gas, and at lover temperatures somewhat more, heing nearly the same in quantity ſor the same portion of the ſluid at all temperatures. When an elastic ſluid is eontracted by eold within certain limits, determined by the degree of pressure to which it is exposed, as vell as by the nature of the fluid, its particles become subjected to the force of cohesion; they rush still nearer together, and form a liquid. Thus, vhen steam, under the common atmospherie pressure, is cooled below the heat of boiling water, ĩt is instantly condensed, and becomes water: but with a pressure oſ two atmospheres, it vould he condensed at a temperature 56° higher, and with the pressure of half our atmosphere only, it might be cooled vithout condensation 33° lower than the common temperature of boiling vater. And similar effects take place in vapours of other kinds at higher or lower temperatures, a double pressure producing, in all cases an equal disposition to condensation, with a depression oſ temperature of between 20 and 40 degrees, and most commonly of about 55°, of Fahrenheitt. Thus, the vapour of spirit of wine is usually condensed at 175° of Fahrenheit; but vith a double pressure it is condensed at a temperature 39° higher; and with the pressure of half an atmosphere, at a temperature 35° lowerſ; and the vapour of ether, which is commonly condensed at 102, requires a temperature 38° higher, with a double pressure, or as much lover, vith half the usual pressure. IF the temperature be below the freezing point of the liquid, the pressure heing suſſiciently lessened, the vapour may still retain ĩts elasticity, but a further reduction of temperature or increase of pressure will convert it immediately into a solid. E The expansion of liquids by the effect of heat is much less uniform and regular than that of elastic ſluids, since it varies considerably, not only in different liquids, but also in the same liquid at different temperatures, being in general greater as the temperature is more elevated, and sometimes almost in proportion to the excess of the temperature uhove a eertain point, at which it begins. This variation appears to be the least considerable in mereury, although even this ſluid expands a little more rapidly as it hecomes more heated; but the expansion is always very nearly one ten thousandth for each . degree? that of water ĩs equal to this at the temperature 64°, and is greater or less nearly in proportion to the distance from 55°, where it begins, but in high temperatures it varies less, since iĩt ĩs not quite four times as great at the heat of boiling water. The expansion of spirit of wine at 707 ĩs six times as great as that of mereury: its utmost variation is much less than that oſf ater, although iĩt ĩs at least twice as great in some parts of the scale as in others. . It has already heen observed that an elevation of temperature considerably diminishes the powers of coliesion and of repulsion in solid bodies: the same is also true of liquids; for the height to which a liquid rises in a capillary tube is diminished somewhat less than /æ for each degree of Falirenheit that the temperature is raistũ, the force of superſicial cohesion being diminished both by the diminution of the immediate actions of the particles, and by that of the distances to which they extend. When the temperature of a liquid is s0 much elevated as to become equal to that of its vapour in a state capable of sustaining the atmospherical pressure, or any other pressure which may be substituted for it, a certain portion of the liquid is converted into vapour, and the heat being generally applied at the bottom of the vessel, the vapour rises up in bubbles, and the eſſect is called boiling. The whole liquid is not converted at once into vapour, because a certain quantity of heat appears to be consumed by the change, and a constant supply of heat is necessary, in order that the operation may be continued. It is not, however, only at the boiling point that a ſluid begins to be converted into vapour: the pressure of the atmosphere is not sufſicient wholly to pre vent the detachment of a certain quantity of vapour from its surface, at a temperature which is incapable of supporting it separately in the form of steam in the open air, and it may be thus suspended, wvhen mixed either with common air, or with any other elastic ſluid, at the ordinary temperature of the atmosphere. And it appears that the quantity, which is thus suspended, bears very nearly some constunt proportion to the density of which the steam is eapuble at the given temperature in a separate state, the interposition of the air either not aſfecting the distance at which the cohesion would take place, or altering it equally in all cases. It seems to he mnst probible that the density of vapour, suspended in this manner in the atmosphere, is always about twice as great, or at least half as great again, as that of steam existing independently at the same temperature. There is perhaps no liquid absolutely free from a disposition to evaporate: even mercury rises in the vacuum of the barometer, and lines the cavity with small globules; and it is said that the effect oſ light is favourable to this slow evaporationn. At whatever temperature evaporation takes place it is always accompanied by the produetion of cold; hence it is usual in wvarm climates, to employ various methods of promoting evaporation, in order to lower the temperature of the air, to cuol liquids for drinking, or even to procure ice for domestic uses. It appears that all aqueous fluids are contracted by cold, until we arrive at a certain point, which is generally about 7 or 8 degrees higher than their ſreezing point: they then expand agam almost in an equal degree as they are still more cooled; and provided that they he free from agitation, they may remain liquid at a temperature considerably below the point, at which they usually freeze, and at which their ice always meltss Water may be cooled in this manner to about 10° of Fahrenheit, and if it be then agitated, or especially if a small particle of ice or snow be thrown into it, a certain part of it will instantly congeal, and its temperature will be raised at once to 32°, in consequence of the heat which is always produced or extricated in the act of freezing In most cases, although not in all, the solid occupies more space than the fluid; thus, it is probable that ice, vhen perfectly ſree ſrom air hubbles, is at least one 16th lighter than water at the same temperature. A saturated solution of Glaubers salts, or sulfate of soda, in lot vater, may be cooled slowly to the temperature of the atmosphere, when the pressure of the air is excluded, and may be made to cerystallize by admitting it suddenly, the liquor becoming at the same time warm in consequence of the heat which is extricated; and there is no doubt but that the congelation of water, and perhaps of all other substances, is a erystallization of the same kind. The expansions of solid bodies appear to be more regular than those of liquids or even of elastic fluids; they vary little at any temperature, although it is said that they do not always take place in their full extent at the instant 2 THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT. 64s that the substance has become heated, and that a blow, or the agitation produced when they are made to sound by the friction of the how of a violin, may sometimes be observed to cause them to assume the state of equilibrium vith greater rapidity. Brass expands about one hundred thousandth of its length for each degree of Fahrenheit, copper and gold a little less; silver some what more; glass and platina less than half as much; iron and steel about two thirds as imuch; tin one third more, and lead and Zinc about half as much moree Wood and earthenware are the least expansible oſ all known solidss The diminution of the elasticity of iron and steel by the elevation of their temperature amounts to about ,4 of the whole for each degree: but probaubly various substances are variously affected in this respect. The liquefaction of solids, and their conversion into ſluids by the operation of heat, is liable to fever irregularities than any other of its effects; the change depending only on the temperature, and not being accelerated or retarded by any accidental circumstances. When the temperature is too low, or the pressure too small, for the existence of the substance in a liquid form, it may still he emverted into vapour, either mixed with air, or iu a separate state: thus ice loses weight when it is exposed to a dry frosty wind; and camphor, benzoin, and ammonia are sublimed by heat without heing melted, althnugh it is prohable, that a pressure sufficiently strong might enable them to eist as liquids in elevated temperatures. In all changes from solidity to liquidity or to elastic ſluidity, a certain quantity of heat disappears, except some cases in vhich a chemical decomposition has accompanied the change; thus, in the detonation of gunpowder, a large quantity of gas acquires the state of elasticity, hut at the same time a great degree of heat is produced. i The efſects of the expansion of bodies hy heat, and of their contraction by cold, are observed in the frequent accidents which happen to glass and to porcelain from a sudden change of temperature. Glass conducts heat so slowly, that one side of a vessel may become much heated, and consequently expanded, while the other remains much colder, and if the vessel cannot readily accommodate its form to this change of proportions, i* will most commonly erack, the colder parts dividing, in consequence of their being too much stretched by the adjoining hotter parts. Hence the thinner the glass is, less liable it is to crack from a ny sudden expansion; and if it he very thick, however simple its form may be, it vill still erack; for no fſlexure, vhich it can assume, can be suſlicient for the equilibrium of the external parts without being too great for that of the parts near the midile. When glass in fusion is very suddenly cooled, its external parts become solid first, and determine the magnitude of the whole piece; while it stil] remains ſluid within. The internal part, as it eools, ĩs disposed to contract still further, but its contraction is prevented by the resistance of the external parts, which form an areh or vault round it, so that the whole is leſt in a state of constraint; and as soon as the equilibrium is disturbed in any one part, the vhole aggregate is destroyed. Hence it becomes necessary to anneal all glass, by placing it in an oven, where it is left to cool slowly; for, without this precaution, a very slight cause would destroy it. The Iologna jars, sometimes called prooſs, are small thick vessels, made for the purpoe of exhibiting this efſect; they are usually destroyed by the impulse of a small and shar) body, for instance a single grain of sand, dropped into them; and a smull body appears to be often more eſſectual than a larger one; perhaps hecause the larger one is more liable to strike the glass vith an obtuse part of its surface. In the same manner the glass drops, sometimes called Prince Rupert's drops, which are formed by suſffering a portion of green glass in fusion to fall into water, remain in equilibrium while they are entire; hut vhen the small projecting part is broken off, the whole rushes together with great force, and rebounding by its elasticity, exhibits the efſect of an explosion. The ends of these drops may, sometimes, but not alvays, be gradually ground oſf vithout destroying them, s0 that the ouncussion produced by breaking the drop scems to be concerned in the destruction oſ the equilibrium. The tempering of metals appears to bear a considerable analogy to the annealing oſ glass; vhen they are made red hot, and sudierly cooled, they acquire a great degree oſ hardness, which renders them proper for some purposes, while the brittleness which accompanies it vould be inconvenient for otherss. By heating them again to a more moderate temperature, and suſſering them to cool more gradually, they are rendered soſter and more flexible, and the more as the heat which is thus applied is the more considerable, - which forms itself on the surface of polished iron or steel, serves as a test of the degree of heat which is applied to it, the yellowish colour which it assumes indicating the first stage of tempering, the violet the second, and the blue the last; and if the heat be raised till the surface hecomes grey, the steel vill be rendered perfectly soſft. Th e density of metals is also a little increased by tempering them, probably for the same reason as water is more dense than ic. In vhat manner the unequal distribution of the mutual actions of the particles of bodies contributes to increase their hardness, cannot be very positively ascertained, although some conjectures might be formed which would, perhaps, be in some measure explanatory of the facts; but it is safer, in the present stute of our knovledge, to be contented with tracing the analogy between these effects in substances of diſferent kinds, and under different circumstances, without attempting to understand completely the immediate operation of the forces which are concerned. vouL. I. 4 L LECTURE LII. ON THE MEASURES AND THE NATURE OF HEAT. TuE principal particulars concerning the origin, the progress, and the effeets of heat, haviug been noticed in the last lecture, we now proceed to examine the most usual modes of measuring its degrees and its quantity, and to inquire into the most probable opinions respecting its intimate nature and its immediate operation. The expansion of solids is measured by a pyrometer, which is caleulated for rendering the smallest change of dimeusions perceptible either by mechanical or by optical means. The ſirst of these methods was adopted by those who ſirst investigated these effects; a bar of metal being placed n a vessel of vater, or of oil, which vas heated by lamps, while the extremities of the bar were in contact with a fixed point on one side, ani on the other with a series of levers, which multiplied the expansions, so as to render them easily observable by means of the end of the last lever, serving as an index. But it is obvious that the expansion of the fixed purt of the instrument, and the irregular changes of temperature of the levers themselves, must very much interfere with the accuracy of such an instrument. A much more correct mode of determination is to employ two microscopes, fixed to an apparatus, which is always kept, by means oſ ice, at a constant temperature, and to observe with a micrometer the change of place of either end of the heated bar. i For such purposes, the degrees of heat may be ascertained by the natural measures of the freezing and boiling points of certain liquiis, and of vater in particular; but for subdividing the intervals hetween these points, other means must be employedc. The most natural mode of determining the intermediate degrees of heat, which must be considered as the standard for the comparison of all others, is too laborious and complicated for common use. If we mix together equal quantities of the same liquid at two different temperatures, they will obviously acquire an intermediate temperature, which is the natural mean between the separate temperatures, provided that no heat be lost or gained during the process; and provided that no irregularity be produced from the approach of the liquid to a state of congelation, the existence of which might be detected by a comparison of experiments on various liquids at the same temperatures. By repeating the operation, we may subdivide the intervals as often as we please, or ve may mix the liquids in any other proportion, so as to obtain at once any other point of the scale, which may afterwards be identified by a thermometer of any description. There is also another method of comparing the divisions of a thermometer with those of the natural scale, but it is not wholly free from objections; the instrument being placed in a cone of the suns rays, made to converge hy means of a lens or mirror, the quantity of heat falling on it must be nearly in the inverse proportion of the square of its distance from the focus; and the elevation of a common thermomèter appears to be nearly proportional to the heat which is thrown on it in this manner. The expansion of solids prohably approaches the nearest to the steps of the natural scale, although even in this there seems to be some inequality; but thut of mercury is scarcely less regular, and a portion of mercury inclosed in a bulb of glass, having a fine tube connected with it, forms a thermometer the most convenient, and most probubly the most accurate, of any, for common use; the degrees corresponding very nearly with those of the natural scale, although, according to the most accurate experiments, they appear to indicate, towards the middle of the common scale of Fahrenheit, a temperature 2 or 3 degrees too low. There is an inequality of the same kind, but still greater, in the degrees oſf the spirit thermometer; and this instrument has also the disadvantuge of being liable to burst in a heat helow that of hoiling water; although it is well calculated for the measurement of very low temperatures, since pure aleohol has never yet been frozen, while mercury has been reduced to a solid by the cold of Siberia and of IIudson's Bay: but both mercury and linseed oil support a heat of hetween 5 and GOO without ebullition. For higher temperatures than this, a thermometer has been made of l semit ransparent porcelain, containing a fusible metal, vhich may he compared with the upper part of the mereurial scale, and then continued ſurther; and the expansion of such of the metals, as are diſlicult of ſusion, aſfords another mode of determining the highest degrees of heat. Mr. Wedgwood's thermometer derives its properties from the contraction of a small brick of prepared clay, which contracts the more, as the heat to whieh it is exposed is higher: it may be extremely useful for identifying the degree oſ heat which is required for a particular purpose: but for the comparison of temperatures by an extension of the numerical scale, ve have not suſicient evidence of its accuracy to allow us to depend on its indications; and iĩt is scarcely credible that the operation of furnaces, of any kind, can produce a heat of so many thousand degrees of a natural scale, as Mr. Wedgvood's experiments have led him to suppose; nor is the supposition consistent with the observations of other philosophers. Mereurial thermometers are in general hermetically sealed, the tube being perfectly elosed at the end, inorder toexclude dust, and to prevent the dissipation of the mereury. When a standard therm ometer is to be adjusted, its ſreczing point is readily fixed by immersing it wholly in melting snow or pounded ice; but for the boiling point, some ſurther precautions are required; the easiest method appears to be, to immerse its bulb in an open vessel of boiling vater, 1o coverit vith several folds of cloth, and to pour hot vater continually over it; for if it were immersed to a considerable depth, the pressure vould raise the temperature of the boiling point, and if it were not covered, the mercury in the tube would be too cold. Attention must also be paid to the stute of the barometer; it must either stand at 30 inches, or the place of the boiling point must be raised, when the barometer is lower than 30, and lowered vhen it ĩs higher; the diſſference of nine tenths of an inch either vay requiring an alteration amounting to i of the interval between freczing and hoiling. This interval is subdivided, in Falirenheit's thermometer, into I80 degrees; in Raumurs, into 80, and in the centigrade thermometer of Celsius and of the Freneh, into 100; and in muking the subdivision, care must he taken to examine the equality of the bore throughout, by observing the length occupied by a detached portion of mercury, and to allov for any ĩirregularities hich may have been thus detected. The scales of Raumur and of Celsius begin at the frecæing point of water; but in that of Fahrenheit the frcezing point stands at 32°, the scale beginning from the cold produced by a freezing mixture, which vas supposed by Fahrenheit to be the greatest that would ever occur in nature. The expansion, which is observed in a mercurial thermometer, is in reality only the difference of the expunsions of mercury and of glass; but this circumstance produces no difſerence in the accuracy of the results The separate effects of the expansion of glass are, however, sometimes perceptible; thus, when a thermometer is plunged suddenly into hot vater, the glass, being first heated, expands more rapidly than the mereury, and, for a moment, the thermometer falls This circumstance would perhaps he still more observable in a thermometer of spirit or of water; for an equal hulk of these liquids would he much longer in acquiring the temperature of the surrounding medium than a mercurial thermometer. The expansion of elastic ſluids aſfords in some cases a test of heat, which is very convenient from its great delicacy, and because a very small quantity of heat is sufficient to raise their temperature very considerably. The thermometer first invented hy Drebel was an air thermometer; but instruments of this kind, when they are subjeet to the variations oſ the pressure of the atmosphere as well as to those oſ its temperature, are properly called manometers, and require, for enabling us to employ them as thermometers, a comparison with the barometer; while on the other hand, they may be used as hbarometers, if the temperature be othervise ascertained. They are however, very useful even without this comparison, in delicate experiments of short duration, since the changes of the barometer are seldom very rapid; and they may also be wholly freed from the eſſeets oſ the pressure of the atmosphere, in various vays. Bernoull's method consists in closing the bulb of a common harometer, so as to leave the column of mereury in equilibrium vith the air contained in the bulb at ĩts actual temperature, and capable of indicating, by the changes of its height and of its pressure, any subsequent changes in the temperature of the air, which must affect both its bulk and its elasticity. Mr. Leslie's photometer, or difſerential thermometer, has some advantages over this instrument, but it can only he employed vhere the changes of temperature can be conſined to a part only of the instrument. The elasticity of the air contained in the bulb is here counteracted, not by the pressure oſ a column of mercury, but by the clasticity of another portion of alæ in a second bulb, which is not to be exposed to the heat or cold that is to be examined: and the difference between the temperatures of the two bulbs is indicated by the place of a drop of a liquid, moving freely in the tube which joins them. (Plate XXX IX. Fig. 548.. 550.) The degree of heat, as ascertained by a thermometer, is only to be considered as a relation to the surrounding bodies, in virtue of which a body supports the equilibrium of temperature when it is in the neighbourhood of hodies equally heated: thus, if a thermometer stands at G0, hoth in a vessel of ater, and in another of mercury, we may infer that the vater and the mercury may he mixed without any change oſ their temperature: but the absolute quantity of heat, contained in equal weights, or in equal bulks, of any two hodies at the same temperature, is by no means the same. Thus, in order to raise the temperature of a pound of vater from 50° to 60°, we need only to add to it another pound of water at 70°, which, while it loses 10° of its own heat, vill communicate 10° to the ſirst pound; but the temperature of a pound of mercury at 500 may be raised 10°, by means of the heat imparted to it, by mixing with it one thirtieth part of a pound of vater, at the same temperature of 70°. Hence ve derive the idea of the capacities of different bodies for heat, which was ſirst suggested by Dr. Irvine, the capacity of mercury being only about one thirtieth part as great as that of water. And by similar experiments it has been ascertained, that the capacity of iron is one eighth of that of water, the capacity of silver one twelfth, and that of lead one twenty fourth. But for equal bulks of these different substances, the disproportion is not quite so great; thus, copper contains nearly the same quantity of heat in a given bulk as water; iron, brass, and gold, a little less, silver à as much, but lead and glass each about one half only. It is obvious that if the capacity oſf a body for heat, in this sense of the word, ere suddenly changed, it would immediately become hotter oreolder, according to the nature of the change, a diminution of the capacity producing heat, and an augmentation cold. Such a change of capacity is oſten a convenient mode of representation for some of the sources of heat and cold: thus, when heat is produeed by the condeusation ofa vapour, or by the congelation oſ a liquid, ve may imagine that the capacity of the substance is diminished; and that it overſlows, asa vessel would doiſ its dimensions vere coutracted. It appears also from direct ex- periments, in some such cases, that the capacity of the same substance is actually greater in a liquid than in a solid state, and in a state of vapour, than in eſther; and hoth Dr. Irvine and Dr. Crawford have attempted to deduce, from æ comparison of the proportional capacities of water and ice, with the quantity of heat extricated during congelation, a measure of the whole heat vhich is contained in these substances, and an estimation of the place which the absolute privation of heat, or the natural zero, ought to occupy in the scale of the thermometer. Thus, when a pound of ice, at 39°, is mixed with a pound of water at 179 of Fahrenheit, the whole excess of 1400 is absorbed in the conversion of the ice into water, and the mixture is reduced to the temperature of 32°; and, on the other hand, when a pound of icæ freezes, a certain quantity of heat is evolved which is prohably capable of raising the temperature of a pound of water 140°, or that of H40 pounds a single degree. Dr. Crawſord found, by means of other experiments, that a quantity of heat capable of raising the temperature of water 9 would raise that of ice as much as 10°; hence he inferred that the eapacity of ice vas?; as great as that of vater, and that if this capacity, instead of being reduced to 2,, had heen vholly destroyed, the quantity of heat extrieated would have been IO times as great, or about 1400°, which has, therefore, been considered as the whole quantity oſ heat contained in a pound of water at 39°, and the beginning of the natural scale has been placed about 1365 below the zero oſ Fahrenheit. Dr. Irvine makes the capacity of ice still less considerable, and places the natural zero about 900 degrees hbelow that of Fahrenheit. If direet experiments on the quantitis of heat, required for producing certain elevations of temperature, in diſferent stutes oſ the same substance, compared in this manner with the emission or absorption of heat which takes place while those changes are performed, agreed with similar experiments made on different substanees, there could be no objection to the mode of representation. But if it should appear that such eomparisons ſrequently present us with contradictory results, we could no longer consider the theory of capucities for heat as sufficient to explain the phenomena. With respect to the simple changes constituting congelation and liquefaction, condensation and evaporation, and compression and rarefaction. there appears to be at present no evidence of the insufficiency of this theory; it has not perhaps yet been shown that the heat absorbed in any one change is always precisely equalto that whichis emitted in the return of the substance to its former state, but nothing has yet been advanced vhich renders this opinion improbable; and the estimation of the natural zero, which is deduced from this doctrine, may at least be considered as a tolerable approximation. If, however, we attempt to deduce the heat produced hy frietion and by combustion from changes of the capacities of hodies, thus estimated, ve shall find that the comparison of a very few facts is suſficient to demonstrate the imperſection of sueh a theory Count Rumford found no sensible difference between the capacities of solid iron and of its chips; but if we even suppose, for the sake of the argument, that the pressure and frietion of the borer had Iessened the capacity of the iron one twelfth, so as to make it no greater than that of copper; we shall then ſind that one twelfth of the absolute heat of the chips, thus abraded, must have amounted to ahove ò 000 degrees of Fahrenheit, and consequently that the natural zero ought to be placed above 700 000 degrees helow the freezing point, instead of I4 or 1500 only. It is, therefore, impossible to sunpose that any alteration of capacities can account for the production of heat Ly friction: nor ĩs it at all easier to apply this theory correetly to the phenomena of combustion. Apound of nitre contains about half its weight of dry acid, and the capacity of the acid, when diluted, is little more than half as great as that of vater; the acid of a pound of nitre must therefore contain less heat than a quarter of a pound of water: hut Lavoisier and Laplace have found, that the deſlagration of a pound of nitre produces a quantity oſ heat suſficient to melt tvelve pounds of ice, consequently the heat extricated by the decomposition of a pound of dry nitrous acid must be suſſicient to melt 24 pounds of ice; and even supposing the gases, extricated during the deſlagration, to absorh no more heat than the charcoal contained, vhich is for several reasons highly improbable, it follows that a pound of vater ought to contain at lenst as much heat, as vould be suſficient to melt 48 pounds of ice, that is, about 6720 degrees of Fahrenheit. In short, the further we pursue such calculations, the more we shall be convineed of the impossibility of applying them to the phenomena. In such a case as that of the nitrous acid, Dr. Blacks term of latent heat might be thought applicable, the heat being supposed to be contained in the - substance, without being comprehended in the quantity required for maintaining its actual temperaturee Iut even this hypothesis is wholly inapplicable to the extrication of heat by frietion, where all the qualities of the substances concerned remain precisely the same after the operation, as before it. If any further argument were required in confutation of the opinion, that the heat excited by friction is derived from a change of capacity, it might be obtained from Mr. Davy's experiment on the mutual friction of two pieces of ice, which converted them into water, in a room at the temperature of the freezing point: for in this case it is undeniable that the capacity of the water must have heen inereased during the operation; and the heat produced could not, therefore, have been occasioned by the diminution of the capacity of the ice. This discussion naturally leads us to an examination of the various theories whieh have been formed respecting the intimate nature of heat; a subjeet upon which the popular opinion seems to have been lately led avay by very superficial considerations. The facility with which the mind conceives the existence of an independent substance, liable to no material variations, except those of its quantity and distribution, especially when an appropriate name, and a place in the order of the simplest elements has been hestowed on it, appears to have caused the most eminent chemical philosophers to overlook some insuperable difficulties attending the hypothesis of caloriec. Caloric has been considered as a peculiar elastic or ethereal fluid, pervading the substance or the pores of all bodies, in different quantities, according to their different capacities for heat, and according to their actual temperatures; and heing transferred from one body to another upon any change of capacity, or upon any other disturbance of the equilibrium of temperature: it has also been commnnly supposed to he the general principle or cause of repulsion; and in its passage from one body to another, by radiation, it has been imagined by some to flow in a continued stream, and by others in the form of separate particles, moving, vith inconceivable velocity, at great distances from each other. The circumstances which have been already stated, respecting the produetion of heat by friction, appear to afford an unanswerable confutation of the voL. I. l 4 u whole of this doctrine. If the heat is neither received from the surrounding bodies, which it cannot be vithout a depression of their temperature, nor derived from the quantity already accumulated in the bodies themselves, which it could not be, even if their capacities were diminished in any imaginable degree, there is no alternative but to allow that heat must be actually generated by friction; and if it is generated out of nothing, it cannot hè matter, nor even an immaterial or semimaterial substance. The collateral parts of the theory have also their separate diſſiculties: thus, if heat were the general principle of repulsion, its augmentation could not diminish the elasticity of solids and of fluids; if it constituted a continued ſluid, it could not radiate freely through the same space in different directions; and if its repulsive particles folloved each other at a distance, they would still approach near enough to each other, in the focus of a burning glass, to have their motions deſlected from a rectilinear direction. If heat is not a substance, it must be a quality; and this quality can only be motion. It was Newton's opinion, that heat consists in a minute vibratory motion of the particles of bodies, and that this motion is communicated through an apparent vacuum, by the undulations of an elastic medium, which is also concerned in the phe nomena of light. If the arguments which have been lately advanced, in favour of the undulatory nature of light, be deemed valid, there will be still stronger reasons for admitting this doctrine respecting heat, and it will only be necessary to suppose the vibrations and undulations, principally constituting it, to be larger and stronger than those oſ light, vhile at the same time the smaller vibrations of light, and even the blackening rays, derived from still more minute vibrations, may, perhaps, when suſficiently condensed, concur in producing the eſiects of heat. These eſſects, heginning from the blackening rays, which are invisible, are a little more perceptible in the violet, which still possess but a faint power of illumination; the yellow green afford the most light; the red give less light, but much more heat, while the still larger and less frequent vibrations, which have no effeet on the sense of sight, may be supposed to give rise to the least reſrangible rays, and to constitute invisible heat. It is easy to imagine that such vibrations may be excited in the component parts of hodies, by percussion, by friction, or by the destruetion of the equilibrium of cohesion and repulsion, and by a change of the conditions on which it may be restored, in consequence of combustion, or of any other chemical change. It is remarkable that the particles of fluidss which are incapable of any material change of temperature from mutual friction, have ulso very little power of communicating heat to each other by their immediate action, so that there may be some analogy, in this respect, between the communication of heat and its mechanical excitation. The effects of heat on the cohesive and repulsive powers of bodies have sometimes been referred to the centrifugal forces and mutual collisions of the revolving and vibrating particles; and the increase of the elasticity oſ aeriform ſluids has been very minutely compared with the force which would be derived from an acceleration of these internal motions. In solids and in liquids, however, this increase of elasticity is not observahle, and the immediate effect of heat diminishes not only the force of cohesion, but also in some degree, that of repulsion, so that these vibrations, if they exist, must derive tneir eſfect on the corpuscular forces from the alterations which they produce on the situation of the particles, with respect to the causes of these forces. The different chemical effects of heat and light are far from furnishing any ohjection to this system; it is extremely easy to imagine the attraction between two or three hodies to be modiſied by the agitations, into which their particles are thrown. If certain undulations be capable of affecting one of the three bodies only, its cohesion with both the others may be weakened, and hence their mutual attraction may be comparatively increased; aud from various combinations of such differences, in the operation of difſerent kinds of heat and light, a great diversity of effects oſ a similar kind may be derived. If heat, when attached to any substance, be supposed to consist in minutæe vibrations, and when propagated from one body to another, to depend on the undulations of a medium highly elastic, its effects must strongly resemble those of sound, since every sounding body is in a state of vibration, and the air, or any other medium, which transmits sound, conveys its undulation to distant parts by means of its elasticity. And ve shall ſind that the principal phenomena of heat may actually be illustrated by a comparison with those of sound. The excitation of heat and sound are not only similar, but often identical; as in the operations of friction and percussion: they are both communicated sometimes by contact and sometimes by radiation; for besides the common radiation of sound through the air, its effects are communicated by contact, when the end of a tuning fork is placed on a table, or on the sounding board of an instrument, which receives from the fork an impression that is afterwards propagated as a distinct sound. And the effect of radiant heat, in raising the temperature of a body upon which it falls, resembles the sympathetic agitation of a string, when the sound of another string, which is in unison with it, is transmitted to it through the air. The water, vhich is dashed about by the vibrating extremities of a tuning fork dipped into it, may represent the manner in which the particles at the surface of a liquid are thrown out of the reach of the force of cohesion, and converted into vapour; and the extrication of heat, in consequence of condensation, may be compared with the increase of sound produced by lightly touching æ long chord which is slowly vibrating, or revolving in such a manner as to emit little or no audible sound; while the diminution of heat by expansion, and the increase of the capacity of a substance for heat, may be attributed to the greater space afforded to each particle, allowing it to be equally agitated vith a less perceptible effect on the neighbouring particles. In some cases, indeed, heat and sound not only resemble each other in their operations, but produce precisely the same effects; thus, an artiſicial magnet, the force of which is quickly destroyed by heat, is affected more slowly in a similar manner, vhen made to ring for a considerable time; and an electrical jar may be discharged, either by heating it, or by causing it to sound by the friction of the ſinger. All these analogies are certainly favourable to the opinion of the vibratory nature of heat, which has been sufficiently sanctioned by the authority of the greatest philosophers of past times, and of the most sober reasoners of the present. Those, however, who look up with unqualified reverence to the dogmas of the modern schools of chemistry, will probably long retain a partiality for the convenient, but superficial and inaccurate, modes of reason ing, which have been founded on the favourite hypothesis of the existence of caloric as a separate substance; but it may be presumed that in the end a careful and repeated examination of the facts, which have been adduced in confutation oſ that system, vill make a suſficient impression on the minds of the cultivators of chemistry, to induce them to listen to a less objectionable theory. LECTURE LIII. ON ELECTRICITY IN EQUILIBRIUM. TuE phenomena of electricity are as amusing and popular in their external form as they are intricate and abstruse in their intimate nature. In examinng these phenomena, a philosophical observer vill not be content with such ex hibitions as dazzle the eye for a moment, without leaving any impression that can be instruetive to the mind, but he will be anxious to trace the connexion of the facts with their general causes, and to compare them with the theories which have been proposed concerning them: and although the doctrine of electricity is in many respects yet in its infancy, ve shall find that some hypotheses may be assumed, vhich are capable of explaining the principal circumstances in a simple and satisfactory manner, and which are extremely useful in conne cting a multitude of detached facts into an intelligible system. These hypotheses, founded on the discoveries of Franklin, have been gradually formed into a theory, by the investigations of Aepinus and Mr. Cavendish, combined with the experiments and inferences o Lord Stanhope, Coulomb, and Robison. We shall first consider thie fundamental hypotheses on which this system depends, and secondly the conditions of equilibrium of the substances concerned in it; determining the mode of distribution of the electric fluid, and the forces or pressures derived from its action when at rest; all which will he found to be deduced from the theory precisely as they are experimentally observablee The motions of the eleetric fluid will next be noticed, as far as ve can form any general conclusions respecting them; and the manner in which the equilibrium of electricity is disturbed, or the excitation of electricity, vill also be considered; and, in the last place, it will be necessary to take a view of the mechanism or the - ili 5 practical part of electricity, and to examine the natural and artificial apparatus concerned in electrical phenomena, as vell as in those uiſout, which have been denominated galvanie. It is supposed that a peculiar ethereal ſluid pervades the pores, if not the actual substance, of the earth and of all other material bodies, passing through them with more or less facility, according to their different powers of condueting it: that the particles of this ſluid repel each other, and are attracted by the particles of common matter: that the particles of common matter also repel each other: and that these attractions and repulsions are equal among themselves, and vary inversely as the squares oſ the distances of the particles. The effeets of this fluid are distinguished from those of all other substances by an attractive or repulsive quality, which it appears to communicate to different bodies, and which differs in general from other attractions and repulsions, by its immediate diminution or cessation, when the hodies, acting on each other, come into contact, or vhen they are touehed by other hodies. The name electricity is derived from electrum, amber; for it was long ago observed that amber, vhen rubbed, continues for some time to attract small bodies; but at present electricity is usually excited by other means. In general a body is said to be electriſied, when it contains, either as a whole, or in any of its purts, more or less of the electrie fluid than is natural to ĩt; and it is supposed that what is called positive electricity depends on a redundancy, and negative electricity on a deſiciency of the fluid. These repulsions and attractions are supposed to act, not only hetween two particles which are either perfectly or very nearly in contact with each other, but also betveen all other particles at all distances, whatever obstacles may be interposed between them. Thus, if two electriſied balls repel each other, the effeet is not impeded by the interposition of a plate of glass: and if any other substance interposed appears to interfere with their mutual action, it is in consequence of its own electricãl affections. In these respects, as well as in the lav of their variation, the electrical forces differ from the common repulsion which operates between the particles of elastic fluids, and resemble more neurly that of gravitation. Their intensity, when sęparately considered, is much greater than that of gravition, and they might be supposed to be materially concerned in the great phenomena of the universe; but in the common neutral state of all bodies, the electrical ſluid, which is every where present, is so0 distributed, that the various forces hold each other exactly in equilibrium, and the separate results are destroved; unless we choose to consider gravitation itself as arising ſrom a comparatively slight inequality between the electrieal attiactions and repulsions. The attraction of the electrie ſluid to common matter is shown by its communication, from one hody to, another, which is less copiously supplied vith it, as well as by many other phenomena; and this attraction of the fluid of the first body, to the matter of the second, ĩs precisely equal to its repulsion for the quantity of the fluid, which naturally belongs to the second, 30 as to saturate the matter. For the excess or deſiciency of the ſluid in the ſirst body does not immediately produce either attraction or repulsion, s0 long as the natural distribution of the ſluid in the second body remains unaltered. j Since also two neutral bodies, the matter vhich they contain being saturated by the electric fluid, exhibit no attraction for each other, the matter in the first must be repelled by the matter in the second; for its attraction for the ſluid of the second would otherwise remain uncompensated. We are, however, scarcely justiſied in elassing this mutual repulsion. among the fundamental properties of matter; for useful as these laws are in explaining electrical appearances, they seem to deviate too far from the magniſicent simplicity of nature's works, to be admitted as primary consequences of the constitution of matter: they may, however, be considered as modiſications of some other more general lavs, which are yet wholly unknown to us. When the equilibrium of these forces is destroyed, the electric fluid is put in motion; those bodies, vhich allow the ſiuid a free passage, are called perfect conductors; but those which impede its motion, more or less, are nonconductors, or imperfect conductors. For example, while the electrie fluid is received into the metallic cylinder of an electrical machine, its accumulation may be prevented by the application of the hand to the cylinder which receives it, and ĩt will pass off through the person of the operator to : . the ground; hence the human body is called a conductor. But when the metallic cylinder, or conductor, of the machine is surrounded only by dry air, and supported by glass, the electric fluid is retained, and its density increased, until it becomes capable of procuring itself a passage, some inches in length, through the air, which is a very imperfect conduetor. If a person, connected with the conductor, be placed on a stool with glass legs, the electricity will no longer pass through him to the earth, but may be so accumulated, as to make its way to any neighbouring substance, which is capable of receiving it, exhibiting a luminous appearance, called a spark; and a person or a substance, so placed as to be in contact with nonconductors only, is said to be insulated. When electricity is subtracted from the substance thus insulated, it is said to be negatively electrified, but the sensihle effects are nearly the same, except that in some cases the form of the spark is a little different. Perfect conductors, vhen electriſied, are in general either overcharged or undercharged with electricity in their most distant parts at the same time; but nonconductors, although they have an equal attraction for the electric fluid, are often differently affected in different parts of their substance, even when those parts are similarly situated in every respect, except that some of them have had their electricity increased or diminished by a foreign cause. This property of nonconductors may be illustrated by means of a cake of resin, or a plate of glass, to which a local electricity may be communicated in any part of its surface, by the contact of an electrified body; and the parts thus electrified muy afterwards be distinguished from the rest, by the attraction which they exert on any small particles of dust or powder projected near them; the manner, in which the particles arrange themselves on the surface, indicating also in some cases the species oſ electricity, whether positive or negative, that has been employed; positive electricity producing an appearance somewhat resembling feathers; and negative electricity an arrangement more like spots. The inequality in the distribution of the electric fluid in a nonconductor may remain for some hours, or even :ome days, continually diminishing till it becomes imperceptible. These are the fundamental properties of the electric ſluid, and of the diſſrent kinds of matter as connected with that ſluid. We are next to examine voL. I. 4x ili jts distribution, and the attractive and repulsive effects exhibited by it, under difierent forms. Supposing a quantity of redundant ſluid to exist in æ spherical conducting body, it will be almost wholly eolleeted into a minute space contiguous to the surface, while the internal paits remain but little overcharged. For wve may neglect the actions of the portion of ſluid which is only occupied in saturating the matter, and also the eſfeet of the matter thus neutralised, since the redundant ſluid iĩs repelled as much hy the one as it is attracted by the other; and ve need only to consider the mutual actions of the particles of this superſluous ſluid on each other. It may then be shown, in the same manner as it is demonstrated of the force of gravitation, that all the spherical strata which are remoter from the centre than any given particle, ill have the vhole of their action on it annihilated by the balance of their forces, and that the eſſeetive repulsion oſ the interior strata will be the same, as if they were all collected in the contree This repulsion will, therefore, impel the particles of the fluid towards the surſace, as long as it exists, and nothing will impede the condensation of the reduudant fluid there, until ĩt is exhausted from the neighbourhood of the centre. In the same manner it may be shown, that if there be a deficiency of fluid, it will be only in the external parts, the central parts remaining always in a state of neutrality: and since the quantity of electrie ſluid taken away ſrom a budy, in any common cxperiment, hears but a very small proportion to the whole that it contains, the deſiciency vill also he found in a very small portion of the sphere, next io its surface. And if; instead of being spherical, the body be of any other form, the effects of electricity will still be principally confined to its surface. This proposition was very satisſactorily inves ſigated by Mr. Cavendish; and it was afierwards more fully shown, by Dr. Gray's experiments, that the capacities of diſterent bodies, for receiving electricity, depend much more on the quantity of their surfaces, than on their solid contents: thus, the conductor of an eleetrical machine will contain very nearly or quite as much electricity if hollow as if solid. If two spheres be united by a cylindrical conducting substance of small dimensions, there will be an equilibrium, vhen the actions of the redundant fluid in the spheres, on the whole fluid in the eylinder, are equal; that is, vhen both the spheres have. their surfaces electriſied in an equal degree: but if the length of the oylinder. is considerable, the ſluid within it can only remain at rest when the quantities of redundant ſluid are nearly equal in both spheres, and consequently when the density is greater in the smalle. And for a similar reason, in bodies of irregular forms, the ſluid is always most accumulated in the smallest parts; and when a conducting substance is pointed, the ſluid becomes so dense at its extremity, us casily to overcome the forces which tend to retain it in its situationn. Plate XXXIX. Fig. 551.) In this distribution we ſind a very characteristic difference between the pressure of the electric ſluid and the common hydrostatic pressure of liquids or oſ simple elastic ſluids; for these exert on every surface similarly situated a pressure proportionate to its magnitude; but the electric ſluid exerts a pressure on small and angular surfaces greater, in proportion to their magnitudes, than the pressure on larger parts: s0 that if the electrie fluid vere in general confined to its situation by the pressure of the atmosphere, that pressure might easily be too weak to oppose its escape from any prominent points. It does not appear, however, that this pressure is the only cause which prevents the escape oſ the electric ſluid; nor is it certain that this ſluid can pass through a perfect vacuum, although it has not yet been proved, that a body placed in a vacuum is perfectly insulatedlc Whatever the resistance may be, which prevents the dissipation of electricity, it is always the more easily overcome, as the electriſied substance is more pointed, and as the point is more prominent; and even the presence of dust is often unfavourable to the suecess of eleetrical experiments, on account of the great number of pointed terminations which it affords. The general eſfſect of electriſied bodies on each other, if their bulk is small in comparison with their distance, is, that they are mutually repelled when in similar states of electricity, and attracted when in dissimilar atates. This isa consequence immediately deducible from the mutual attraction of redundant matter and redundant fluid, and from the repulsion supposed to exist between any two portions either of matter or of fluid, and it may also easily be conſirmed by experimental proof. A neutral body, if it were a perfeet nonconductor, vould not be affected either way by the neighhourhood of an elcctrified body: for while the whole matter contained in it remains barely saturated vith the electric ſluid, the attractions and repulsions balance each other. But in general, a neutral body appears to be attracted by an electriſied hody, on account of a change of the disposition of the fluid which it contains, upon the approach of a body either positively or negatively electrifiedl. The electrical affeetion produced in this manner, without any actual transfer of the ſluid, is called induced clectricity. When a body positively electriſied approaches to a neutral body, the redundancy oſ the fluid expels a portion of the natural quantity from the nearest parts of the neutral body, so that it is accumulated at the opposite extremity; while the matter, which is left deficient, attracts the redundant fluid of the first body, in such a manner as to cause it to be more condensed in the neighbourhood of the second than elsewhere; and hence the ſluid of this body is driven still further off, and all the effects are redoubled. The attraction of the redundant ſluid of the electrified body, for the redundant matter of the neutral body, is stronger than its repulsion for the fluid which hãs heen expelled from it, in proportion as the square of the mean distance of the matter is smaller than that of the mean distance of the fluid: so that in all such cases of induced electricity, an attraction is produced between the bodies concerned. And a similar attraction will happen, under contrary circumstances, when a neutral body and a hody negatively electrified, approach each other. The state of induced electricity may be illustrated by placing a long conductor at a little distance from an electriſied substance, and directed towards it; and by suspending pith balls or other light bodies from it, in pairs, at different parts of its length: these vill repel each other, from being similarly electriſied, at the two ends, vhich are in contrary states of electricity, while at acertain point tovards the middle, they will remain at rest, the conductor being here perfeetly neutral. It was from the situation of this point that Lord Stanhope ſirst inferred the true law of the electric attractions and repulsions, although Mr. Cavendish had before suggested the same law as the most probable supposition. The attraction, thus exerted by an eleetrified hody upon neutral substances, ĩs strong enough, if they are sufficiently light, to overcome their gravitation, and to drav them up from a table at some little distance: upon touching the electrified body, if it is a conductor, they receive a quantity of electricity from it, and are again repelled, until they are deprived of their electricity by contact with some other substance, which, if suſſiciently near to the first, is A usually in a contrary state, and therefore renders them still more capable of returning, when they have touched it, to the ſirst substance, in consequence of an increased attraction, assisted also by a new repulsion. This alternation has_been applied to the construction of severalelectrical toys; a little hammer, for example, has been made to play between two bells; and this instrument has been employed for giving notice of any change of the electrical state of the atmosphere. The repulsion, which takesplace between two bodies, in a similar state of elecetricity, is the cause of the currents of air which always accompany the discharge of electricity, whether negative or positive, from pointed substances; each particle of air, as soon as it has received its electricity from the point, being immediately repelled by it; and this current has also been supponsed to facilitate the escape of the electricity, by bringing a continual succession of particles not already overcharged. If two bodies approach each other, electriſied either positively or negatively in different degrees, they will either repel or attract each other, according to their distance: when they are very remote, they exhibit a repulsive force, but wheu they are within a certain distance, the effects of induced electricity overcome the repulsion, which would necessarily take place, if the distribution of the fluid remained unaltered by their mutual inſluence. When a quantity of the electric fluid is accumulated on one side of a nonconducting substance, it tends to drive off the fluid from the other side; and if this fluid is suffered to escape, the remaining matter exerts its attraction on the fluid which has been imparted to the first side, and allows it to be accumulated in a much greater quantity than could have existed in an equal surface of a conducting substancee In this state, the body is said to be charged; and for producing it the more readily, each surface is usually coated with a conducting substance, which serves to convey the fluid to and from its different parts with convenience The thinner any substance is, the greater quantity of the ſluid is required for charging it in this manner, so as to produce a given tension, or tendency to escape: but if it be made too thin, it will be liable to break, the attractive force of the ſluid, for the matter on the opposite side overcoming the cohesion of the substance, and perhaps forcing its way through the temporary vacuum which is formed. When a communication is made in any manner by a condueting substance between the two coatings of a charged plate or vessel, the equilibrium is restored, and the eſcet is called a shock. If the coatings be removed, the plate will stĩll remain charged, and it may be gradually diseharged by making a communication beteen its several parts in suecession, but it cannot he discharged at once, for want oſ a common connexion: so that the presence of the coating is not absolutely essentĩal to the charge und discharge of the opposite surfaces. Such a coated suhistance is most usunlly employed in the form of a jur. Jars vere formerly filled with wuter, or with iron ſilings; the instrument having been prineĩpully made known from the experiments of Musschenbrock and others at Leyden, it vas called the Leyden phial; but at present a coating of tin foll is commonly applied on both sides of the jur, leaving a suſſicient spuce at ĩts upper part, to avoid the spontaneous discharge, which would often take place between the coatings, if they approached too near to cach other; and a ball is fixed to the cover, which has a communication with the internal coating, and hy means of which the jur is charged, while the external coating is allowed to communicate vith the ground. A collection of such jars is called a battery, and an apparatus of this kind muy be made 30 powerful, by increasing the number of jars, as to exhibit many striking effeets by the motion of the electrie ſluid, in its passage from one to the other of the surfaces. The conducting powers of different substances are concerned, not only in the facility with which the motions of the electrie ſluid are directed into æ particular channel, but also in many cases of its equilibrium, and particularly in the properties of charged substances, which depend on the resistance opposed by nonconductors to the ready transmission of the fluid. These powers may be compared, by ascertaining the greatest length of each of the substances to be examined, through which a spark or a shock ill tuke it course, in preference to a given length of air, or of any other standard of comparison. The substances, vhich conduct electricity the most readily, are metals, well burnt charcoal, animal bodies, acids, saline liquors, water, and very rare air. The principal nonconduetors are glass, ice, gems, dry salts, sulfur, amber, resins, silk, dry wood, oils, dry air of the usual density, and the barometrical vacuum. Heat commonly inereases the conducting powers of bodies; a jar of glass may be discharged by a moderate heat, and liquid resins are capable of transmitting shocks, although they are by no means good conductors: it is remarkable also that a jar may be discharged by minute agitation, when it is caused to ring by the friction of the finger. It has neen observed that, in a great variety of cases, those substances, which are the best conductors of heat, afford also the readiest passage to electricity; thus, copper conducts heat more rapidly, and electricity more readily, than iron, and platina less than almost any other metal; glass also presents a considerable resistance to the transmission of both these inſluencess. The analogy is, however, in many respects imperfect, and it aſſords us but little light, with regard either to the nature of heat, or to that of the electric ſluid, LECTURE LIV. ON ELECTRICITY IN MOTION. TuEr manner in which the electric fluiil is transſerred from one body to another, the immediate effects of such a transfer, the causes which originally disturb the equilibrium of electricity, and the practical methods, by which all these circumstances are regulated and measured, require to be considered as belonging to the subject of electricity in motion. Among the modes of excitation by which the equilibrium is originally disturbed, one of the most interesting is the galvanic apparatus, which has been of late years a very favourite subject of popular curiosity, and of which the theory and operation will be brieſly examined, although the subject appears rather to belong to the chemical than to the mechanical doctrine of electricity. The progressive motion of the electric fluid through conducting substances is 50 rapid, as to be performed in all cases without a sensible interval of time. It has indeed been said, that when very weakly excited, and obliged to pass to a very great distance, a perceptible portion of time is actually occupied in its passage; but this fact is somewhat doubtful, and attempts have been made in vain, to estimate the interval, employed in the transmission of a shock through several miles of wiree We are not to imagine that the same particles of the ſluid, which enter at one part, pass through the whole conducting substance, any more than that the same portion of blood, which is thrown out of the heart, in each pulsation, arrives at the wrist, at the instant that the pulse is felt theree The velocity of the transmission of a spark or shock far exceeds the actual velocity of each particle, in the same manner as the velocity of a vave exceeds that of the particles of water concerned in its propagation; and this velocity must depend both on the elasticity of the electric ſluid, and on the ſorce with which it is confined to the conducting substance. If this force were merely derived from the pressure of the atmosphere, we might infer the density of the fluid from the velocity oſ a spark or shock, compared with that of sound; or ve might deduce its velocity from a determination of its density. It has been supposed, although perhaps somehat hastily, that the actual velocity is nearly equal to that of light. When a conducting substance approaches another, which is electrified the distribution of the electric ſluid vithin it is necessarily altered by induction, hefore it receives a spark, so that its remoter extremity is brought into a state similar to that oſ the ſirst body: hence it happens that vhen the spark passes, it produces less effect at the remoter end of the substance, vhile the part presented to the electriſied body is most affected, on account of its sudden change to an opposite state. But if both ends approach bodies in opposite states of electricity, they will both be strongly affected vhen the shock takes place, vhile the middle of the circuit undergoes but little change. The manner in which the electric ſluid makes its way, through a more or less perfect nonconductor, is not completely understood: ĩt is doubtful whether the substance is forced away on each side, s0 as to leave a vacuum for the passage of the fluid, or vhether the newly formed surface helps to guide it in its vay; and in some cases it has been supposed that the gradual communication of electricity has rendered the substance more capable of conducting it, either immediately,. or, in the case of the air, by ſirst rareſying it. However this may be, the perforation of a jar of glass by an overcharge, and that of a plate of air by a spark, appear to be effects of the same kind, although the charge of the jar is principally contained in the glass, while the plate of air is perhaps little concerned in the distribution of the eleetricity. The actual direction of the electric current has not in any instance been fully ascertained, although there are some appearances which seem to justify the common denominations of positive and negativee Thus, the fracture of a charged jor of glass, by spontaneous explosion, is vell defined on the positive, and splintered on the negative side, as might be expected from the passage of a foreign substance from the former side to the latter; and a candle, held between a positive and a negative hall, although it apparently vibrates voL. I. 4 o 670 LECTURE LIV. hetween them, is found to heat the negative hall much more than the positivee We cannot, however, glace much dependence on any circumstance of this kind, for it is doubtful whether any current of the fluid. which ve can produce, possesses suſficient momentum to carry with it a body of sensible magnitude. Itis in fact of little consequence to the theory, whether the terms positive and negative be correctly applied, provided that their sense remain determined; and that, like positive and negative quantities in mathematies, they be always understood of states which neutralise each other. The original opinion of Duſay, of the existence of two distinct ſluids, a vitreous and a resinous electricity, has at present few advocates, although some have thought such a supposition ſavoured by the phenomena of the galvanic decomposition of vater. When electricity is simply accumulated withont motion, it does not appear to have any eſfect, either mechanical, chemical, or physiological, by which its presence can be discovered; the acceleration of the pulse, and the advancement of the growth of plants, which have heen sometimes attributed to it, have not been confirmed by the most accurate experiments. An uninterrupted current of electricity, through a perfect conductor, would perhaps be also in every respect imperceptible, since the best conductors appear to be the least affected by it. Thus, if we place our hand on the conduetor of an electrical machine, the electricity will pass oſf continually through the body, without exciting any sensationn. A constant stream of galvanic elecetricity, passing through an iron vire is, however, capable of exciting a considerable degree of heat, and if it be transmitted through the hands of the operator, it will produce a slight numbness, although in general some interruption of the current is necessary in order to furnish an accumulation suſficient to produce sensible effects; and such an interruption may even increase the eſſect of a single spark or shock; thus, gunpowder is more readily ſiredd by the discharge of a battery passing through an interrupted eircuit, than through a series of perfect conductors. The most common eſfeet of the motion of the eleetrie ſluid is the produetion of light. Light is probably never occasioned by the passage of the fluid through a perfect conductor; for when the discharge of a large hattery renders a small wire luminous, the ſluid is not wholly conſined to the wire, but 2 overflows a little into the neighbouring space. There is always an appearance of light whenever the path of the fluid is interrupted by an imperfect conductor; nor is the apparent contact of conducting substances suſficient to prevent it, unless they are held together by a considerable force; thus, a chain, conveying a spark or shock, appears luminous at each link, and the rapidity of the motion is 50 grent, that we can never observe any difference in the imes of the appearance of the light in its different parts; so that a series of luminous points, formed hy the passage of the electric fluid, between a string of conducting bodies, represents at once a brilliant delineation of the whole figure in which they are arranged. A lump of sugar, a piece of wood, or an egg, may easily be made luminous in this manner; and many substances, by means of their properties as solar phosphori, retain for some seconds the luminous appearance thus acquired Even water is s0 imperfect a conductor, that a strong shock may he seen in its passage through it; and when the air is suſficiently moistened or rarefied to become a conductor, the track of the fluid through it is indicated by streams of light, which are perhaps derived from a series of minute sparks passing between the particles of water or of rareſied air. When the air is extremely rare, the light is greenish; as it becomes more dense, the light becomes blue, and then violet, until it no longer conductss The appearance of the electrical light of a point enables us to distinguish the nature of the electricity with which it is charged; a pencil of light, streaming from the point, indicating that its electricity is positive, while a luminous star, with few diverging rays, shows that it is negative. The sparks, exhibited by small halls, differently electriſied, have also similar varieties in their forms, accõrding to the nature of their charges. (Plate XL. Fig. 552.) The production of heat by electricity frequently accompanies that of light, and appears to depend in some measure on the same circumstancess A ſine wire may be fused and dissipated by the discharge of a hattery; and without being perſeetly melted, it maysometimes he shortened or lengthened, accordingly as it is loose or stretehed during the experiment. The more readily a metal conducts, the shorter is the portion of it which the same shock can destroy; and it has sometimes heen found that a double charge of a battery has been capable of meltiug a quadruple length of wire of the same kind. The mechanical effects of electricity are probably in many cases the conse- quences of the rareſaction produeed by the heat which is excited; thus, the explosion, attending the transmission of a shock or spark through the air, may easily be supposed to be derived ſrom the expansion caused by heat; and the destruction of a glass tube, vhich contains a fluid in a capillary bore, vhen a spark is caused to pass through it, is the natural consequence of the conversion of some particles oſ the ſluid into vapour. But vhen a glass jar is perſorated, this rarefaction cannot be supposed to he adequate to the eſfect. It is remarkable that such a perſoration may be made by a very moderate discharge, when the glass is in contact with oil or with sealing vax; and no suſſicient explanation of this circumstance has yet been given. A strong current of electricity, or a suecession of shocks or sparks, transmitted through a substance, by means of ſine wires, is capable of producing many chemical combinations and decompositions, some of which may be attributed merely to the heat which it occasions, but others are wholly different. OF these the most remarkable is the production of oxygen and hydrogen gas ſrom common vater, vhich are usually extricated at once, in such quantities, as, when again combined, vill reproduce the water which has disappeared; but in some eases the oxygen appears to be disengaged most copiously at the positive wire, and the hydrogen at the negative. When the spark is reeeived hy the tongue, it has generally a subacid taste; aud an explosion of any ind is usually accompanied hy a smell somewhat likæ that of sulſur, or rather of fired gunpowder. The peculiar sensation, which the electriec ſluid occasions in the human frame, appears in gencral to be derived from the spasmodic contractions oſf the muscles through wlhich it passes; although in some cases it produces pain of a diſſerent ind; thus, the spark of a conductor occasions a disagreeable sensation in the skin, and vhen an extoriated surface is placed in the galvanic current, a sense of smurting, mixed with burning, is experiencedl. Sumetimes the effect of a shock is ſelt most powerſully at the joints, on account of the diſiculty which the ſluid finds in passing the articulating surſaces vhich form the cavity ofthe juints. The sudden death of an animal, in consequence oſ a violent shock, is probably owing to the immediate exhaustion of the vhole energy of the nervous system. It is remarkable that a very minute tremor, communicated to the most elastic parts of the hody, in particular to the chest, produces an agitation of the nerves, which is not vholly unlike the eſſect of a weak electricity. The principal modes, in which the electric equilibrium is primarily destroyed, are simple contact, friction, a change of the form of aggregation, and chemical combinations and decompositions. The electricity produced by the simple contact of any two substances is extremely veak, and can only be deteeted by very delicate experiments: in general it appears that the substance, vhich conducts the more readily, acquires a slight degree of negative eleetricity, while the other substance is positively electriſied in an equal degree. The same disposition of the fluid is also usually produced by frietion, the one substance always losing as much as the other gains; and commonly although not always, the vorst conduetor becomes positive. At the instant in which the friction is applied, the capacities or attractions of the bodies for electricity appear to be altered, and a greater or less quantity is required for saturating them; and ũpon the cessation of the temporary change, this redundancy or deſicieney is rendered sensiblee When two substances of the same kind are rubbed together, the smaller or the rougher becomes negatively electiiſied; perhaps because the smaller surface is more heated, in consequence of its undergoing more frietion than an equal portion of the larger, and hence becomes a better conductor; and because the rougher is in itself a hetter conductor than the smoother, and may possibly have its conduceting povers increased by the greater agitation of its purts which the friction produces. The hack of a live cat hecomes positively electrified, with whatever substance it is rubbed; glass is positive in most cases, but not when rubbe with mercury in a vacuum, although sealing wvax, vhich is generally negative, is rendered positive by immersion in a trough of mercury. When a white and a black silk stocking are rubbed together, the white stocking acquires positive electricity, und the black negative, perhaps because the black dye renders the silk both rougher and a better conductor. Those substances, vhich have very little conlueting power, are sometimes called eleetries, since they are capable of exhihiting readily the eleetrieity vhich frietion excites on their surfaces, where it remains accumulated, so that it may be colleeted into a conductor; whild the surfaces of such substances, as have greater conducting powers, do not ,50 rendily imhibe the fſluid from others vith which they are rubbed, since they may be supplied from the internal parts of the substances themselves, when their altered capacity requires it; thus, glass, when heated to 110° & Fahrenheit, can with difiiculty be excited, becoming an imperſect conductor: hut a thin plate of a conducting substance, when insulated, may be excited almost as easily as an electric, commonly so called. Vapours are generally in a negative state, hut if they rise from metallic substances, or even from some kinds of heated glass, the eſfect is uncertain, probably on account of some chemical actions which interfere with it. Sulfur becomes electrical in cooling, and wax candles are said to be sometimes found in a state so electrical, vhen they are taken out of their moulds, as to attract the particles of dust which are floating near them. The tourmalin, and several other erystallized stones, become electrical when heated or cooled, and it is found that the disposition, assumed hy the ſluid, bears a certain relation to the direction in which the stone transmits the light most readily; some parts of the crystal being rendered always positively and others negatively electrical, by an increase of temperature. The most remarkable of the phenomena, attending the excitation of electricity by chemical changes, are those which have lately received the appellation of galvanic. Some of the effects which have been considered as belonging to galvanism are prohably derived from the electrical powers of the animal body, and the rest have been referred by Mr. Volta, and many other philosophers on the continent, to the mere mechanical actions of bodies possessed of different properties with regard to electricity. Thus, they have supposed that when a circulation of the electric ſluid is produced through a long series of substances in a certain direction, the differences of their attractions and of their conducting povers, vhich must remain the same throughout the process, keep up this perpetual motion, in deſiance of the general laws of mechanical forces. In this country it has heen generally maintained, that no explanation founded on such principles could be admissible, even if it were in all other respects suſficient and satisfactory, which the mechanical theory of galvanism certainly is not. The phenomena of galvanism appear to be principally derived from an inequality in the distribution of the electric fluid, originating from chemical changes, and maintained by means of the resistance opposed to its motion, by a continued alternation of substances of difſerent kinds, which furnishes a much stronger obstacle to its transmission than any of those substances alone would have done. The substances employed must neither consist wholly of solids nor of ſluids, and they must be of three different kinds, possessed oſ different povers of conducting electricity; but whether the difference of their conducting powers is of any other consequence than as it accompanies different chemical properties, is hitherto undetermined. OF these three substances, to must possess a power of acting mutually on each other, while the other appears to serve principally for making a separate connexion between them: and this action may be of two kinds, or perhaps of more; the one is oxidation, or the combination of a metal or an inſlammable substance with a portion of oxygen derived from water or from an acid, the other sulfuration, or a combination with the sulfur contained in a solution of an alkaline sulfuretWe may represent the effects of all galvanic combinations, by considering the oxidation as producing positive electricity in the acting liquid, and the sulfuration as producing negative electricity, and by imagining that this electricity is alvays communicated to the best conductor of the other substances concerned, so as to produce a circulation in the direction thus determined. For example, when two vires of zinc and silver, touching each other, are separately immersed in an acid, the acid, becoming positively electrical, imparts ĩts electricity to the silver, and hence it flows hack into the zine: when the ends of a piece of charcoal are dipped into water and into an acid, connected together by a small tube, the acid, becoming positive, sends its superſluous ſluid through the charcoal into the vater; and if a wire of copper be dipped into water and a solution of alkaline sulfuret, connected with each other, the sulfuret, becoming negative, ill druw the fluid from the copper on which it acts; and in all these cases the direction of the current is truly determined, as it may he shown by composing a battery of a number of alternations of this kind, and either examining the state of its different parts by electrical tests, or connecting vires with its extremities, which, when immersed into a portion oſ ater, will exhibit the production of oxygen gas where they emit the electric fluid, and of hydrogen where they receive it. These processes of oxidation and of sulfuration may he opposed to each other, or they may be eombined in various ways, the sum or difference oſ the separate actions heing obtained hy their union; thus it usually happens that both the metals employed are oxidable in some degree, and the oxidation, which takes place at the surface of the better conductor, tends to impede the vhole eftect, perhaps by impeding the passage of the fluid through the surfacee The most oxidable of the æ metals, and probably the worst conductor, is Zine; the next is iron; then come tin, lead, copper, silver, gold, and platina. (Plate XL. Fig. 553.. 555.) In the same manner as a vire charged with positive eleetricity causes an extrication of oxygen gas, so the supply of electricity through the more eonducting metal promotes the oxidation of the zinc of a galvanic battery; and the effect of this circulation may be readily exhibited, by ſixing a wire ofæine, and another oſ silver or platina, in an acid, vhile one end of each is loose, and may be brought together or separated at pleasure: for at the moment that the contact takes place, a stream of bubbles rising from the platina, and a white cloud of oxid falling from the zinc, indicate hoth the eireulation of the fluid and the increase of the chemical action. But when, on the other hand, a plate of Zinc is made negative by the action of an acid on the greater part of its surface, a detached drop of water has less eſfect on it, than in the natural state: while a plate of iron, which touches the ine, and forms a part of the cirele with ĩt, is very readily oxidated at a distant point: such a plate must therefore be considered, with regard to this effect, as being made positive by the electrieity which it receives from the acid or the water; unless something like a compensation be supposed to take place, from the effects of induced eleetricity. Instead of the extrication of hydrogen, the same causes vill sometimes occasion a deposition of a metal which has been dissolved, will prevent the solution of a metal vhich vould otherwise have been corroded, or produce some effects which appear o indicate the presence of an alkali, either volatile or fixed. All these operations may, however, be very much impeded by the interposition of any considerable length of water, or of any other imperfeet conductor. (late XL. Fig. 556.) It is obvious, that since the current of electrieity, produced by a galvanie cirele, facilitates those actions from which ĩts powers are derived, the effect of a double series must be more than twice as great as that of a single one: and hence arises the activity of the pile of Volta, the discovery of which forms the most important era in the history of this department of natural Enovledge. The intensity of the electrieal charge, and the chemical and physiological effects of a pile or battery, seem to depend principally on the number of alternations of substances; the light and heat more on the joint magnitude oſ the surfaces employed. In common elecetricity, the greatest heat appears to be occasioned by a long continuation of a slow motion of the ſluid; and this is perhaps best furnished in galvanism by a surface oſ large extent, while some other efſects may very naturally be expected to depend on the intensity of the charge, independently of the quantity of chaged surface. It may easily be imagined, that the tension of the ſluid must be uearly proportional to the number of surfaces, imperfectly conducting, which are interposed between the ends of a pile or battery, the density of the fluid becoming greater and greater by a limited quantity at each step; and it is easily understood, that any point of the pile may be rendered neutral, by a connexion vith the earth, while those parts, vhichare ahove it or below it, will still preserve their relations unaltered with respect to each other: the opposite extremities being, like the opposite surface of a charged jar, in contrary states, and a partial discharge being produced, as often as they are connected by a condueting substance. The various forms, in which the piles or troughs are constructed, are of little consequence to the theory of their operation: the most convenient are the varnished troughs, in which plates of silvered inc are arranged side by side, with intervening spaces for the reception of vater, or of an acidc. Plate XL. Fig. 557.) It is unquestionable that the torpedo, the gymnotus electricus, and some other fishes, have organs appropriated to the excitation of eleetricity, and that they have a pover of communicating this electricity at pleasure to conduceting substances in their neighbourhood. These organs somewhat resemble in their appearance the plates of the galvanic pile, although ve knov nothing of the immediate arrangement, from vhich their eleetrical properties are derived; but the effect of the shock, which they produce, resembles in all respects that of the weak charge of a very large battery. It has also been shown by the experiments of Galvani, Volta, and Aldini, that the nerves and muscles of the human hody possess some electrical povers, although they are so much less concęrned in the phenomena which vere at ſirst attributed to them by Galvani, than he originally supposed, that many philosophers have been inclined to consider the excitation of electricity as always occasioned by the inanimate substances employed, and the spasmodic contractions of the muscles as merely very delicate tests of the inſluence of foreign electricity on the nerves. Such is the general outline of. the principal experiments and conclusions 4r ] which the subject of galvanism affurded before Mr. Davy's late ingenious and interesting rescarches, which have thrown much light, not only on the foundation of the whole of this class of phenomena, hut also on the nature of chemical actionsand affinities in general. Mr. Davy is inclined to infer ſrom his experiments, that all the attractions, which are the causes of chemical combinations, depend on the opposite natural electricities of the bodies concerned; sinee such bodies are alvays found, by delicate tests, to exhibit, when in contact, marks of different species of electricity; and their mutual actions may be either augmented or destroyed, by inercasing their natural charges of eleetricity, or by electriſying them in a contrary way. Thus, an acid and a metal are found to be negatively and positively electricul with respect to each other; and by further electrify ing the acid negatively, and the metal positively, their combination is accelerated; but when the acid is positively electriſied, or the metal negatively, they have no effect whatever on each other. The acid is also attracted, as a negative body, by another positively electriſied, and the metal by a body negatively eleetriſied, so that a metallic salt may be decomposed in the circuit oſ Volta, the positive point attructing the acid, and the negative point the metal: and these attractions are so strong, as to carry the particles of the respective bodies through any intervening medium, which is in a fluid state; or even through a moist solid; nor are they intercepted in their passage, by substances which, in other cases, have the strongest elective attractions for them. Alkali, sulfur, and alkaline sulfurets, are positive with respect to the metals, and much more with respect to the acids: hence they have a very strong natural tendency to combine with the acids and with oxygen: and hydrogen must also be considered as belonging to the same class with the alkalis. Supposing now a plate of zine to decompose a portion of water: the oxygen, which has a negative property, unites with the zine, and probably tends to neutralise it, and to weaken its attractive force; the hydrogen is repelled by the zinc, and carries to the opposite plate of silver its natural positive electricity; and if the two plates be made to touch, the energy of the ꝓlate of zinc is restored, by the electricity which it receives from the silver: and it receives ĩt the more readily, as the two metals, in any case of their contacet, have a tendency to become electrical, the zinc positively, and the silver negatively. Mr. Davy therefore considers this chemical action as destroying, or at leagt counteracting, the natural tendency of the electric ſuid to pass from 1he vater to the zine, and from modiſications oſ this counteraction he explains 1he eſfects of galvanic combinations in all cases. Thus, in a cirele composer oſ copper, sulfuret, and iron, the fluid tends to pass from the iron towards the sulfuret, and from the copper to the iron, in one direction, and in the opposite direction from the copper to the sulfuret, with a force which must be equal to both the others, since there would otherwise be a continual motion without any mechanical cause, and without any chemical change; hut the action of the sulfuret on the copper tends to destroy its electromotive, or rather electrophorie, power, of directing the current towards the sulfuret, and its comhination with the sulfur makes it either positively electrical, or negatively electrical in a less considerable degree; consequently the ſluid passes, according to its natural tendency, from the copper to the iron, and from the iron io the sulfuret. In a third case, vhen copper, an acid, and water, form a cirele, the natural tendency is from the acid 1o the copper on one side, and from the acid to the water, and from the water to the copper on the other; here we must suppose the first foree to he only a little weakened by the ehemical action, while the third is destroyed, so that the ſirst overcomes the s&cond, and the circulation is determined, although very feebly, in such a direetion, that the fluid passes from the acid to the copper. When, in the fourth place, the combination consists of copper, sulfuret, and water, the tendencies nre, first, from the copper to the sulfuret, and from the vater to the eopper; and secondly, from the water to the sulfuret: in this instance a chemical action must be supposed betveen the oxygen of the water and the sulſuret, which lessens the electromotive tendency, more than the action that takes place between the sulfuret and the copper, s0 that the ſluid passes ſfrom the copper to the sulfuret; and the eurrent has even force enough to prevent any chemical action hetween the water and the copper, which vould tend to counteract that force, iſ it took place. Mr. Davy has observed that the decomposition of the substances, employed n the hattery of Volta, is of much more consequence to their activity than either their conducting pover, or their simple action on the other elements of the series: thus, the sulfurie acid, which conducts electricity better, and dissolves the metals more readily, than a neutral solution, is, notwithstanding, less active in the hattery, hecanse it ĩs not easily decomposed. Mr. Davy bus also extended his researches, and the application of his discoveries, to a variety of natural as well as artiſicial phenomena, and there can be no doubt but that he vill still make such additions to his experiments, as will be of the greatest importag#e to this branch of science. ] The operation of the most usual electrical machines depends first on the excitation of eleetricity by the friction of glass on a cushion of leather, covered with a metallic amalgam, usually made of mercury, zinc, and tin, which probubly, besides being of use in supplying electricity readily to different purts of the glass, undergoes in general a chemical change, by means of which some eleetricity is extricated. The fluid, thus excited, is received into an insulated conductor by means of points, placed at a small distance from the surface which has lately undergone the effects of friction, and from this conductor it is conveyed by vires or chains to any other parts at pleasure. Sometimes also the cushion, instead of being connected vith the earth, is ſtself fixed to a second conductor, which becomes negatively electrified; and either conductor may contain within ĩt a jar, vhich may be charged at once by the operation of the machine, when its internal surface is connected either with the earth, or vith that of the jar contained in the opposite conductor. The glass may be either in the form of a circular plate or of a cylinder, and it ĩs uncertain which of the arrangements affords the greatest quantity of electricity from the same surface; but, the cylinder is cheaper than the plate, and Iess liable to accidents, and appears to be at least equally powerful. (Plate XL. Fig. 558, 559.) The plate machine in the Teylerian museum, employed by Van Marum, when worked by two men, excited an electricity, of which the attraction vas sensible at the distance of à8 feet. and which made a point luminous at 27 feet, and afforded sparks nearly 24 inches long. A battery charged by it, melted at once twenty ſive feet of ſine iron wiree Mr. Wilson had also a few years ago, in the Pantheon in London, an apparatus of singular extent; the principal conductor was 150 feet long, and I6 inches in diameter, and he employed a cireuit of 4800 feet of vire. The electrophorus derives its operation from the properties of induced electricity. A cake of a nonconducting substance, commonly of resin or of sulfur, is ſirst excited by ſriction, and hecomes negatively electric: an insulated plate of a conducting substance, being placed on it, does not come suſficiently into contact with it to receive its electricity, but acquires by induction an opposite state at its lover surface, and a similar state at its upper; s0 that vhen this upper and negative surface is touched hy a substance communicating with the earth, it receives enough of the electrie ſluid to restore the equilibrium. The plate then being raised, the action of the cake no longer continues, and the eleetricity, which the plate has received from the earth, is imparted to a conductor or to a jar; and the operation may be continually repeated, until the jar has received a charge, of an intensity equal to that of the plate when raisedl. Although the quantity of eleetricity, received hy the plate, is exactly equal to that which is emitted from it at each alternation, yet the spark is far less sensible; since the eſſect of the neighbourhood of the cake ĩs to increase the capacity of the plate, while the tension or foree impelling the fluid is but weak; and at the same time the quantity received is suſficient, when the capacity of the plate is again diminished, to produce a much greater tension, at a distance from the cake. (Plate XL. Fig. 560.) The condenser acts in some measure on the same principles with the electrophorus, both instruments deriving their properties from the effects of induetion. The use of the condenser is to collect a eak electricity from a large substance into a smaller ohe, s0 as to make its density or tension sufſicient to be examined. A small plate, connected with the substance, is brought nearly into contact with another plate communicating with the earth; in general a thin stratum of air only is interposed; but sometimes a noncondueting varnish is employed; this method is, however, liable to some uncertainty, from the permanent electricity which the varnish sometimes contracts by frietion. The electricity is accumulated by the attraction of the plate communicating with the earth, into the plate of the condenser; and when this plate is ſirst separated from the substance to be examined, and then removed from the opposite plate, its electricity is always oſ the same kind vith that which originally existed in the substance, but its tension is s0 much increased as to render it more easily discoverablee. This principle has been variously applied by different electricians, and the employment of the instrument has been facilitated by several subordinate arrangements. (Plate XL. Fig. 561.) Mr. Cavallos multiplier is a combination of two eondensers; the second or auxiliary plate of the first, like the plate of the electrophorus, is moveable, and carries a charge oſ electricity, contrary to that of the substance to be examined, to the ſirst or insulated plate of the second condenser, which receives it repeatedly, until it has acquired an equal degree of tension; and when the two plates of this condenser are separated, they hoth exhibit an electricity much more poverſul than that of the ſirst condenser. The ſorce is, however, still more rapidly augmented by the instruments of Mr. Bennet and Mr. Nicholson, although it has been supposed that these instruments are more liable to inconvenienco from the attachment of a greater portion of electricity to the ſirst plate of the instrument, which leaves, for a very considemble time, a certain quantity of the charge, not eusily separable from it. Mr. Dennet employs three varnished plates laid on each other, but Mr. Nicholson has substituted simple metallie plates, approaching only very near together, so that there can be no error from any accidental friction. In both of these instruments, the second plate of a condenser acquires an electricity contrary und nearly equal to that of the first, by means of vhich it brings a third plate very nearly into the same state with the ſirst; and when the first and thinl plates are connected and insulated, they produce a charge nearly twice as great in the second plate, while the ſirst plate becomes at the same time doubly charged; s0 that by ench repetition of this process, the intensity of the eleetrieity is nearly doubled: it is thereſore scarcely possible that any quantity should be so small us to eseape detection hy its operation. (Plate XL. Fig. 562, 563.) The immediate intensity of the electricity may be measured, and its character distinguished, by electrical balances, and by electrometers of difierent construetions. The electrical halance measures the attraction or repulsion exerted by two halls at a given distanee, by the magnitude of the force required' to counteract ĩt; and the most convenient manner of applying this foree is by the torion of a wire, vhich has been employed for the purpose hy Ar. Coulomb. The quadrant electrometer of Henley expresses the mutual repulsion of a moveable ball and a fixed eolumn, by the divisions of the arch 10 which the ball risess These divisions do not exactly denote the proportional strength of ihe action, but they are still of utility in ascertaining the identity of any tvo charges, and in informing us how far ve may venture to proceed in our experiments with safety; and the same purpose is answered, in a manner :omevhat less accurate, by the electrometer, consisting of two pith balls, or of two straws, vhich are made to diverge hy a smaller degree of electricity. Mr. Dennet's electrometer is still more delicate; it consists of two small portions of gou leaſ, suspended from a plate, to which the eleetricity of any substance is communicated hy contact: a very weak electricity is sufſicient to niake them diverge, and it may casily be ascertained whetler it is positive or negative, by bringing an excited stick of sealing wax near the plate, since its approach tends to produce by induction a state of negative electricity in the remoter extremities of the leaves, so that their divergence is either increased or diminished, accordingly as it was derived from negative or from positive electricity: a strip of gold leaf or tin foll, ſixed within the glass which covers the electrometer, opposite to the extremities of the leaves, prevenis the communication of any electricity to the glass, which might interfere vith the action oſ the instrument. When the balls oſ an electrometer stand at the distance oſ 4 degrees, they appear to indicate a charge nearly 8 times as great as vhen the stand at one degree: a charge 8 times as great in each hall producing a mutual action 64 times as great at any given distance, and at a quadruple distaice a quadiuple foree; in the same mauner a separation of 9 degrees is probubly derived ſrom an intensity ę7 times as great as at I. In Lane's electrunmetor the nngnitude oſ a shock is determined by the quantity of air throngh which it is olliged to pass, hetween two balls, of which the distance may be varied at pleasure; and the power of the machine may be estimated by the frequency of the sparks which pass at any given distance. It appeais from Mr. Lane's experiments, that the quantity of electricity required ſor a discharge is simply as the distance of the surfaces of the halls, the shocks being twice as frequent when this distance is only æ of an inch as when it is 4. Mr. Volta says, that the indications of Lane's and Henleys electrometer agree immediately with each other; but it seems diſficult to reconcile this result with the general theory. Sometimes the force of repulsion between two balls in contact is opposed by a counterpoise of given magnitude, and as so0n as this is overcome, they separate and form a circuit which discharges a battery; whence the instrument is called a discharger. (Plate XI. Fig. 564.. 568.) It must be confessed that the whole science of electricity is yet in a very imperfect state: ve know little or nothing of the intimate nature of the substances and actions concerned in it: and we can never foresee, without previous experiment, vhere or hov it will be excited. We are vholly ignorant of the constitution of bodies, by which they become possessed of diſferent conducting powers; and we have only been able to drav some general conclusions respecting the distribution and equilibrium of the supposed electric fluid, from the laws of the attractions and repulsions that it appears to exert. There seems to be some reason to suspect, from the phenomena of cohesion and repulsion, that the pressure of an elastic medium is concerned in the origin of these forces; and if such a medium really exists, it is perhaps nearly related to the electric fluid. The identity of the general causes of electrical and of galvanic effects is now doubted by few; and in this country the principal phenomena of galvanism are universally considered as depending on chemical changes; perhaps, also, time may sho, that electricity is very materially concerned in the essential properties, which distinguish the different kinds of natural bodies, as well as in those minute mechanical actions and affections vhich are probably the foundation of all chemical operations; but at present it is scarcely safe to hazard a conjecture on a subject so ohscure, although Mr. Davy's experiments have already in some measure justified the boldness of the suggestion. ON MAGNETISM. TuE theory of magnetism bears a very strong resemblance to that of electricity, and ĩit must therefore be placed near it in a system of natural philosophy. We have seen the electric ſluid not only exerting attractions and repulsions, and causing a peculiar distribution of neighbouring portions of a ſluid similar to itself, but also excited in one hody, and transferred to another, in such a manner as to he perceptible to the senses, or at least to cause sensible effects, in its passage. The attraction and repulsion, and the peculiar distribution of the neighbouring fluid, are found in the phenomena of magnetism; but we do not perceive that there is ever any actual excitation, or any perceptible transfer of the magnetic fluid ſfrom one body to another distinet body; and it has also this striking peculiarity, that metallic iron is very nearly, if not absolutely, the only substance capable of exhibiting any indications of its presence or activity. For explaining the phnomena of magnetism, we suppose the particles oſ a peculiar fluid to repel each other, and to attract the particles of metallic iron vith equal forces, diminishing as the square of the distance increases; and the particles of such iron must also he imagined to repel each other, in a similar manner. Iron and steel, when soft, are conductors of the magnetic ſluid, and become less and less pervious to it as their hardness increases. The ground work of this theory is due to Mr. Aepinus, hut the forces have been more particularly investigated by Coulomb and otherss. There are the same objections to these hypotheses as to those vhich constitute the theory of electricity, if considered as original and fundamental properties of matter: and it is additionally difficult to imagine, why iron, and iron only, whether apparently magnetic or not, should repel similar particles oſ iron with a peculiar force, which happens to be precisely a balance to the attraction of the magnetic fluid for iron. This is obviously improbable; but the hypotheses VOL. I. 4Q ure still of great utility in assisting us to generalise, and to retain in memory, a number of particular facts which would otherwise be insulated. The doctrine of the circulation oſ streams oſ the magnetic ſluid has been justly and universally abandoned, and some other theories, much more ingenious and more probuble, for instance that of Mr. Prèvost, appear to be ton complicated, and too little supported by ſacts, to require much of our attention. The distinetion between conduetors and nonconductors is, with respeet to the cleetric ſluid, irregular and intricate: but in magnetism, the soſtness or hardness of the iron or steel constitutes the only difference. Ileat, as soſtening iron, must consequently render ĩt a conduetor; even the heat of hoiling water afſeets ĩt in a certain degree, althongh ĩt can scarcely he supposed to alter its temper; hut the efſect of a moderate heat is not so considerable in magnetism as in eleetrieity. A strong degree of heat appears, ſrom the experiments of Gilbert, and of Mr, Cavallo, to destroy completely all magnetie action. It is perſectly certain that magnetic effects are produced hy quantities of iron incapable of being deteeted either by their weight or by any chemical tests. Mr. Cavallo found that a few particles of steel, adhering to a hone, on which the point of a needle vas slightly rubbed, imparted to it magnetic properties; and Mr. Coulomb has observed that there are scarcely any hodies in nature which do not exhibit some marks of being subjected to the inſluence of magnetism, although its foree is always proportional to the quantity of iron which they contain, as far as that quantity can be ascertained; a single grain heing suſficient to make 20 pounds of another metal sensibly magnetic. A combination with a large proportion of oxygen deprives iron of the whole or the greater part of its magnetie properties; finery cinder is still considerably magnetie, but the more perſeet oxids and the salts of iron only in a slight degree; it is also said that antimony renders iron incapable of being attracted by the magnet. Nickel, hen freed from arsenic and from cobalt, is decidedly magnetic, and the more so as it contains less iron. Some of the older chemists supposed nickel to be a compound metal containing iron, and we may still venture to assume this opinion as a magnetical hypothesis There is indeed no way of demonstrating that it is impossible for two substances to be so united as to be incapable of separation by the art of the chemist; had nickel a been as dense as platina, or as light as cork, we could not have supposed that it contained any considerable quantity of iron, but in fact the speciſic gravity of these metals is very nearly the same, and nickel is never found in nature but in the neighbourhood of iron; ve may therefore suspect, with s0me reason, that the hypothesis of the existence of iron in nickel may be even chemically truee. The aurora horealis is cortainly in some measure a magnetical phenomenon, and if iron were the only substance capaple oſ exhibiting magnetic effccts, it would follow that some ferruginous particles must exist in the upper regions of the atmosphere. The light usually attending this magnetical meteor may possibly be derived from clectricity, which may be the immediate cause of a change of the distribution of the magnetic ſluid, contained in the ferruginous vapours, that are imagined to ſloat in the air. We are still less capable of distinguishing with certainty in magnetism, than in electricity, a positive from a negative state, or a real redundancy of the ſluid from a deficiency. The north pole of a magnet may be considered as the part in which the magnetic ſluid ĩs either redundant or deſicient, provided that the south pole be understood in a contrary sense: thus, if the north pole of a magnet be supposed to be positively charged, the south pole must be imagined to be negative; and in hard iron or steel these poles may he considered as unchangeable. A north pole, therefore, always repels a north pole, and attracts a south polee And in a neutral piece of soft iron, near to the north pole of a magnet, the fluid becomes 50 distributed by induction, as to form a temporary south pole next to the magnet, and the whole piece is of course attracted, from the greater proximity of the attracting pole. IF the bar is sufficiently soft, and not too long, the remoter end becomes a north pole, and the vhole bar a perfect temporary magnet. But when the bar is of hard steel, the state of induction is imperfect, from the resistance opposed to the motion of the ſluid; hence the attraction is less powerful, and an opposite pole is formed, at a certain distance, within the bar; and beyond this another pole, similar to the first; the alternation being sometimes repeated more than once. The distribution of the ſluid within the magnet is also affected by the neighbourhood of a piece of soft iron, the north pole hecoming more powerful by the vicinity of the new south pole, and the south pole being consequently strengthened in a certain degree; so that the attractive power of the whole magnet is increased by the proximity of the iron. A weak magnet is capable of receiving a temporary induction of a contrary magnetism from the action of a more powerful one, its north pole becoming a south pole on the approach of a stronger north pole; but the original south pole still retains its situation at the opposite end, and restores the magnet nearly to its original condition, after the removal of the disturbing cause. The polarity of magnets, or their disposition to assume a eertain direction, is of still greater importance than their attractive power. If a small magnet, or simply a soft wire, be poised on a centre, ĩt will arrange itself in such a direction, as will produce an equilibrium of the attractions and repulsions of the poles of a lurger magnet; being a tangent to a certain oval figure, passing through those poles, of which the properties have been calculated by various mathematicians. This polarity may easily be imitated by electricity;: a suspended vire being brought near to the ends of a positive and negative conductor, vhich are placed parallel toeach other, as in Nairne's electrieal machine, its position is perfectly similar to that oſ a needle attracted by a magnet, of which those conductors represent the poles. (Plate XLI. Tig. 569.) The same effect is observable in iron filings placed near a magnet, and they adhere to each other in curved lines, by virtue oſ their induced magnetism, the north pole of each particle being attached to the south pole of the particle next itt. This arrangement may be seen by placing the ſilings either on clean mereury, or on any surface that can be agitated; and it may be imitated by strewing powder on a plate of glass, supported by two balls, which are contrarily electrifiedl. (Plate XLI. Fig. 570.) The polarity of a needle may often be ohserved when it exhibits no sensible attraction or repulsion as a whole; and this may easily he understood by considering that when one end of a needle is repelled from a given puint, and the other is attracted towards it, the two forces, if equal, will tend to tum it round its centre, but vill wholly destroy each other's effects with respect to any progressive motion of the whole necdlee Thus, vhen the end of a magnet is placed under a surface on which iron filings are spread, and the surface is shaken, so as to leave the particles for a moment in the air, they are not drawn sensibly towards the magnet, hut theĩr ends, which are nearest to the point over the magnet, are turned a little downwards, so that they strike the paper further and further from the magnet, and then fall outwards, as if they were repelled by it. (Plate XLI. Fig. 571.) The magnets, vhich we have hitherto considered, are such as have a simple and vell determined form; but the great compound magnet, which directs the mariner's compass, and which appears to consist principally of the metallic and slightly oxidated iron, contained in the internal parts of the earth, is probably of a far more intricate structure, and we can only judge of its nature from the various phenomena derived from its influence. The accumulation and the deficieney of the magnetic fluil, which determine the place of the poles of this magnet, are probably in fact considerably diffused, but they may generally be imagined, without much error in the result, to centre in two points, one of them nearer to the north pole oſ the earth, the other to the south polee In consequence oſ their attractions and repulsions, a needle, whether previously magnetic or not, assumes always, if freely poised, the direction necessary for its equilibrium; which, in various parts of the globe, is variously inclined to the meridian and to the horizon. Hence arises the use of the compass in navigation and in surveying: a needle, which is poised with a liberty of horizontal motion, assuming the direction of the magnetic meridian, vhich for a certain time remains almost invariable for the same place; and a similar property is also observable in the dipping needle, vhich is movealle only in a vertical plane; for vhen this plane is placed in the magnetic meridian, the needle acquires an inclination to the horizon, which varies according to the situation oſ the place with respect to the magnetic poless. (late XLI. Fig. 579, 575.) The natural polarity of the needle may be in some measure illustrated by inclosing an artificial magnet in a glohe; the direction of a small needle, suspended over any part of its surface, heing determined hy the position of the poles of the magnet, in the same manner as the direction of the compass is determined by the magnetical poles of the earth, although with mueh more regularity. In either case the vhole necdle ĩs scarcely more or less attracted towards the globe than if the inſluence of magnetism vere removed; except vhen the small needle is placed very near to one of the poles of the artiſicial magnet, or, on the other hand, when the dipping needle is employed in the neighhourhood of some strata of ferruginous substances, which, in particular parts oſ the earth, interfere materially with the more general effects, and alter the direetion of the mugnetic meridiun. A bar of soſt iron, placed in the situation of the dipping needle, acquires from the earth, by induction, a temporary state of magnetism, which may be reversed at pleasure by reversing its direction; but burs of iron, vhich have remaincd long in or near this direction, assume a permanent polarity; for iron, even vhen it has been at first quite soft, becomes in time a little harder. A natural magnet is no more than a heavy iron ore, which, in the course of ages, has acquired a strong polarity from the great primitive magnet. It must have lain in some - detached, and must possess but little conducting pover, in order to have received and to retain ĩts magnetism. We cannot, from any assumed situation of two or more magnetic poles, calculate the true position of the needle for all places; and even in the same place, its direetion is observed to change in the course of years, according to a lav which has never yet heen generally determined, although the variation which has been ohserved, at any one place, since the discovery of the compuss, may perhaps be comprehiended in some very intricate expressions; but the less dependence can be placed on any calculations of this kind, as there is reason to think that the change depends rather on chemical than on physical causes. Dr. lalley indeed conjectured that the earth contained a nucleus, or separate sphere, revolving freely within it, or rather ſloating in a ſluid contained in the intermediate space, and causing the variation of the magnetic meridian; and others have attributed the effect to the motions of the eelestial bodies: but in eĩther case the changes produced would have heen much more regular and universal than those which have been actually observed. Temporary changes oſ the terrestrial magnetism have certainly been sometimes oceasioned by other causes; such causes are, therefore, most likely to be concerned in the more permanent efſects. Thus, the eruption of Mount Ilecla vas found to derange the position of the needle considerably; the aurora borealis has been observed to cause its north pole to move ON MAGNETIS M. 6™9l 6 or 7 degrees to the westward of its usual position; and a still more remarkable chunge occurs continually in the diurnal variation. In these elimates the north pole of the nedle moves slowly westvards from about 8 in the morning till 2, and in the evenlig returns again; a change which Ins vith probability heen attributed to the temporary elevation ol the tem;oſ the earth, eastwards oſ the place oſ ohæervation, vhere the suns nein Lho place at an earlier hour in the morning, and to the diminution of the 1u⸗™netic attraction in consequence of the heat thus communicated. In winter this variation amounts to about 7 minutes, in summer to 13 or l4. Important as the use of the compass is at present to navigation, it wvould be still more valuable if its declination from the true meridian vere constant for the sume pluce, or even iſ it varied according to any discoverable law; since it would aſſord a rendy mode oſ determining the longitude of a place by a comparison of an astronomical observation of its latitude with another o the magnitude oſ the declinationn. And in some cases it may even now he applied to this purpose, vhere we have a collection of lute and numerous cbservations. Such observations huve from time to time been arranged in charts, furnished with lines indicating the magnitude of the declination or variation at the places through which they pass, beginning ſrom the line of no variation, and proceeding on the opposite sides of this line to show the magnitude of the variation east or west. It ĩs obvious that the intersection of a given parallel of latitude, with the line showing the magnitude of the variation, will indicate the preeise situation of the place at which the observations have been made. The line oſ no variation passed in 1657 through London, and in 1666 through Paris: its northern extremity appears to have moved continually eastvards, and its southern parts westwards; and it now passes through the middle of Asia. The opposite portion seems to have moved more uniſormly westvards; it now runs from North America to the middle of the South Atlanticc. On the European side oſ these lines, the declination is westerly; on the South American side, it is easterly. The variation in London has been for several years a little more than 24°. In the West Indies it changes but slowly; for instance it was 5° near the island of Barbadoes, from 1700 to 1756. (Plate XLI. Fig. 574.. 576. Plate XLII. XLIII) The dip of the north pole of the needle in the neighbourhood of London is 79°. Hence the lower end of a har standing upright, as a poker, or a lamp iron, hecomes always a north pole, and the temporary south pole of a piece of soft iron being uppermost, it is somewhat more strongly attracted hy the north pole oſ a mugnet placed over it, than by its south pole; the distribution oſ the ſluid in the magnet itself being also a little more favourable to the attraction, while its north pole is downwards. It is obvious that the magnetism oſ the northern magnetic pole of the earth must resemble that of the south pole oſ a mãgnet, since it attracts the north pole; so that if we considered the nature of the distribution of the ſluid, rather than its situation in the earth, ve should call it a south polee Although it is impossible to find any places for two, or even ſor a greater number oſ magnetie poles, which will correetly explain the direetion oſ the needle in every part of the earth's surface, yet the dip may be determined vith tolerable accuracy, from the supposition of a small magnet placed at the centre of the earth, and directed towards a point in Baſſin's Ray, about 75° north latitude, und 70° longitude west of London; and the variation of the dip is so inconsiderable, that a very slow change of the position of this supposed magnet would probably be suſficient to produce it; but the operation of such a magnet, according to the general laws of the forcès concerned, could not possibly account for the very irregular disposition of the curves indicating the degree of variation or declination; a general idea of these might perhaps he obtained from the supposition of two magnetic poles situated in a line considerably distant from the centre of the earth; but this hypothesis is hy no means suſficiently accurate to allow us to place any dependence on it. (Plate XLI. Vig. 577, 578) The art of making mugnets consists in a proper application of the attractions and repulsions of the magnetic ſluid, by means of the different conducting povers of different kinds of iron and steel, to the production and preservation of such a distribution of the ſluid in a magnet, as is the hest fitted to the exhibition of its peculiar properties. We may begin with any bar of iron that has long stood in a vertical position; but it is more common to employ an artificial magnet of greater strength. When one pole of such a magnet touches the end of a bar of hard iron or steel; that end assumes in some degree the opposite character, and the opposite end the same character: but in drawing the pole along the bar, the first end becomes neutral, and aſterwards has the opposite polarity; while the second end has its force at ſirst a little inereased, then becomes neutral, and afterwards is opposite to what it ſirst vas. When the operation is repeated, the effect is at first in some measure destroyed, and ĩt is dificult to understand why the repetition adds materially to the inequality of the distribution oſ the ſuid; but the fact is certain, and the strength of the new magnet is for some time increased at each stroke, until it has acquired all that it is capable of receiving. Several magnets, made in this manner, may be placed side by side, and each of them being nearly equal in strength to the first, the Whole collection will produce together a much stronger effect; and in this manner ve may obtain from a weak magnet others continually stronger, until ve arrive at the greatest degree of polarity of which the metal is capable. It is, however, more usual to employ the process called the double toueh: placing two magnets, with their opposite poles near to each other, or the opposite poles of a single magnet, bent into the form of a horseshoe, in contact with the midile of the bar: the opposite actions oſf these two poles then conspire in their eflort to displace the magnetic ſluid, and the magnets having been drawn hackwards and forwards repeatedly, an equal number of times to and from each end of the bar, with a considerable pressure, they are at last withdrawn in the middle, in order to keep the poles at equal distances. Iron ſilings, or the scoriae from a smith's forge, when ſinely levigated, and formed into a paste with linsced oil, are also capable of heing marde collectively magnetic. A bar oſ steel, placed red hot between two magnets, and suddenly quenched by cold vater, becomes in some degree magnetie, but not 30 poverfully as it may be rendered by other means. For preserving magnets, it is usunl to place their poles in contact with the opposite poles oſ other magnets, or vith pieces of soſt iron, which, in consequence of their own induced magnetism, tend to favour the accumulation oſ the magnetic pover in a greater quantity than the metal can retain after they are removed. IIence the ancients imagined that the magnet fed on iron. A single magnet may be made of two bars of steel, with their ends pressed VOL. I. : 4r into close contact; and it might be expected that when these bars are separated, or vhen a common magnet has been divided in the middle, the portions should possess the properties of the respective poles only. But in fact the ends which have been in contact are found to acquire the properties of the poles opposite to those of their respective pieces, and a certain point in each piece is neutril, which is at ſirst nearer to the newly formed pole than to the other end, but is removed by degrees to a more central situation. In this case ve must suppose, contrarily to the general principles of the theory, that the magnetic fluid has actually escaped by degrees from one of the pieces, and has been received from the atmosphere by the other. There is no reason to imagine any immediate connoxion between magnetism and electricity, except that electrieity affects the conducting povers of iron or steel for magnetism, in the same manner as heat or agitation. In some cases a blov, an increase of temperature, or a shock of eleetricity, may expedite a little the acquisition of polarity; hut more commonly any one of these causes impairs the magnetic power. Professor Robison found, that when a good magnet was struck for three quarters of an hour, and allowed in the mean time to ring, its efficacy vas destroyed; although the sume operation had little effcet when the ringing was impeded; so that the continued exertion of the eohesive and repulsive powers appears to favour the transmission of the magnetic as well as of the electric ſluidc. The internal agitation, produced in bending a magnetic vire round a cylinder, also destroys its polarity, and the operation of a ſile has the same eſſect. Mr. Cavallo has found that brass hecomes in general much more capable of being attracted when it has heen hammered, even between two ſlints; and that this property is again diminished by ſire: in this case it may be conjectured that hammering increases the conducting pover of the iron contained in the brass, and thus renders it more susceptible of magnetic actionn. Mr, Cavallo also observed that a magnetic needle was more poverſully attracted by iron ſilings during their solution in acids, especially in the sulfurie acid, than either before or aſter the opeiation: others have not alvays succeeded in the experiment; but there is nothing improbable in the circumstance, and there may have been some actual diſerence in the results, dependent on causes too minute for ohservation. In subjects so little understood as the theory of magnetism, we are obliged to ad: mit some paradoxical propositions, which are only surprising on account of the imperfect state of our knowledge. Vet, little as we can understand the intimate nature of magnetical actions, they exhibit to us a number of extremely amusing as well as interesting phenomena; and the principles of crystallization, and even of vital growth and reproduction, are no where so closely imitated, as in the arrangement of the small particles of iron in the neighbourhood of a magnet, and in the production of a multitude of complete magnets, from the influence of a parent of the same kind. LECTURE LVI. ON CLIMATES AND WINDS. THE science of meteorology relates principally to the natural history of the air, and to such temporary changes in the earth and sea as are produced hy causes not mechanical only. The subject is of a very complicated and intricate nature; it comprehends many effects derived from such causes, as belong separately to every department of physics which we have hitherto examined; and although it has occupied the attention of several philosophers of considerable eminence, ve cannot yet boast of having made any great advancement in it. Whether we shall ever be able to carry our theories to so high a degree of perfection, as to furnish us with much information applicable to the purposes of common life, to agriculture, or to medicine, is at present uncertain; although some advantage has already been derived from the indications of meteorological instruments; and the philosophy of the science is in many respects much more advanced than has commonly been supposed. We shall divide this extensive subject into two parts, the first relating principally to the effects of heat on the atmosphere, including the phenomena of winds; the second to the nature and consequences of evaporation, comprehending atmospherical electricity, and to the eſiects of subterraneous fires and igneous meteors. The variations of temperature, in difſerent parts of the earths surface, require to be examined in the ſirst place; since they are not only of considerable importance in themselves, but are also among the principal causes of other changes in the state of the winds and weather. These changes are measured by thermometers, of various kinds, vhich have already been described; hut, for meteorological purposes, some additions are frequently made to the simple thermometer. In Six's thermometer, the tube is twice bent, so as to return in a parallel direction: the bulb is in the form of a long cylinder, and is usually ſilled with spirit of wine, which is in contact with a portion of mercury occupying the lower part of the tube; and this is succeeded by a second portion of spirit. The mercury carries on each of its surfaces an index, which is retained in its remotest situation by means of a weak spring; and con:equently shows the greatest degree of heat or of cold that has happened since the last observation. The indexes are of iron or steel, and may be brought back to the surface at pleasure by means of a magnet; they are carried up hy the mereury, more by its capillary action, than by the difference of the spee fic gravities. A similar effect is obtained in Rutherford's arrangement of a pair of thermometers, one with mercury, the other vith spirit of vine, placed in a horizontal position; one index being without the surface of the mereury, the other within that of the spirit: the thermometers being in contrary direetions, both indexes may be brought back to their places, by merely raising the end of the instrument. Self registering thermometers have also sometimes been constructed, for keeping a still more accurate account of all the variations of temperature that have occurred, by describing a line on a revolving harrel, vhich shows the height for every instant during the whole time of their operation. (Plate XLI. Fig. 579, 580.) The climates of difſerent parts of the earth's surface are unquestionably owing in great measure to their position with respect to the sun. At the equator, where the sun is always nearly vertical, any given part of the surſace receives a much greater quantity of light and heat, than an equal portion near the poles; and it ĩs also still more aſfected by the suns vertical rays, because their passage through the atmosphere is shorter than that of the oblique rays. As far as the sun's mean altitude only is concerned, it appears from Simpson's caleulations, that the heat received at the equator in the whole year, is nearly twice and a half as great as at the poles; this proportion being nearly the samæ as that of the meridian heat of a vertical sun, to the heat derived, at the altitude 25;°, in the middle of the long annual day at the poles. Iut the diſſerence is rendered still greater, hy the eſfect of the atmosphere, which interrupts a greater portion of the heat at the poles than elsewhere Bouguer has calculated, upon the supposition of the similarity oſ the aſſections of heat and light, that in latitude 4°, 80 parts out of 100 are transmitted at nnon in July, aud 55 only in December. The heat intereepted by the atmosphere is perhaps not wholly, but ver, ucarly, lost with respeet to the climate oſ the neighbouring places. Tt is obvious that, at any individual place, the climate in summer must approach in some degree to the equatorial climate, the suns altitude being greater, and in winter to the climate of the polar regions. While the earth is hecoming warmer at any particular spot, the heat thrown oſf hy radiation into the atmosphere, and thence into the empty space beyond it, together with that which is transmitted to the internal parts of the earth, must be less than the heat received from the sun; and vhen the earth is growing colder, more heat must pass oſf than is received: but whenever the heat of the surface is stationary, neither increasing nor diminishing, as at the times of the greatest and least heat, ĩt is obvious that the heat received from the sun must he precisely equal to the heat which is thrown o. Now this quantity may be estimated by the degree of refrigeration in the night and hence Mr. Prèvust has very ingeniously deduced the proportion of the suns heat arriving at the surface of the earth in the latitude of Geneva, in July, and in December; which he ſinds to be as 7 or 8 to I; and this result agrees very vell with a ealculation deduced from the length of the day, the suns altitude, and the interception of his rays by the atmosphere. In London the temperature generally varies, in the course of the day and night, somewhat more than 59, and less than 20°. In January, the mean diurnal variation oſ temperature is 6°, in March 200, in July 10°, and in September, 18. Hence, says Mr. Kirvan, ve may understand the reason of the great frequeney of colds in spring and in autumn. Some philosophers have supposed the earth to become progressively warmer in the course of ages, while others have imagined that its heat is exhausted. Both these opinions appear in general improbablee The greater heat the earth receives by day, the more it throws oſf, both by day and by night; so that in the course of a few ages the heat must probably have attained its maximum. Local changes may indeed arise from local circumstances; thus, the climate of America is suid to have become considerably varmer, since a large part of its surface has been cleared from its dense forests by human labour: and to judge from the deseriptions of the ancients, it appcars that even in Europe the winters were formerly much colder than they are at present. If; however, Dr. Herschel's opinion of the variation of the heat of the sun be onſirmed, it will introduce a great uncertainty into all theories upon the subject: since in these calculations the original heat oſ the sun has always been supposed unalterable. The sea is less heated than the lanũ, partly because a greater quantity of vater evaporates from it, and partly hecause the sun's rays penetrate to a considerable depth, and have less effect on the surface, while the water is also mixed, by the agitation of its waves and currents, ith the colder water below. It is also more slowly cooled than the land, since, vhen the temperature of the superſicial particles is depressed, they become heavier, anil sink to the bottom. For similar reasons, the sea ĩs colder than the land in hot elimates, and by day, and warmer in cold climates, and by night. These circumstances, however, nearly balance each other, so that the mean temperatures of both are equal, that of the sea being only less variable. Although the process of evaporation must cool the sea, yet when the vapours are condensed without reaching the land, their condensation must compensate for this effect by an equal extrication of heat. There is another cause which perhaps contributes in some degree, in temperate climates, to the production of cold; that is, the alternation of freezing and thawing. Mr. Prèvost observes that congelation takes place mueh more suddenly than the opposite process of liquefaction; and that of course the same quantity of heat must be more rapidly extricated in freezing than ĩt is absorbed in thawing; that the heat, thus extricated, being disposed to ſly off in all ãirections, and little of it being retained by the neighbouring bodies, more heat is lost than is gained by the alternation: so that vhere ice has once been formed, its production is in this manner redoubledl. This circumstance must occur wherever it freezes, that is, on shore, in latitudes above 35°; and it appears that from about 30° to the pole, the land is somewhat colder than the sea, and the more as it is further distant from it; and nearer the equator the land is warmer than the sea: but the process of congelation cannot hy any means be the principal cause of the diference, and it is probable that the different capacity of earth and water for heat is materially concerned n it. Since the atmosphere is very little heated hy the passage nf the sun's rays through it, it is nuturally colder thun the eurth's surface; and for this reason, the most elevated tracts of land, which are the most prominent, and the most exposed to the effects of the atmosphere, are always colder than situations nearer the level of the sea. The northern hemisphere is somewhat warmer than the southern, perhaps because of the greater proportion of land that it contains, and also in some measure on account of the greater length of its summer than that of the southern; for although, as it as long ago observed by Simpson, the different distance of the sun compensates precisely for the different velocity of the earth in its orbit, with respect to the whole quantity of heat received on either side of the equinoctial points, yet Mr. Prèvost has shown, that in all probability the same quantity of heat must produce a greater effect when it is more slowly applied; hecause the portion lost by radiation from the heated body is greater, as the temperature is higher. Since, therefore, on account of the eecentricity of the earth's orbit, the north pole is turned towards the sun 7 or 8 days longer than the south pole, the northern winters must be milder than the southern: yet the southern summers, though shorter, ought to be somewhat warmer than the northern: but in fact they are colder, partly perhaps from the much greater proportion of sea, vhich in some degree equalises the temperature, and partly for other reasons. The comparative intensity of the southern summer and winter is not exactly known; but in the island of New Georgia the summer is said to be extremely cold. The northern ice extends about ° from the pole: the southern I& or L0; in some purts even 0°; and ſloating ice has occasionally heen found in hoth hemispheres as far as 40° from the poles, and sometimes, as it has been said, even in latitude 41° or 42°. Detween 4° and 0C south latitude, the snov lies on the ground, at the sea side, thronghout the summer. The line of perpetual congelation is three miles above the surface at the equator, vhere the mean heat is 81°; at Teneriffe, in latitude à58°, two miles; in the latitude of London, a little more than a mile; and in latitude 80° north, only 1200 feet. At the pole, according to the analogy deduced hy Mr. Kirwan, from a comparisun of various ohservations, the mean temperature should be 31°. In London the mean temperature is 50; at Rome and at Montpelier, a little more than 60°; in the island of Madeira, 70°; and in Jamaica, 80°. There are frequently some local causes of heat and cold which are independ- ent oſ the sun's immediate action. Thus, it has been observed, that when the weather has been clear, and a cloud passes over the place of observation, the thermometer frequently rises a degree or two almost instantaneously. This has heen partly explained by considering the cloud as a vesture, preventing the escape of the heat which is always radiating from the earth, and reflecting it back to the surface: the cloud may also have been lately condensed, and may itself be of a higher temperature than the earth. Mr. Six has observed that in clear weather, the air is usually some degrees colder at night, and warmer hy day, close to the ground, than a few feet above it; but that in cloudy weather there is less difference: and iĩt is possible that this circumstance may be derived from the difference of the quantity of evaporation from the earth's surface, which occasions a different degree of cold in different states of the atmosphere. The motions of the air, which constitute winds, are in general dependent, in the first instance, on variations of temperature. They are so àccidental and uncertain, as to be subjected to no universal laws; as far however as any regularity can be observed in their recurrence, it may in most cases be suſficiently explained. The principal phenomena of the periodical winds may be reduced to six distinet heads: ſirst the general tendency from north east and south east towards the equator, in latitudes below 30°; secondly, the deviation of this tendency from the precise situation of the equator; thirdly, the prevalence of westerly winds between 30° and 40° or more, especially in the southern hemisphere; fourthly, the local modifications to which these general effects are subjected; fifthly the monsoons, which vary every half year; and lastly the diurnal changes of land and sea breezes. With respect to the general tendency of the trade winds to the vest, it may be sufficiently explained by Hadley's theory of the difference of the rotatory motion of diſerent parts of the atmosphere, combined with the currents occasioned by the greater heat at the equator. For the sun's rays, expanding the air in the neighbourhood of the equator, and causing it to ascend, produce a current in the lower parts of the atmosphere, which rush southwards and northwards towards the equator, in order to occupy the place of the heated air as it rises: and since the rotatory motion of the ear th is VOL. I. 4 greatest at the equator, and is directed eastwards, the air coning ſrom the poles has oſ course a relative motion westwards; and hence the joint motion of the current is direeted, in the northern hemisphere, ſrom north east to south vest, and in the southern, from south east to north west. Dr. Ilalley supposed that the air was made in some measure to ſollow the sun round the enrth, simply by means oſ the expansion of the atmosphere, vhieh tukes place immediately under him, and accompanies him round the globe; but it docs not seem evident that the air could have any greater tendency to follow the sun than to meet him. Astronomers have, howe ver, deduced an additionnl cause for an easterly wind from the attractions oſ the moon and of the sun, which appear, from the laws of gravitation, to have a slight tendency ſo retard the rotatory motion of the atmosphere: and a similur instance has been observed in the motions of the atmusphere oſ the planet Jupiter, by means of the appearances of spots oſ diſſerent Kinds on his dise, sume oſ which seem to revolve less rapidly than the ILody of the planet. At so great a distance, the inſluence of the sun's heat must be compuratively inconsideruble, and the vant of a tendency in the spots towards the equator ap)ears to shov, that the atmosphere, in which they ſloat, is not put in motion hy the same causes, vhich we have supposed to be most concerned in the production of our own trade winds. It has been remarked that the frietion of the atimosphere, thus retarded by the attraction of the sun and moon, must in the course oſ ages have impaired the uniformity of the earths diurnal motion; and it has been observed, on the other hand, that even this eſſect would he partially counteracted by the gradual ſilling up of valleys, by means of the descent of the superſicial parts oſ mountains, which, at a greater distance from the centre, were revolving vith a rapidity sumewhat greater than the valleys in which they are deposited; but probably neither oſ these changes vould become sensible in millions oſ yeurs. The second circumstance is easily explained by the greater heat of the northern than of the southern hemisphere; so that instead of coinciding with the equator, the neutral portion oſ the atmosphere lies between 3° and 5 of north latitude; the north east wind not reaching the equator, and the south east continuing about 3° heyond it. But the situation of the neutral portion varies vith the sun's declination, accordingly as different parallels of latitude become in succession somewhat hotter than the neighbouring parts Where the northern and southern currents meet, their joint effect must naturally be to produce a due east vind; but in some parts of the ocean, temporary calms and irregular squalls have heen observed to take place of this easterly wind, hich generally prevails i in the heutral parts near the equator. The third fact, that is,; he ſreiqueney oſf westerly winds between the latitudes 30° and 40°, has not yet been sufficiently explainedl. The most probable cause of this circumstance ĩs, that the current oſ heated air, which ve have hitherto neglected, and which passes, in the upper purts of the atmosphere, from the equator each way towards the poles, and which, heing the converse of the trade wind, must be a south west and north west wind, in the different hemispheres, becomes here sufſiciently cool to descend and mix vith the lower parts of the atmosphere, or to carry them along by its lateral frietion; and while it descends to complete the eſrele, necessary for supplying the current to the equator, its motion with respect to the horizon must become al a certain time due vest, since the cause which stons its progress northwards, has no tendency to impede its motion eastwards. The outvard bound East India ships generally make their easting in about 26° south Iatitude. It iĩs probably also on account of the rotatory motion of the earth, that south west winds are more common in our latitudes than south east, and north east than north west. Among the local modiſications to he considered in the fourth place, we may reckon the greater indistinctness of the third eſſeet in the northern than in the southern hemisphere, a circumstance vhich is explained from the more irregular distribution of sea and land: for betveen 30° and 40 south latitude the ocean is scarcely any where interrupted. In lower latitudes also, near the vest eoast of Africa, the winds are 5s0 much deſlected towards the land, as to become in general westerly instead of ensterly. The monsoons, which constitute the ſiſth remarkable circumstance, are s0 called from a Malay word, denoting season. They are occasioned by the peculiar situation of the continent of Asia, on the north side of the equntor. From April to September, the sun having north decliuation, the heat on this continent, ã little north of the tropic, is very intense, and the general current is consequently towards the north. The air, therefure, coming from 3outh latit udes towards the equator, hccomes, on account of the defſi- ciency of rotatory motion, a south east wind, as usual, which is found to prevail between Madagascar and New Holland, as far as the equator. In consequence perhaps of friction in its passage, it gradually loses its impetus tovards the west, and at the equator is nearly a south vind: but in proceeding north from the equator, it becomes, from an excess of rotatory motion, a south west wind, which blows into the Arabian gulf, and the bay of Bengal. Both these winds are however variously modiſied by the particular situations of the islands and continents. From October to March, on the contrary, the sun having south declination, the south east trade wind stops at 10° south latitude; the trade vinds on the north side of the equator are as usual north east; and beyond the equator they become for some degrees north west, the circumstances heing the reverse of those which happen in the summer months, at greater distances, on the other side of the equator. (Plate XLII. XLIII) The last fact is the simplest of all. The land and sea breezes are produced by the ascent of the air over the land in the day time, while the land is hotter than the sea; and its descent at night, vhen the land is become colder: hence the breeze comes from the sea by day, and from the land by night. The violent agitations of the air, vhich constitute hurricanes and vhirlwinds, occur more commonly in tropical climates than in otherss. The causes oſ these storms are little understood: their course iĩs said to be generally opposite to that of the trade winds; but tornados, which are less regular hurricanes, originate indifferently from every quarter. The variations of the weight of the air, which occasion the winds, and other changes in its density, which are the efects of the winds themselves, are indicated by the height of the barometer, which is in general the more variable as the winds are more liable to sudden changes. Hence in the neighbourhood of the equator the height of the barometer is scarcely ever a quarter of an inch more or less than 30 inches, which is very nearly its mean height on the level of the sea in every part of the globe: in Great Britain it is sometimes as low as 28 inches, but never higher than 3. We have already seen that the elevation of any place above the sea reduces the height of the barometer according to a lav which is determined by the general properties of elastic fluids: thus, at an elevation of I mile above the sea, the mean height of the barometer is 24 inches, and at 2 miles, 20 inches only. The use of the barometer, in foretelling variations of weather, is perhaps more limited than has sometimes been supposed; but by a careful observation, conclusions may be drawn from it, which may in many cases be of considerable utility: and it has even been applied with success, by some late navigators, to the prediction of changes oſ wind, at times when they could not have been suspected from any other circumstances. LECTURE LVII. OF AQUEOUS AND IGNEOUS METEORS. Tur phenomena originating from the evaporation of water constitute a large proportion of the subjects oſ meteorology: they are materially influenced by the diversities of climates and vinds, which we have lately considered; and they appear to contribute to the electrical changes, vhich form a principal part oſ luminous or igneous meteors: nor is the action of water vholly unconcerned in many of the eſfects of subterraneous fires, which have also a slight connexion with atmospherical electricity; and it has been conjectured that the only igneous meteors, which appear wholly independent of any of these phenomena, may originate from volcanic commotions in other worlds. The action of heat appears to detach continually from the surſuce of vater, and perhaps of every other liquid, and even solid, a certain quantity of vapour, in the form of an invisible gas; but when the space above the liquid is already charged with as much vapour as can exist in iĩt at the actual temperature, the vapour, thus continually thrown off, either remains suspended in the form of visible particles, or falls back immediately into the liquid. This is the simplest mode of explaining the continuance of evapnration, under the pressure of any dry gas, however dense, and its apparent suppression in the presence of moist air, however raree Sometimes also, when the temperature of the liquid is elevated, so that minute globules either of steam or of air rise through it, some visible particles are projected upwards by each globule, and continue to ſloat in the air; this appears, however, to be an irregularity unconneeted vith the principal process of slow evaporation. The quantity of vapour, which can exist in the space above any portion of ater, has been supposed hy Delue, Volta, and Dalton, to be wholly independent of the nature, the density, or even the presence of the air or gas which that space contains: and we may easily imagine that the smallest distance, at which the particles of water, constituting vapour, can exist, without coming within the reach of their mutual cohesion, is the sume, vhatever other purticles mav he scattered through the intervening space. It appears, however, more consistent with some experiments, to suppose, that the presence of air of the usuul density allows the particles of water to approach a little nearer together without cohering, so. that the utmost quantity of moisture, that can be contained in a cubie foot of air at a given temperature, is not exactly the same as vould make a cubic foot of pure vapour, but alvays in a certain proportion to ĩit; and it seems to follow, from the experiments of Saussure, compared with those of Pictet, that the veight of the vapour contained in a cubie foot of air is about one half greater than that of a cubic foot oſ pure vapour at the same temperature. When the air, in the neighbourhood of the surface of the water, has become thus suturated vith moisture, the evaporation proceeds very slovly, the vapour being precipitated as soon as it rises: but iſ the air be continually changed, so that the moistened portion may be removed, and dry air substituted for it, the process vill be greatly expedited; and such a change may he eſſected cither by wind, or by the natural eireulation, occasioned by any elevation of temperature communicated by the vater to the neighbouring air; but vhen this circulation is prevented, the evaporation is much diminished, although the temperature may be considerably elevated. In moderate exposures, the depth of the quantity of vater, evaporating in 24 hours ſrom any surface, ĩs expressed, according to Mr. Daltons experiments, by the height of the column of mercury equivalent to the ſorce of steam at the given temperature, dedueting, however, the eſicet of the elasticity of the moisture already existing in the air. Since the quantity oſ moisture, which the air is capable of receiving, is greater as its temperature is greater, ve may obtain a natural measure of the quantity which it contains, by reducing it to the temperature at which the moisture begins to be deposited. Thus, if ve take a glass of cold vater, and add to it some common salt, or some muriate of lime, we may cool the air near it so much, as to cause it to deposit a part of its moisture on the glass: and by measuring the temperature of the water when the precipitation begins, Mr. Dalton estimates the true state of the air with respect to moisture. Thus, if the glass begins to be moistened when the water is at 40°, he infers from the known elasticity of stèam at that temperature, that the quantity of moisture contained in the air is equivalent to the pressure of a column of mercury about a quarter of an inch in height; and if the actual temperature of the air be 500, the corresponding elasticity of steam being a little more than one third of an inch, the daily evaporation in such air will amount to about one ninth of an inch, making 40 inches in the whole year. In fact, however, the air is usually moister than this, and the mean evaporation of all England is, according to Mr. Dalton, about 23 inches only. In hotter climates, and in particular situations, the evaporation may be considerably greater. The Mediterranean Sea, being surrounded by land, is more heated than the ocean, and the winds which blow over it are drier; consequently its evaporation is greater than that of the Ailantic, and its specific gravity is increased by the increased proportion of salt; so that at the straights of Gibraltar, a current runs inwards at the surface and outwards near the bottom, for the same reason as the air, when it is denser in a passage than in the adjoining room, blows a candle towards the room at the lower part of the door, and draws it towards the passage at the upper. Had there been a continual current inwards through the Straights, at all parts, the Mediterranean must in the course of ages have become a rock of salt. It is indeed remarkable that all lakes, into which rivers run without any further discharge, are more or less salt, as well as lakes in general near the sea: but where a river runs through a lake into the sea, it must necessarily, in the course of time, have carried the salt of the lake with it, if it had ever existed. Experiments on the deposition oſ moisture, like those of Mr. Dalton, are liable to a slight inaccuracy, on account of the effects of an apparent elective attraction, by means of which, some substances seem to attract humidity at a temperature a little higher than otherss. Thus, a surface of metal often remains dry, in the neighbourhood of a piece of glass which is covered with moisture. It is certain that some substances attract moisture from the air, even vhen the quantity which it contains is incomparably less than that vhich would saturate it, since it is on this circumstance that the construction of hygrometers depends; and it is probably by a property some what si- milar, that even sdrfaces of diſferent kinds possess diſferent attractive povers for moisture nearly ready to be depositedl. It is, however, only necessary to employ, for Mr. Daltons experiment, a substance which has a very veak attraction for moisture; and any kind of metal will perhaps be found sufficiently correct in its indications. It has been ohserved, that a piece of metal, placed on glass, usually protects also the opposite side of the glass from the deposition of dew; and Mr. Benedict Prévost has shown, that in general, whenever the metal is placed on the warmer side of the glass, the humidity is deposited more copiously either on itself, or on the glass near it; that when it is on the colder side, it neither receives the humidity, nor permits its deposition on the glass; but that the addition of a second piece of glass, over the metal, destroys the effect, and a second piece of metal restores it. It appears that, from its properties with respect to radiant heat, the metallic surface produces these eſfects. by preventing the ready communication either of heat or of cold to the glass. The quantity of invisible moisture, contained in air, may be, in some degree, estimated from the indications of hygrometers, although these instruments have hitherto remained in a state of great imperfection. A sponge, a quantity of caustic potash, or of sulfuric acid, or a stone of a peculiar nature, has sometimes been employed for determining the degree of moisture of the air, from &hich it acquires a certain augmentation of its weight. A cord dipped in brine, or the beard of.an oat, is also often used for the same purpose: the degree in which it untvists, from the effect of moisture, being shown by an index. But the extension of a hair, or of a slip of whalebone, which have been employed by Saussure and Deluc, appear to be more certain and accurate in their indications. The hair hygrometer acquires more speedily the degree corresponding to any given state of the air, but it seems to reach the utmost extent of its scale before it arrives at perfect humidity; while the whalebone hygrometer appears to express a greater change upon immersion in ater than from the eſfect of the moistest transparent air, which has also been considered by some as an imperfection. Both these instruments are impaired by time, and acquire contrary errors, so that a mean between both is more likely to be correet than either separately. Their indications are at all times videly different from each uther, and the mean appears to approach much nearer to a natural vOL. I. AT icale than either of them. Mr. Leslie employs a very delicate thermometer, of which the bulb is moistened, for measuring the dryness of the air, by the cold produced during evaporation, when the thermometer is exposed to it; but this mode of estimating the quantity of moisture appears to be liable to considerable uncertainty. (Plate XLI. Fig. 581.) In order that the scale of a hygrometer should be perfectly natural, it ought to express, at all temperatures, the proportion of the quantity of moisture in the air to that which is required for its saturation; thus, at 100 degrees, it should imply that the slightest depression of temperature would produce a deposition; at 50 degrees, that the air contains only half as much vater as would saturate it, or, supposing the thermometer at 520, that a deposition would be produced in it by a depression of 17°. And if we know the actual temperature, and the temperature at which the deposition takes place, we may find the height of the natural hygrometer, by the proportion of the corresponding elasticities of steam. The mean height of the natural hygrometer in London is probably about 80°; that of Deluc's hygrometer, with proper corrections, being nearly 70°: so that a depression of 6 must usually be sufficient to cause a deposition of moisture. The quantity of water actually contained in a cubic foot of air, saturated with moisture, appears to be ahout 2 grains at the freezing point, 4 grains at 48°, 6 at 60°, and 8 at 68; and the density of the vapour, thus mixed vith air, is, according to Saussure's experiments, about three fourths as great as that of the air itself; so that moist air is always a little lighter than dry air: and the more so as the air is warmer, provided that it be saturated with moisture by means of the presence of water. It ſollows from the properties of moisture thus determined, that if any two portions of perfectly humid air, at diſferent temperatures, be mixed together, there must be a precipitation: thus, a cubic foot of air at 32° being mixed with another at 60°, their common temperature must be 46]; if they are saturated with moisture, they must contain 8 grains of water when separate; but when mixed they vill be too cold by 2* to contain the same quantity; since air at 48° can only contain 4 grains ſor each foot; and it has been supposed that such mixtures frequently occasion a precipitation in naturee Thus, it often happens that the breath of an animal, vhich is in itself transparent, becomes visible vhen mixed with a cold atmo- sphere; and in such cases the deposition may perhaps be facilitated by the cooling of the warmer air to a certain degree, even before a perfect mix ture has taken place When visible vapour has been thus deposited from transparent air, by means either of cold or of mixture, it generally remains for some time suspended, in the form of a mist or of a cloud: sometimes, however, it appears to be at once deposited on the surface of a solid, in the form of dew or of hoar frost; for it is not probable that the crystallized form, in which hoar frost is arranged, can be derived from the union of the particles already existing in the air as distinct aggregates. The dew, which is commonly deposited on vegetables, is paitly derived, in the evening, from the vapours ascending from the heated earth, since it is then ſound on the internal surface of a bell glass; and towards the morning, from the moisture descending from the air above, as it begins to coul. Sometimes, however, in warmer weather, the dew begins to descend in the evening; this the French call serein: the humidity deposited by mists on trees, and by moist air on windows, generally within, but sometimes without, they call givre. Mists are said to consist sometimes of other particles than pure water: these are called dry mists, and they have been supposed to blight vegetables. Such mists are sometimes attended by a smell, resembling that which is occasioned by an electric spark. Rain falling aſter a dry season deposits, when it has been suffered to stand, some particles of foreign matter which it has brought down from the atmosphere There must indeed frequently be a multiplicity of substances of various kinds floating in the air; the wind has been ſound to carry the farina of plants as far as 30 or 40 miles, and the ashes of a volcano more than 200. It only requires that the magnitude of the particles of any substance be sufficiently reduced in size, in order to render them incapable of falling with any given velocity; and when this velocity js very small, it may easily be overpowered by any accidental motions of the air. The diameter of a sphere of water, falling at the rate of one inch only in a second, ought to be one six hundred thousandth of an ineh, which is about the thickness of the upper part of a soap bubble at the instant when it bursts; but the particles of mists are incomparably larger than this, since they vould otherwise be perfectly invisible as separate drops: the least particle, that could be discovered by the naked eye, being such as would fall witha velocity of about a foot in a second, if the air were perſectly at rest. But it is very probable that the resistance, opposed to the motion of partieles so small, may be considerably greater, than would be expected from a calculation, derived from experiments made on a much larger scale, and their descent consequently much slower. When the particles of a mist are united into drops capable of descending vith a considerable velocity, they constitute rain; if they are frozen during their deposition, they exhibit the appearance oſ a perfect erystallization, and become snow: but if the drops already ſormed are frozen, either by means of external cold, or on account of the great evaporation produced by a rapid descent through very dry uir, they acquire the character of hail, which is often observed in veather much too hot for the formation of snov. It cannot be doubted but that there is a connexion hetween the descent of the barometer and the fall of rain; but no satisfactory reason has yet been assigned for the circumstance; nor is ĩt possible to foretel, with certainty, that rain will follow any changes in the height of the barometer that have been observedl. The immediate dependence of rain, or of any other atmospherical phenomena, on the inſluence of the moon, appears to be rendered highly improbable, not only by mathematical calculations of the effects of the moons attraction, but also by the irregularity of the very observations, which have been adduced in favour of such a connexion. But however uncertain the ultimate causes of rain may be in general, their effects in sume places are sufficiently constant, to be attributed to permanent local circumstances, and in particular to the periodical recurrence of similar winds. In low and level countries, clouds may often begin to descend from the upper regions of the atmosphere, and may he redissolved by the varmer air below; but when they descend in an equal degree among mountains, they fall on the earth; and besides the quantity of vater which they furnish for vegetation, and that which is carried off by evaporation, they afford, by means of springs and rivers, a constant supply for the use of man and of other animals in distant partss. The upper regions of the atmosphere are however by no means the principal sources of rain in ordinary climates, since a gage placed on a very high huilding seldom collects more than two thirds as much rain as anothęr standing on the ground below: and the eſfects of mountains in collecting rain are perhaps chieſly derived from the àscending currents which they occasion, and by which the air saturated with moisture is carried to a higher and a colder region. i The Abyssinian rains are the causes of the inundation ofthe Nile; they last from April to September; but ſor the ſirst three months the rain is only in the nightThe inundation, in Egypt, begins at present about the 17th of June; it increases for 40 days, and subsides in the same time; but the ancient accounts, as well as some modern ones, assign a longer duration to itt. The river Laplata rises and falls at the same times as the Nile The Ganges. the Indus, the Euphrates, the river of Ava or Pegu, and many other large rivers, have also considerable inundations at regular periods. In many other countries there are seasons at vhich the rains seldom fail to recur; and sometimes the periodical rains are different in different parts of the same country. Thus the coast of Malabar, vhich is to the west of the Gate mountains, or Gauts, enjoys summer weather, without rain, from September to April, while that of Coromandel, which is on the eastern side, experiences all the rigours of its winter; being at this time exposed to the inſluence of the north east trade wind. Vicissitudes of a similar nature are also observed on the north and south sides of the island of Jamaica. The mean fall of rain in London is about 23 inches; at Exeter, which is nearer to the Atlantic, 33; the average of England and Wales is 31. The evaporations and precipitations, and probably also the condensations and expansions, vhich take place on a large scale in the atmosphere and in the clouds, cannot fail of producing changes in their electrical qualities; and these changes appear to be the principal sources of the phenomena of thunder and lightning. The clouds, vhen electrified, being more or less insulated by the interposition of the air, exhibit attractive and repulsive effects, and are discharged by explosions, either among themselves, or communicating with the earth, in the same manner as bodies which have been electrified by artificial means; they also sometimes produce, in the neighbouring parts of the earth, and in the animals on its surface, a state of induced electricity; and in this case the returning stroke, or the sudden restoration of the equilibrium, when the electricity of the nearest clouds is imparted to the more remote, may be fatal, without any appearance of an immediate discharge, at the place where the animal stands. We can, however, by no means precisely ascertain in what manner all the electrical phenomena of the atmosphere are produced. It appears from the experiments of Beccaria and Cavallo that the air is in general positively electrical, and most so in cold and clear veather; in cloudy weather more slightly: and that during rain, the air is generally in a negative state. Mr. Read has found that air charged with putrid vapours of any kind, and in particular the air of close rooms, is almost always negatively electriſied. The electricity is more readily communicated to an electrometer in an elevated situation, and in damp weather, than in other circumstances; a candle is also very useful in collecting it. When a vire is connected with a ite, being continued along the string, we may frequently obtain from it sparks a quarter of an inch long. We ſind a complete and interesting description of the effects of a violent thunder storm in a paper by Mr. Brereton, — in the Philosophical Transactions. The circumstance happened in September 1780, at East Bourn, in a house occupied by Mr. Adair: it was built of stone, and stood facing the sea. About nine o'clock, in a very stormy morning, a black cloud approached the house; several balls of fire were seen to drop from it successively into the sea, and one in particular, appearing like an immense sky rocket, broke against the ſront of the house in different directions. Mr. Adair was standing at a window on the ſirst floor, with his hands clasped together, and extended against the middle of the frame: his hands were forced asunder, he was thrown several yards off on the ſloor, and remained for some time speechless and motionless, although not insensible: his clothes were much torn; several articles of metal about his person were partially melted, while others, apparently in similar circumstances, and in particular a silver buckle, escaped; and his skin was in many parts much scorched and laceratedc. The whole of the glass in the window, and a pier glass near it, were completely destroyed, and scattered about the room; most of the furniture was broken to pieces, and all the bell wires were melted. In the ronm ahove this, a lady and her maid vere driven to a distant part, and rendered insensible for some time, but not hurt; in the room below, two servants, vho vere near the windows, were struck dead: both the bodies were turned black; one of them had a wound near the heart; and neither of them became stiſſ aſter death; a third servant, who vas a little behind one of them, 4 escaped with the loss of a telescope, which he held in his hand, and with the sensation of a violent pressure on his head and on his back. A large stone was forced out of the wall near them, and thrown into the room, and some other similar effects were observed, which marked the progress oſ the explosion. For guarding against accidents so dreadful, Dr. Franklin's great invention of metallic conductors may be very advantageously employed: for, when properly fixed, they afford a degree of security which leaves very little room for apprehension. 4 conductor ought to be continued deep into the earth, ur connected with some vell or drain; it should be of ample dimensions, and vhere smallest, of copper, since copper conducts electricity more readily than iron. In one instance a condtctor of iron, ſour inches wide, and half an inch thick, appears to have been made red hot by a stroke of lightning. It seems to be of some advantage that a conductor should be pointed, but the circumstance is of less consequence than has often been supposed. Mr. Wilson exhibited some experiments in which a point was struck at a greater distance than a ball, and therefore argued against the employment of pointed conductors. Mr. Nairne, on the contrary, showed that a ball is often struck in preference to a point. But it has been observed, that if a point attracts the lightuing from a greater distance, it must protect a greafer extent of building. It is easy to show, by hanging cotton or wool on a conductor, that a point repels light Telectrical bodies, and that a pointed conductor may, therefore, drive away some fleecy clouds; but this effect is principally derived from a current of air repelled by the point; and such a current could scarcely be supposed to have any perceptible effect on clouds so distant as those vhich are concerned in thunder storms. In order to escape personal danger in a thunder storm, the best precautions are, to avoid eminences, and all exposed situations, as well as a near approach to conductorss The neighbourhood of windows, looking glasses, ſire places, and trees, must always be considered as hazardous. It has been supposed that a sudden condensation of the air, arising from cold, accompanied by a deposition of moisture, and propagated by a continuation of the cause, by means of the cold occasioned by expansion, produces frequently the noise of thunder, without any lightning, and without any electrical agitation: but it does not appear that the opinion is well established. The phenomena oſ waterspouts, if not of electrical origin, appear to have some connexion with electrical causes. A waterspout generally consists oſ large drops, like a dense rain, much agitated, and descending or ascending vith a spiral motion, at the same time that the whole spout is carried along horizontally, accompanied in general by a sound like that of the dashing of waves. Spouts are sometimes, although rarely, ohserved on shore, but generally in the neighbourhood oſ vater. They are commonly largest above; sometimes two cones project, the one from a cloud, the other from the sea below it, to meet each other, the junction heing accompanied by a ſlash of, lightning: and when the whole spout has exhibited a luminous appearance, it has perhaps served to conduct electricity slowly from the clouds to the earth Some of these circumstances may be explained by considering the spout as a whirlwind carrying up drops of water, which it has separated from the surface of the waves; and the remainder may perhaps he deduced from the cooperation of electricity, already existing in a neighbouring cloud. It is doubtful whether the light of the aurora borealis may not be of an electrical nature: the phenomenon is certainly connected with the gen eral cause oſ magnetism; the primitive beams of light are supposed to be at an elevation of at least 50 or 100 miles above the earth, and every where in a direction parallel to that of the dipping needle; but perhaps, although the substance is magnetical, the illumination, which renders it visible, may still he derived from the pussage of electricity, at too great a distance to be discovered by any other test. l Earthquakes and volcanos appear to originate in chemical changes, which take place vithin the substance of the earth: they have probably little further connexion with electricity, than as causes which oceasionally destroy the electrical equilibrium; ſor although some authors have inferred, from the great velocity with which the shock of an earthquake is transmitted from place to place, that its nature must be electrical, yet others have, with greater probability, attributed the rapid succession of the effects to the operation of a single cause, acting at a great distance below the earth's surface. There are however some circumstances, vhich indicate such a connexion between the state of the atmosphere and the approach of an earthquake, as caunnot easily be explained by any hypothesis. The shocks of earthquakes, and the eruptions of voleanos, are in all prohabi lity modiſications of the effects of one common cause; the same countries are liable to hoth of them; and where the agitation produced by an earthquake extends further than there is any reason tosuspecta subterraneous conimotion, it is probubly propagated through the earth nearly in the same munner as a noise is conveyed through the nir. Voloanos are found in almost all parts of the world, but most commonly in the neighbourhood of the sea; and especially in small islands; for instance, in Italy, Sicily, Iceland, Japan, the Caribbees,v the Cape Verd islands, the Canaries, and the Azores: there are also numerous volcanos in Mexico and Peru, especially Pichincha and Cotopaxi. The subterraneous ſires, vhich are continually kept up in an open volcano, depend perhaps in general on sulfurenus combinations and decompositions, like the heating of a heap of wet pyrites, or the union of sulfur and iron ſilings: but in other cases they may perhaps approach more nearly to the nature of common ſires. A mountain of coal has been burning in Siberia for almost a century, and must probably have undermined in s0me degree the neighbouring country. The immediate cause of an eruption appears to be very frequently an admission oſ water from the sea, or from subterraneous reservoirs; it has often happened thut hoiling water has been discharged in great quantities from a volcano; and the foree of steam is perhaps more adequate to the production of violent explosions, than any other power in naturee. The consequence of such an admission of vater, into an immense collection of ignited materials, may in some measure be understood, from the accidents which occasionally happen in founderies: thus a whole furnace oſ melted iron was lately dissipated into the air in Colebrook Dale, by the effect of a ſlvod, vhich suddenly overſloved it. The phenomena of earthquakes and volcanos are amply illustrated by the partioular accounts, transmitted to the Roval Society by Sir William Hamilton, of those which have happened at diſferent times in Italy. The earthquake, which desolated Calabria, in 1783, was fatal to ahout 40000 persons, continuing its ravages for more than three months; it destroyed the towns and villages oceupying u circle of nearly 50 miles in diameter, lying hetween 38 and 89 degrees latitude, and extending almost from the vestern to the eastern coust of the southernmost poĩnt of Italy, besides doing considerable damage to places at much greater distances from its origin, which is supposed to have been either immediately under the town voL. I. 4v of Oppido, in the centre of this circle; or under some part of the sea, between the west of Italy, and the volcanic island of Stromboli. This island, as vell as Mount Etna, had smoked less than usual before the earthquake, but they both exhibited appearances of an eruption during its continuance; Etna tovards the beginning, and Stromboli at the end. Before each shock the clouds were usually motionless for a certain time, and it rained violently; frequently also lightning and sudden gusts of wind accompanied the rain. The principal shocks appeared to consist in a sudden elevation of the ground to a considerable height, which was propagated somevhat like a wave, from west to east: besides this, the ground had also a horizontal motion back wards and forvards, and in somæ measure in a circular directionn. This motion vas accompanied by a loud noise; it continued in one instance for ten seconds vithout intermission: and it shook the trees so violently that their heads nearly reached the ground. It affected the plains more strongly than the hillss In some places luminous exhalations, vhich Sir William Hamilton thinks rather electrical than igneous, were emitted by the earth: the sea boiled up near Messina, and vas agitated as if by a copious discharge of vapours from its bottom; and in several places water, mixed with sand, vas thrown up to a considerable height. The most general effect of these violent commotions was the destruction of buildings of all kinds, except the light barracks of vood or of reeds, into which the inhabitants retreated as soon as they were avare of their danger: the beds of rivers were often left dry, while the shock lasted, and the water on its return overſloved their banks: springs were sometimes dried up, and new ones broke out in nther places. The hills vhich formed the sides of steep vallies were often divided by deep chasms parallelto the vallies; andin many cases large portions of them were separated, and removed by the temporary deluge to places half a mile or a mile off; vith the buildings and trees still standing on them; and in this manner hills vere levelled, and vallies vere ſilled up. But the most ſatal accident of this Eind happened at Seilla, where so large a portion of a cliff vas thrown into the sea, that it raised an immense vave, vhich carried off more than 2000 inhabitants who vere collected on the heach, and even extended its formidable eſſects to the opposite eoast of Sicily, where several persons perished by it in a similar manner. The eruptions of volcanos are usually attended by some shocks like those of carthquakes, although commonly less violent. Open volcanos continually throw out, in more or less abundance, smoke, ashes, and pumice stones, or light cinders; but their most formidahle effects are produced by a torrent of ignited lava, vhich, like a vast deluge oſ liquid or semiliquid fire, lays waste the country over which it runs, and buries all the works of human art. In March, 1767, Vesuvius began to throv out a considerable quantity of ashes and stones, which raised its summit in the course of the year no less than 200 feet, forming first a little mountain of pumice stones within the erater, which hy degrees hecame visible above its margin. The smoke, which was continually emitted, was rendered luminous at night, by the light derived from the ſire burning below it. In August some lava had broken through this mountain, and in September ĩt had ſilled the space left between it and the former erater. On the I3th and I4th of October there vere heavy rains, which perhaps supplied the water concerned in the eruption that shortly folloved. On the morning of the 19th, clouds o smoke were forced, in continual succession, out of the mouth of the volcano, forming a mass like a large pine tree, which as lengthened into an arch, and extended to the island of Caprea, 28 miles off: it was accompanied by much lightning, and by an appearance of meteors like shooting stars. A mouth then opened below the crater, and discharged a stream of lava, which Sir William Hamilton ventured to approach within a short distance, imagining that the violence of the conſined materials must have been exhausted; but on a sudden the mountain opened with a great noise at a much lover point, about a quarter of a mile from the place where he stood, and threw out a torrent of lava, which advanced straight towards him, vhile he was involved in a shover of small pumice stones and ashes, and in a cloud of smoke. The foree of the explosions was so great, that doors and windows were thrown open by them at the distance of several miles: the stream of lava was in some places two miles broad, and 60 or 70 feet deep; it extended about six miles from the summit of the mountain, and remained hot for several weeks. In 1794 a still more violent eruption occurred: it was expected by the inhabitants of the neighbourhood, the crater being nearly filled, and the water in the wells having subsided. Showers of immense stones vere projected to a great height; and ashes vere thrown out so copiously, that they were very thick at Taranto, 250 miles oſf; some of them also were wet with salt wate. A heavy noxious vapour, supposed to be carbonic acid, issued in many places from the earth, and destroyed the vineyards in which it as suffered to remain stagnant. A part of the town of Torre del Greco was overwhelmed by a stream of lava, which ran through it into the sea; yet notwithstanding the frequency of such accidents, the inhabitants had so strong a predilection for their native spot, that they refused the offer of a safer situation for rebuilding their houses. Convulsions of these kinds must have very materially inſluenced the dis position of the strata of the earth, as well as the form of its surface; but it is by no menns fully determined how far such causes have been concerned, or how fur the effects are to be attributed to the intermediation of vater only. Mineralogists and geologists have been principally divided into two classes vith respect to their theories of the earth, some maintaining the Vulcanian, and some the Neptunian hypothesis. It appears to be impossible to decide vith any certainty hbetween these opposite opinions; nor is it perhaps of much consequence for any purpose oſ practice, or even of science. The Neptunians are certainly able to establish their own theory positively, and to prove that the fluid parts of the earth and sea must have been very materially concerned in producing the changes which have happened to the solid purts; but it may he diſticult for them to confute the assertion, that heat, whether caused by voleanos or otherwise, has also been a very powerful agent in these operations, and in some cases the joint eſfects of heat and of increased pressure appear to have been concerned, in giving to minerals of different kinds their actual form; although on the vhole it seems probable that the operation of heat has heen much more limited than that of aqueous solutions and precipitationss. Mr. Davy has also very justly inferred, from his experiments vith the battery of Volta, that the effects of the electricity excited hy means of chemical changes within the earth, have prohably been very materially concerned in the gradual formation of a variety of mineral productions. The arguments for establishing the general fact, that great convul sions have actually happened to the earth, are too well known to require minute examination: the variety of fossil substances, many of them marine productions, and some almost preserving a recent appearance, that are found in mountains remote ſfrom the sea, are undeniable prooſs that the Ievels of the earth's surface must have undergone considerable changes; although some philosophers are of opinion, that such of the primary mountains as are above õ or 700 feet high, have never been wholly covered by the sea. It is not at all easy to explain the change oſ climate, which some of these cil cumstances appear to indicate; the remains of animals inhabiting hot countries, and the marine productions of hot climates, which are frequently found ii high northern latitudes, vould induce us to suspect, that the positiun of rhe earth's axis vas at a former time very different from its present positioũ and ve can scarcely assign any other probable cause for this change, than the casual interference, and perhaps incorporation, of a comet with Ihe earth. The probabilities of such an event, in the whole course of time, urè however 50 smull, that we have no reason to be apprehensive of the chance of its occurring in future, for it is not enough that a comet should approach s0 near to the earth as to be very poverfully attracted by it, its motion must also be directed almost in a straight line towards the earth; otherwise it might only be inflected into a new orbit, and go ofſ again, without having caused any other disturbance than a partial overſlow oſ the sea. The face of the globe has also been very muterially changed in the course of ages, by the gradual operation of the sea and of riverss. The sea has incroached in particular parts, and retired from others; and the mouths of large rivers, running through low countries, have often been variously modified, by a deposition and transſer of the matter washed down ſrom the land. At Havre the sea undermines the steep eoast, and recedes at Dunkirk, where the shore is flat: in Holland the Zuyder Zee was probably formed in the middle ages by continual irruptions of the sea, vhere only the small luke Flevo had before existed; and the mouths of the Rhine have been considerably altered, both in their dimensions andin their directions. The mud, depositedl by large rivers, generally causes a Delta, or triangular piece of land, to grow out into the sea; thus the mouth of the Mississippi is said to have advanced above 50 miles since the discovery of America; and the sea has retired from Rosetta above a mile in 40 years. The mouths of the Arno and of the thone consist also in great measure of nev land. The meteors denominated shooting stars are observed to move in all directions, as well upwards as downvards, although they frequently seem to have a tendency towards a particular quarter in the course of the same evening. Their height is seldom less than 20 miles, and sometimes as much as 100 or 200, but usually about 50; their velocity is commonly ahout 20 miles in a second, which differs very little from that of the earth in its orbit. The rapidity of their motion, as well as its occasional deviation from a right line, has generally heen considered as a reason for supposing that they depend on electricity; but the opinion is by no means fully established. Other igneous meteors, which nearly resemble in their appearance the largest of these, are sometimes observed to fall on the earth, either entire or divided: and after their fall, certain stones have been found, which have been supposed to have descended in an ignited state. Mr. Howard has ascertained that almost all these stones agree in their general characters, and in their chemical analysis, especially in the circumstance of containing nickel. It has been conjectured, both in this country and on the continent, that they have been emitted by lunar volcanos, and it has been observed, that since they would find little or no resistance from the very rare atmosphere of the moon, they would require a velocity of projection only four times as great as that which a cannon ball sometimes receives, in order to rise into the sphere of the earth's attraction. Their heat and combustion may not improbably be derived from the great condensation which they must occasion in the air immediately before them, and even their friction might easily produce enough of electric light, to render them visible in the dark. Among many such substances projected from the moon, it is probable that a few only would be directed towards the earth, and many more would be made to revolve in ellipses round it, and become little satellites, too small for human observation, except vhen they enter far enough into the atmosphere to produce an appearance of light, resembling that of a shooting star; but it is scarcely probable that their velocity could ever be at all comparable with that which has been attributed to these meteors. There is, however, no diſſiculty in supposing, on the other hand, that the wandering substances, which may be moving through empty space, with a velocity equal to that of the shooting stars, may be so much retarded, vhen they penetrate deep into our atmosphere, as to make but a moderate impression by their fall on the ground; and if we suppose the meteors to be of one kind only, they must be referred rather to the description of shooting stars than to that of the productions of lunar volcanos; although the undulatory motion, sometimes observed in these meteors seems to be in some measure inconsistent with the progress of a heavy body, moving by means of its natural inertia in a straight line. LECTURE LVIII. ON VEGETATION. IT may appear idle to some persons, to attempt to reduce the outlines of natural history into so small a compa:s, as is required for their becoming a part of this course of lectures; and it would indeed be a fruitless undertaking to endeavour to communicate a knowledge of the particular subjects of this science, even in a much longer time than we shall bestow on it. But many naturalists have spent a great portion of their lives in learning the names of plants and animals, and have known at last less of the philosophy of the science, than might have been told them in a few hours, by persons who had observed with more enlarged views, and who had reasoned on general principles. And we shall perhaps ſind it possible to collect into a small compass the most useful information, that has hitherto been obtained, respecting the laws of animal and vegetable life, as well as the foundations of the methods, by which the most received systematical classifications have been regulated. The surface of the earth, as vell sea as land, is occupied by innumerable individuals, constituting an immense variety of distinet species of animated and inanimate beings, comprehended in the three grand divisions of natural bodies. The mineral kingdom consists of such substances, as are composed of particles either united without any regular form, or collected together by accretion or external growth only. When mineral substances crystallize, they often imitate the form, and almost assume the external appearance of vegetables: but their particles are never extended to admit others between them, and to be thus enlarged in all their dimensions; their growth is only performed by the addition of similar particles, upon the surface of those tl at have been already deposited. Vegetables derive their existence, by seeds, or otherwise, from a parent stock, their parts are extended and evolved from within, and they imbibe their nutriment by superficial absorption only. There is indeed in the erystallization of minerals a slight resemblance to a reproduction or generation, when a small portion of the substance serves as a basis for the formation of sub;equent crystals: but this portion becomes a constituent part of the crystal, vhile it preserves its original form; a seed, on the contrary, ĩs a substance naturally and completely detached ſrom the plant, and containing within itself the simplest rudiments of a new individual, which is aſterwards evolved and enlarged. Sometimes, however, vegetables are propagated by means of bulbs, or by spreading roots, by slips, or by ingrafted scions, without a seed detached in the regular manner; but in these cases the new plant is much more jdentical vith the old one, than when ĩt is raised ſrom a seed, heing us ĩt vere a continuation of the same existence. Plants are nourished in great measure by means of their roots; and sometimes, where they are without roots, their nutriment is probably absorbed by all parts of their surſace. Animals are distinguished from vegetables by the reception of their food, for digestion and assimilation, into an internal cavity constituting a stomach. The existence of a stomach, calculated for the digestion of food, appears to De the best, if not the only criterion of an animal. Some vegetables, indeed, have u power of catching and detaining animals, by curling up their leaves so as to cover them, as the drosera or sundew, and the dionaca muscipula, or catchſly; but this mechanism can scarcely be intended for their immediate nutriment, at least the leaf can scarcely be supposed to assume the character of a stomach. It is true that we imagine all animals to have sensation, and all plants to be without it; and if it were possible to diseriminate decisively between sensation and irritation, the distinetion would supersede every other: but in many eases it is extremely diſicult to say where sensation is present, and vhere irritation only produces the same apparent efſects. We cannot he sure that the hydra, or ſfiesh vater polypus, or the trichurus sol, an animalcule described by Dr. Shaw, suſſers any sensation of pain when it is divided into two parts; at least the pain seems to agree remarkably vell with its constitution, for it lives and thrives with increased vigour, as two distinct animals. On the other hand, many plants are easily stimulated to perform motions, vhich have the appearance of muscular actions, influenced by sensation: the sensitive plants close or depress their leaves, in consequence of agitation or of electricity; the stamina of the barberry and of the pellitory are thrown into motion, vhen touched with a needle, and those of rue, and of the grass of parnassus, have at times alternate motions without any apparent cause. A znophyte is an animal absolutely ſixed to one place; and the vallisneria is a vegetable possessed of a certain limited power of locomotionn. A plant chooses in preference to turn towards the light; and it has heen known that an ash tree on a vall, when incapable of being any longer supported hy the all only, has concentrated all its force in the production of one large root, descending to the ground. Some of these circumstances may be explained vithout recurring to any thing like volition; but, as far as we know, the same explanations might be applied to some animal motions: and although it is very possible that there may be a certain limit, where the inſluence of mind and sensation terminates, and the laws of vegetable life only prevail; yet the place of the division is not strongly enough marked, to allow it to form a characteristic in an artiſicial system. It has been asserted that some worms are nourished by absorption only, vithout the assistance of a stomach; thus hydatids, which are supposed to be of an animal nature, appear to be simply bags of a ſluid without any visible opening; but a few doubtful cases of this kind can scarcely be suſicient, to invalidate the general position, that all bodies decidedly animal have a cavity for the reception of food. There are usually also some chemical distinctions in the component parts of animals and vegetables; animal substances commonly containing greater proportions of azote or nitrogen, and of phosphoric acid; but there are some exceptions to this observation; thus the carica papaya, or papuw, contains nearly the same principles as are usually found in substances of animal origin. In general ve may readily distinguish a small portion of an animal from a vegetable substance, by the smell produced in burning it. According to common language, ve say, that minerals have growth only, but not always; that vegetables grow and live also; and that animals have sensation, as ell as liſe and increase of magnitude. Mineralogy is a branch of natural history s0 nearly allied to chemistry, that it canmot be completely understood without a previous knowledge of that science. It may therefore be more properly considered as belonging to a course of chemical than of physical lectures. i VOL. I. 4 x The vegetable kingdom presents to us a speetacle hihly interestinæ hy its variety and by its elegance; but the economy of veetation appens to be little diversiſied, although little understond. With respect to the a;pent perfeetion of their functions, and the complication oſ theĩ strueture, we may consider all vegetables as belongſing to two principal divisions, in one of vhich the sced is prepared vith the assistance of a ſlower, laving its stanina and its pistils, with petals or a calyx; while in the other, the Jreparation of the seed is Iess regular and conspicuous, and hence sueh plants are enlled eryptogamous. In sume oſ these there is a slight resemhlunce to the fſlowers of other vegetables, but on the vhole, the class appears to form one of the conneeting links between rhe three kingdoms of nature; its physiology is probably simple, but ĩt has been lititle examined. The licrbs, pulms, shrubs, and trees, which constitute the numerous genera of flowering vegetables, exhihit the greatest diversity in the forms and dispositions of the organs of ſructiſication, while they have all a general reseniblance in their internal economy. Every vegetable may be considered as a congeries of vessels, in which, by some unknown means, the aqueous ſluids, imbibed hy its roots, are suhjected to peculiar ehemical and vital actions, and exposed in the leaves to ſhe inſluence of the light and air; so as to be rendered ſit for becoming constituent parts of the plant, or of the peculiar substances contauined within iĩt. The first process in the germination of a seed is its imbibing moisture, and undergoing a chemical fermentation, in which oxygen is absorbed, and a purt of the mucilage contained in the seed is converted into sugar; a substance probably more nutritive to the young plant. The radiele shoots downwards, and the seed leaves, or cotyledons, which are generally two, although sometimes more or less numerous, raise themselves above the ground, tĩll in a short time they die and drop off, being succeeded by the regular and more adult leaves. In every transverse section of a vegetable, ve commonly discover at least four different substances. The parts next to the axis oſ the tree or branch consist of medulla or pith, which ĩs supposed by some to be the residence oſ the vegetable life of the plant; but a tree may live for many years aſter be5 ing in great measure deprived of its medulla. The pith is of a loose and light spongy texture; it sends a ramification into each branch and each leaf, vhere it appears to serve also as a reservoir of moisturee The pith is surrounded by the voody part, composed of ſibres more or less strongly compacted together, but not actually ramiſying into euch other in any great degree, although there is reason to suspect some lateral communications between them. They are interrupted, at certain intervals, in many trees, by fibres, in a radiating direction, forming what is called the silver grain. Like the bones in animals, the wood constitutes the strongest part of the vegetable; and like them too it is in a certain degree furnished with vessels. It has even been supposed by some, that the ſibres themselves are distinct tubes, and by others, that the interstices hetween them serve the purpose oſ vessels, but neithtr of these opinions is at present generally received. The wool consists of a number oſ concentrie layers orstrata, formed in successive years; the external part, which is last formed, is called the alburnum, or vhite wood, and this part is the most vascular. The bark encompasses the wood; and this also consists, in trees, of several layers, which are produced in as muny different years; the external parts usually cracking, and allowing us at their divisions to observe their number, the inner layer only being of immediate use. This layer is called the liber, and since this material was once used instead of paper, the Romans called a book also liber. The bark consists of ſibres of the same kind as the wood, but more loosely connected. It is covered by the cuticle, which extends itself in a very great degree, as the growth of the vegetable advances, but at last cracks, and has its oſfice supplied by the outer layers of bark. Between the hark and the cuticle a green pulpy substance, or parenchyma, is found, which seems to be analogous to the rete mucosum, interposed between the true skin and the cuticle in animals. Mr. Desfontaines has observed, that in palms, and in several other natural orders of plants, the annual deposition of nev matter is not confined to the external surface, but that it takes place in various purts of the plant, as if it were composed of a number of ordinary stems united together. There are three principal kinds of vessels in the diſferent parts of vegetables: the sap vessels, which are found both in the vood and in the bark, although their nature appears to require further examination: secondly, the air vessels, or tracheae, which are composed of single threads wound into a spiral tube, like the spring oſ a bell, and capable of being easily uncoiled; these, though they have been called air vessels, aud supposed by some to serve the purposes of respiration, are deseribed by others as containing, during the life of the plant, an aqueous ſluid: and they are probably little more than sap vessels, with an additional spiral coat: they are not found in the bark, nor in all species of plants; and it has thence been inferred that they are not immediately necessary to the growth of the plant. The third kind are the proper vessels of the plant, which are generally disposed in concentric circles, and appear to be unconnected vith the sap vessels, and to contain the milky, resinous, and other peculiar juices, which are found in different kinds of plants; for the sap is nearly the same in all, at least ĩt is independent of the gums and resin, which oſten distinguish particular plants; it contains a certain portion of mucilage, and probably in some plants, as the sugar maple, a considerable quantity of sugar. Mr. Mirbel has also made a number of still more accurate distinctions respecting the structure of the diſferent kinds of vesselss. The circulation of the sap is not completely understood; when an oriſice is made near the root of a tree, it ſlows most copiously from above: when near the summit, from below. Dr. Hope actually reverted the natural course of the juices of a tree, without changing its position; by inoculating a willow with two others, he completely united its existence with theirs, and then, removing its roots, he found that its vegetation was supported by the juices of the two others. A tree may also be actually inverted, and the upper part will strike root, the lower putting out branches and leaves. Plants perspire very considerably, and also emit a quantity of gases of different kinds; they generate a slight degree of heat, which may be observed by means of the thermometer, and by the melting of snow in contact with them. The growth of every tree tukes place at the internal surface of the bark, not only the bark itself being formed there, but the wood also being deposited by the Lark; for Dr. Hope separated the whole of the bark of a branch of willow from the wood, leaving it conneeted only at the ends, so as to constitute a hollow eylinder, parallel to the wood; and he found that new layers vere formed within the bark; and in another experiment a part of the wood, deprived of the bark, although protected from the air, was only covered with new bark as it grew over from the old bark above and below. The layers of wood, which are added in successive seasons, and keep æ register of the age oſ the tree, are very easily observed when it is cut across; sometimes as many as 400 have been found in ſirs, and oaks are said to have lived 1000 years. Mr. Knight has inferred, from a great variety of experiments, that the sap, either usually or universally, ascends through the wood into the leaves, and then descends through the bark to nourish the plant. The leaves seem to be somewhat analogous to lungs, or rather to the gills of fishes: for plants have need of air, and it has been found, that even seeds will not germinate in a vacuum. As the lungs of animals appear to be concerned in forming the blood, so it may be inferred from Mr. Knight's experiments, that the sap ſirst ascends 10 the leaves through the external fresh wood or alburnum; and through the central vessels of the young leaves and branches, derived from the alburnum, and accompanied by the spiral tubes; and after being perfected by exposure to light and air in the leaves, it descends in the bark, and serves for the secretion of the alburnum, and of the internal layers of the bark, being conveyed probably by two distinct sets of vessels. The sap, thus prepared hy the leaves in the summer and autumn, is supposed to leave its extractive matter in the tree throughout the winter, in such a state as to be ready to unite vith the aqueous juices, which ascend from the root, in the succeeding spring. The internal parts of the wood, having served the purposes of vegetation, are hardened, and perhaps dried up, so as to be aſterwards principally subservient to strength alone. By subsequent experiments, Mr. Knight has also found, that when a branch hangs downwards, the sap still appears to proceed from the part of the bark which is uppermost; so that the direction of the force of gravity seems to be concerned in determining that of the motion of the sap. There appears also to be some reason to suppose that mechanical means assist in the protrusion of the sap, and the consequent growth of the tree; for ifa tree be more agitated by the wind in one direction than in another, its diameter vill be greatest in that direction. The process of graſting depends on a remarkable property of the growth of vegetables; if the cut surface of the inner bark of a small branch, or cutting, be placed in contact with that of the branch of another tree, they vill unite sufficiently for the nourishment of the cutting: provided, however, that the nature of the plants be not too diſferent. Something of the sume ind occurs in animal life, where a tooth has heen transplanted into the socket of another, or where the spur of a cock has been inserted into his comb. Plants have their natural periods of life, either of a few days, as in the case of some of the ſungi, of a year, of a few years, or of many centuries They have also their discases; they are often infested by insects, as in the gall of the ouk, and the woodruſſ of the rose, or by animalcules oſ a still lover order, which are either the causes of the smut of corn, or constant attendants on it. From unnatural and too luxuriant culture, they become sterile, and produce double ſlowers instead of fruits and seeds. When deprived of suſficient moiture, or nipped by fſrost, their leaves and hranches often die; and if the plants recover their vigour, a separation is afſected by a natural process, resembling the sloughing oſ decayed parts of animals: but when the whole plant sinks, the dead leaves continue to adhere to itt. The annual fall of leaves in autumn appears to he a natural separation nearly of the same kind, vhich takes place when the leaves are no longer wanted; the growth of the plant being discontinued, and their functions being no longer required. Succulent plants generally die when the cuticle is removed, but not all other plantss. The air appears to be injurious to vegetables where it ĩs not natural; hence arises the henefit of Mr. Forsyth's method of completely excluding the air from the wounded parts of trees, by means of which their Iosses are oſten in great measure repaired, and they acquire nev strength and vigour. Sumetimes a diminution of the magnitude of a tree immediately inerenses its fertility; its foree being more concentrated, by lopping off its useless branches and leaves, it produces a larger quantity of fruit, with the juices which would have been expended in their nourishment. The Linnean system of vegetables is confessedly rather an artiſicial than a naturul one; but it is extremely vell adapted for practice, and its universal adoption has been productive of the most important improvements in the science oſ botany. Of the 24 classes into which Linnè hus divided the vegetable kingdom, 23 are distinguished hy the forms of the ſlowers and fruit, and the 24th by the want of a regular florescence. The ſirst 10 are named from monandria, in order, to decandria; then follow dodecandria; icosan dria, and polyandria; the names expressing the number of the stumina, or ſilamerts, surrounding the seed vessel; and the orders are deduced in a similar manner from the number of pistils, or little columns immediately connected with the sced vessel; and denominated mono>ynia, digy nia, and so forth, as far as polygynia. These classes diſſer little in general uith respeet to their natural hubits, except the twelfth, icosandria, which is characterized hy the attachiment of the filaments to the green cup, surrounding the ſlower, and which compreliends the most common fruit trees: this cluss has, however, been incorporated hy some later botanists with the next. In the third class we ſind most of the natural order oſ grasses; the ſifth, pentandria, is by far the most numerous oſ any: the sixth contains the lilies, and many other bulbous plants. The 14th class, didynamia, is knownby two longer and two shorter ſilaments; it is perfectly natural, and comprehends ſlowers similar in their strueture to the foxglove and the deadnettle The I5th also, tetradynamia, is a class of plants strongly characterized even by chemical properties; two of the ſilaments are here shorter than the other fuur: eresses, radishes, and many other acrid and ammoniacal vegetables belong to this class, as well as the turnip and cablage, which, when cultivated, hecome mild and nutritious. The class monadelphia contains a few plants similar to the mallow; they are known by the union of the filuments at their bases into a cylinder: those of the next class have generally nine united, and one separate, vhence the class is named diadelphia; it contains the papilionaceous flowers, sumewhat resembling a butterſly in their form, like the pea, and other leguminous plants, the broom, the furze, and the acacia. The 18th class, polyadelphia, has the filuments of its ſlowers united into several masses or hundles, as the hypericum or tutsun. The next class is perfectly natural, and contains the composite ſlowers, which have a peculiur union of the summits of the ſilaments; it is named syngenesia: sunſlovers, daisies, and artichokes, are familiar examples of the plants of this class. The 20th class, gynandria, though it contains the natural family of the orchides, has been omitted by some late botanists; here the ſiluments are fixed on the pistil; or more properly, in the arums, within the pistilss. The three following classes, monocceia, dioecia, and polygamia, difſer from the rest in having some ſlowers with ſilaments or chives, and some with pistils only, either on the same plant, or on different plants, or mixed with ſlowers of the more common construction. Most of the f.rest trees belong to these classes, but the distinetions which separate them from oſher elusses are not always very uniſormly preserved, and, for this reason, many later botanists have disused them. The plants of the last class, eryptogamia, are exceedingly numerous; the families of ferns, mosses, algue, or membranous veeds, and fungi or mushrooms, ſill up its extensive departments; some have al:o separated a part of the algae under the name of hepaticae, or gelatinous weeds. In this class the fructiſications are extremely various; some of the fuci and confervae approach so much in their general appearance and mode of growth to corallines and zoophytes, that they seem to form an obvious connexion between the lowest ranks of the vegetable and animal kingdoms; while other plants oſ the cluss are scarcely distinguishable by their appearance from some oſ the productions of the mineral kingdom. The French have introduced into very general use the botanical system of Jussieu. The most prominent feature in this system is the division of all the genera into a hundred natural orders, which are also arranged in ſifteen classes. Jussicu begins, like Linnè, with the separation of eryptogamic from phanerogamic plants; the seeds of the cryptogamic plants, which form the first class, being without cotyledons or seed leaves, and all other plants being distinguished into such as have seeds with one and with two cotyledons. Accordingly as the stamina or ſilaments are inserted below the pistil, on the calyx, or on the seed vessel, the ſirst description of seeds affords three distinet classes. The plants which have two cotyledons follow, and are divided into apetalous, monopetalous, and polypetalous, from distinctions respecting the corolla or ſlower leaves, which are somewhat arbitrarily understood; and lastly diclinous, from the separation of the stamina and pistilss, The three ſirst of these divisions are subdivided according to the insertion of the stamina, and the union or separation of the antherae, which they support, into ten classes, making, with the four already mentioned, fourteen, to which the diclinous plants add a ſifteenth. The orders are determined without any particular limitation of the parts from which the characters are taken. This system is of acknovledged merit as a philosophical classiſication of the natural orders of plants; such vegetubles as nearly agree in their habits and appearances heing brought more uniformly together than in the system of Linnc. Hence, in the arrangement of a botanical garden, or in a treatise on the chemical or medical properties of plants, it might be employed with aidvanage: but for the practical purposes of botanical investigation it appears to be utterly unfit, since its author has sacrificed all logical and systematical lavs to the attempt to follow nature, in analogies, which are often discoverable only vith great difſiculty, and which are seldom reducible to methodical deſinitions. l LECTURE LIX. ON ANIMAL LIFE. THE functions of animal life are not only more complicated in the same individual than those of vegetation, but also more diversiſied in the different classes into which animals are divided; so that the physiology of each class has its peculiar laws. We are indebted to Linnẽ for the ſirst enlargement of our views of the different classes of animals, and perhaps for the most convenient arrangement, of the animal kingdom; although his method has never been universally adopted by our neighbours on the continent. A considerable portion of the bulk of all animals is composed of tubular vessels, which originate in a heart; the heart propels through the arteries, with the assistance of their own muscular powers, either a colourless transparent ſluid, or a red blood, into the extremities of the veins; through which it again returns to the origin of its motion. Both insects, and vermes, or worms, have their circulating fluids a little warmer than the surrounding medium, and generally colourless; but insects have legs furnished with joints, and worms have nothing but simple tentacula at most in the place of legs Fishes have cold red blood, which is exposed to the inſluence of the air contained in water, by means oſ their gills. The amphibia receive the air into their lungs, but their blood is cold, like that of fishes, and in both these classes the heart has only two regular cavities, while that of animals with warm blood has four; the whole contents of one pair being obliged to pass through the lungs, in order to arrive at the other pair. Of animals with warm blood, the oviparous are birds, and are generally covered with feathers, the viviparous are either quadrupeds or cetaceous animals, and are furnished with organs for suckling their young. Each of these classes of animals is subdivided by Linnè into different VOL. I. 4 orders, of which we shall only be able to take a very cursory view. The first class, denominated mammalia, from the female's suckling its young, comprehends all viviparous animals with warm blood. These, with very few exceptions, have teeth fixed in their jaw bones; and from the form and number of these teeth, the orders are distinguished, except that of cetaceous fishes, which is known by the fins that are found in the place of feet. The distinctions of the teeth are somewhat minute, but they appear to be connected with the mode of life of the animal, and they are tolerably natural. The first order, primates, contains man, monkeys, and bats; the second, bruta, among others, the elephant, the rhinoceros, the ant eater, and the ornithorhynchus, an extraordinary quadruped, lately discovered in Nev Holland, with a bill like a duck, and sometimes teeth inserted behind it; but there are some suspicions that the animal is oviparouss. The order ferae contains the seal, the dog, the cat, the lion, the tiger, the weasel, and the mole, most of them beasts of prey; the opossum and the kangaroo also belong to this order, and the kangaroo feeds on vegetables, although its teeth are like those of carnivorous animals. The fourth order, glires, comprehends beavers. mice, squirrels, and hares, the ſifth, pecor, camels, goats, sheep, and horned cattle The sixth order, belluae, contains the horse, the hippopotamus, and the hog. The cetaceous fishes, or whales, form the seventh and last order: they reside in the water, enveloped in a thick clothing of fat, that is, of oĩly matter, deposited in cells, which enables their blood to retain its temperature, notwithstanding the external contact of a dense medium consiiderably colder. Birds are distinguished from quadrupeis, by their laying egęs; they are also generally feathered, although some few are rather hairy; and instead of hands or fore legs they have wings. Their eg”s are covered by a calcarious shell; and they comist of a white, or albumen, which nourishes the chick during incubation, and a yolk, which is s0 suspended within it, as to preserve the side on which the little rudiment of a chicken is situated, continually uppermost, and next to the mother that is sitting on it. The yolk is in great measure received into the abdomen of the chicken a little before the time of its being hatched, and serves for its support, like the milk of a quadrupeq, and like the cotyledons of young plants, until the system is become sufi- ciently strong for extracting its own food out of the ordinary nutriment of the species. Birds are divided, according to the form of their bills, into six orders: accipitres, as eagles, vultures, and havks: picae, as crows, jackdaws, humming birds, and parrots; anseres, as ducks, swans, and gulls; grallae, as herons, voodcocks, and ostriches; gallinae, as peacocks, pheasants, turkies, and common fovls; and, lastly, passeres, comprehending sparrows, larks, swallows, thrushes, and doves. The amphibia are in some respects very nearly allied to hirds: but their blood is little warmer than the surrounding medium. Their respiration is not necessarily performed in a continual succession of alternations, since the whole of their blood does not pass through the lungs, and the circulation may continue without interruption in other parts, although it may be impeded in these organs, for want of the motion of respirationn They are very tenacious of life; it has been asserted on good authority that some of them have lived many years vithout food, inclosed in hollow trees, and even in the middle of stones: and they often retain vestiges of life some days after the loss of their heartss. Their eggs are generally covered with a membrane only. They have sometimes an intermediate atage of existence, in which all their parts are not yet developed, as we observe in the tadpole; and in this respect they resemble the elass of insects. They are now univers: lly considered as divided into two orders only; reptilia, as the tortoise, the dragon, or flying lizard, the frog and the toad; all these have four feet: but the animals which belong to the order serpentes are without feet. Most of the serpentes are perſectly innocent, but others have fangs, by which they instil a poisonous ſluid into the wounds that they make. In England the viper is the only venomous serpent; it is known by its dark brown colour, and hy a stripe of whitish spots running along its back; but to mankind its bite is seldom, if ever, fatal. The first three classes of animals have lungs, as we have already seen, for respiration, and receive air by the mouth; those which have gills, and red blood, are fishes, residing either in fresh or in salt water, or indiſferently in both: their eggs are involved in a membrane, and have no albumen. Of the six orders oſ fishes, four have regular gills, supported by little bones; and they are distinguished, according to the place of their ventral fins, into apodes, as the eel and lamprey; jugularis, as the cod; thoracici, as the sole and perch, and abdominales, as the salmon and pike: distinctions which appear to be perfectly artiſicial, although useful in a systematic arrangement. The two remaining urders are without bones in the gills, those of the one being soft, and of the other cartilaginous or gristly. These are the branchiostegi and chondropterygii of Artedi, which Linnè, from a mistake, classed among the amphibia. The sun fish, the lump ſish, the fishing frog, and the sea horse, are of the former, and the sturgeon, the skate, and the shark, of the latter order. Insects derive their nume from being almost always divided, into a head, thorax, and ahdomen, with very slender intervening portions: although these divisions do not exist in all insects. They are usually oviparous: they respire, but not by the mouth; they have a number of little orifices on each side of the abdomen, by which the air is received into their ramiſied tracheae; and if these are stopped with oil, they are sufſocated. Instead of bones, they have a hard integument or shel. Their mouths are formed on constructions extremely various, but generally very complicated: Fabricius has made these parts the basis oſ his classification; but from their minuteness in most species, the method is, in practice, insuperably inconvenient; and the only way, in which such characters can be rendered really useful, is when they are employed in the subdivision of the genera, as determined from more conspicuous distinctions. Insects have most frequently jaws, and often several pairs, but they are alvays so placed as to open laterally or horizontally. Sometimes, instead of jaws, they have a trunk, or proboscis In general, they pass through four stages of existence, the egg, the larva, or atage of growth, the pupa, or chrysalis, which is usually in a state of torpor or complete inactivity, and the imago, or perfect insect, in its nuptial capacity. After the last change, the insect most frequently takes no food till its death. The Linnean orders oſ insects are the coleoptera, with hard sheaths to their O l wings, generally called beetles; the hemiptera, of which the sheaths are of a softer nature, and cross each other, as grasshoppers, bugs, and plant lice; the lepidoptera, with dusty scales on their vings, as butterſlies and moths; the neuroptera, as the libellula, or dragon ſly, the may ſly, and other insects with four transparent wings, but without stings; the hymenoptera, which have stings, either poisonous or not, as bees, wasps, and ichneumons; the diptera, with two vings, as common fſlies and gnats, vhich have halteres, or halancing rods, instead of the second pair of wings; and lastly the aptera, without any wings, which form the seventh order, comprehending crabs, lobsters, shrimps and prawns, for these are properly insects; spiders, scorpions, millepeds, centipeds, mites, and monoculi. The monoculus is a genus including the little active insects found in pond water, vhich are scarcely visible to the naked eye, as well as the Molucea erab, which is the largest of all insects, being sometimes six feet long. Besides these there are several genera of apterous insects which are parasitical, and infest the human race as well as other animals. The vermes are the last and lowest oſ animated beings, yet some of them are not deficient either in magnitude or in beauty7. The most natural division of vermes is into five orders; the intestina, as carthworms and ascarides, vhich are distinguished by the want of moveable appendages, or tentacula, from the mollusca; such as the dew snail, the cuttle fish, the sea anemone, and the hydra, or fresh water polype. The testacea have shells of one or more pieces, and most of them inhabit the sea, and are called shell fish, as the limpet, the periwinkle, the snail, the muscle, the oyster, and the barnaclee. The order zoophyta contains corallines, sponges, and other compound animals, united by a common habitation, which has the general appearance of a vegetable, although of animal origin; each of the little inhabitants, resembling a hydra, or polype, imitating by its extended arms the appearance of an imperſect lower. The last order, infusoria, is scarcely distinguished from the intestina and mollusca by any other character than the minuteness of the individuals belonging to it, and their spontaneous appearance in animal and vegetable in fusions, where ve can discover no traces of the manner in which they are produced. The process, by which their numbers are sometimes increased, is no less astonishing than their first production; for several of the genera often appear to divide spontaneously, into two or more parts, vhich become new and distinct animals, so that in such a case the question respecting the identity of an indvidual would be very difficult to determine. The volvox, and some of the vorticellae are remarkable for their continual rotatory motion, probably intendei for the purpose of straining their food out of the vater: while some other species of the vorticella resemble fungi or corallines in miniature. Among the animals of these different classes, the more perfect are informed of the qualities oſ external ohjects by the senses of touch, taste, smell, hearing, and vision. A few quadrupeds are incapable of seeing: the mole has an eye so small as to be vith difficulty distinguishable; and the mus typhlus, supposed to be the aspalax of Aristotle, has its eye completely covered by the skin and integuments, without any perforation. Birds have hearing, but no external ears, or auriculae Insects appear to want the organs of smell; but it is not impossible that their antennae may answer the purpose of hearing. Many of the vermes are totally destitute of sight, and some of all the organs of sense: none of them huve either ears or nostrils. The external senses of animals with warm hlood are usually liable to a periodical state of inactivity in the night time, denominated sleep. It is said that ſishes never sleep; and it is well known that some animals pass the whole of the severest part of the vinter in a state nearly resembling their usual sleep. In animals which approach, in their economy, to that of the human system, the process for supporting life by nutrition begins with the mastication of the food, which has been received by the mouth. The food thus prepared is conveyed into the stomach by the operation of swallowing; but in ruminating cattle, it is ſirst lodged in a temporary receptacle, and more completely masticated at leisuree In the stomach, it undergoes digestion, and being afterwards mixed with the bile and other fluids, poured in by the liver and the neighbouring glands, it hecomes ſit ſor affording the chyle, or nutritive juice, which is separated from it by the absorbents of the intestines, in ĩts passage through the convolutions of a canal nearly forty feet in length. Together with the chyle, all the aqueous ſluids, which are swallowed, must also be ahsorbed, and pass through the thoracic duet into the large veins entering the heart, and thence into the general circulation, before they can arrive at the kidneys, by which the superſluous parts are rejected The chyle passes unaltered, with the blood, through the right auricle and ventricle of the heart, and enters the lungs, to be there more intimately mixed with it, and perhaps to be rendered animal and vital; while the blood receives from the air, in the same place, a supply of oxygen, with a small portion of nitrogen, and emits some superſluous carbonic matter, in the form of carbonic acid. The blood, thus rendered arterial, returning to the leſt side of the heart, is distributed thence to every part of the system, supplying nutriment throughout, while the glands and arteries secrete from it such ſluids, as are become redundant, and such as are required for particular purposes subservient to the animal functions. It is probably in these processes that heat is evolved; for by experiments on living animals, it has been found, that the blood, returning from the lungs, is not warmer than before its entrance into them: we must therefore suppose, that when the florid arterial blood is, by some unknown means, converted, in the extreme ramifications of the arteries, into the purple venous blood, to return to the heart by the converging branches of the veins, there is a much more considerable extrication of heat, than in the conversion of venous into arterial blood, by the absorption of oxygen and nitrogen in the lungs. If the chyle is actually converted into blood in the lungs, it is here that we must look for the formation of the red globules, those singular corpuscles, to which the blood owes its colour, as it does its power of coagulation to a glutinous lymph, mixed with a less coaguluble serum. The red particles in the human blood are ahout 5æ of an inch in diameter, some what oblong, and ſlattened; they have usually the appearance of a dark point in the centre; but there is tome reason to suspect that this is merely an optical deception. In a few animals they are a little smaller, but in most of the amphibia, much larger and ſlatter than in man. While the lymph remains fluid, after the blood has been withdrawn from the vessels, these globules tend to subside, and to leave it semitransparent: hence arises the appearance of a buſf coat on blood leſt to coagulate, which is thinner or thicker, accordingly as the globules are sooner or Iuter arrested in their descent. The muscles are probably furnished by the blood vith a store of that unknown principle, by which they are rendered capable of contracting, for producing locomotion, or for other purposes, in obedience to the influence transmitted by the nerves from the sensorium; the brain and nervous system in general are also sustained, by means of the vascular circulation, in a ſit state for transmitting the impressions, made by external objects on the senses, to the im- mediate seat oſ thought and memory, in the sensorium; and for conveying the dictates of the will, and the habitual impulses almost independent of volition, to the muscular parts of the whole frame. In what manner these reciprocal impressions are transmitted by the nerves, has never yet been fully determined: but it has long heen conjectured, that the medium of communication may bear a considerable analogy to the electrical ſuid; and the extreme sensibility of the nerves to the slightest portion of electrical inſluence, as well as the real and apparently spontaneous excitation of that inſluence in animal bodies, which have been of late years evinced by galvanic experiments, have added very materially to the probability of the opinion. An extremely slender ſibre, of a substance capable of conducting electricity with perfect freedom, enveloped in a sheath oſ a perfect nonconductor, would perhaps serve to communicate an impulse, very nearly in the same manner, as the nerves appear to do. Indeed nothing can be more ſit to constitute a connecting link between material and immaterial beings, than some modiſication of a ſluid, which appears to diſfer very considerably, in ſts essential properties, from the common gross matter of the universe, and to possess a subtility and an activity, vhich entitle it to a superior rank in the order of created substances. When all the functions of animal life are carried on in their perfect and natural manner, the animal is said to be in health: when they are disturbed, a state of disease ensues. The diseases to which the human frame is liable are so various and irregular, that they cannot easily be reduced to any systematical orde. Dr. Cullen has divided them into four classes. Febrile diseases, which constitute the first class, consist principully in an increase of the frequency of the pulsations of the heart and arteries, together with an elevation of the temperature, the whole animal economy being at the same time in some measure impaired: they are often accompanied by unnatural or irregular actiuns of the vessels oſ particular parts, constituting local inflammations, which were formerly considered as a derivation of diseased humours, falling on those parts: thus, a pleurisy is a fever, with an inflammation of the membrane lining the chest. The incapacity of a part to perform its functions, upon the application of. a natural stimulus, or perhaps more frequently the incapacity of the nerves to transmit to it the dictates oſ the mind, constitutes a palsy: such derangements, and others, by which the actions of the nervous system are peculiarly impaired, form the class of neuroses, including spasmodic affections, madness, melancholy, and epilepsy. A general derangement of the system, without fever, or any peculiar debility of the nerves, constitutes the class oſ cacheetic diseases, such as atrophy, consumption, scrofula, and dropsy. Besides these diseases, we have a fourth class, consisting of local aſſections only, such as blindness, deafness, tumors, and luxations. Notwithstanding the labours of men of the greatest learning and genius, continued for many centuries, it must he confessed that the art of healing diseases is still in a state of great imperfection. Happily, hovever, for manKind, we may observe in almost all cases, where the offending cause is discoverable, and where the system is not at once overwhelmed by its magnitude, a vise and vonderful provision for removing it, by a mechanism admirably simple and eſfiacious; and iĩt is reasonable to conclude, where the cause is more ohscure, that the same benevolent Providence has employed agents equally well adapted for counteracting it, although their operations are utterly beyond the reach of human penetration. voL. I. 4 z LECTURE LX. ON THE HISTORY OF TERRESTRIAL PHVYSICS. THROUG HOUT the whole of nature, ve discover a tendency to the multiplication of life, of activity, and of enjoyment: man is placed at the head of terrestrial heings, the only one that comprehends, and that can tracè, in a faint outline, the whole plan of the universe. We have seen the innumerable luminaries which enliven the widely expanded regions of immeasurable space, with their brilliant, but distant emanations of light and heat. Revolving round them at lesser intervals, and cherished by their ſostering inſluences, are their planets and their comets; those preserving their distances nearly equal, and these, ranging more videly from the upper to the lower regions, vithout limits to their numbers or to their motions. Having conjectured what might possibly exist on other planetary globes, ve descended to our own, anil examined its structure and the proportions of its parts. Next we studied the general properties of the matter within our reach, and then the particular substances or qualities that are either not material, or are distinguished by very remarkable properties from other matter, as we found them concerned in the phenomena of heat, of electricity, and of magnetism; and ve afterwards examined the combinations of all these, in the great atmospherical apparatus of nature, which serves for the exhibition of meteorological phenomena. The forms and the laws of animal and vegetable life have been the last objects of our inquiries; but the magnitude of some departments of natural history, and the obscurity of others, have prevented our entering more than superſicially upon any of them. OF the gradual advancement of astronomy we have already taken a historical viev. With respect to the other sciences comprehended under the denomination of proper physics, the progress of discovery has generally heen slow, and frequently casual. The ancients had little or no substantial Enowledge oſ any part of physies, except astronomy and natural history: their opinions were in general mere speculations, derived from fancy, and inapplicable to the real phenomena of naturee Opinions such as those will only require to be s0 far examined, as to enable us to trace the imperfect rudiments of discoveries, which were only completed after intervals of many ages. The Chinese are said to have been acquainted with the use of the compass above 3000 years ago; but in such accounts, it is impossible to ascertuin how far the spirit oſ national vanity may have induced a historian to falsiſy his dates. It has been conjectured that the death of Numa, like that of Professor Richmann, was occasioned by some unguarded experiments on the electricity of the atmosphere, which drew on him the effects of a thunderstorm that vas passing by. If, however, the fact was such, the experiments must probably have been suggested rather by an accidental discovery of the light on the point of a spear, than by any rational opinions respecting the nature of the ethereal fire. Thales is the most ancient of the Grecian philosophers, who appear to have seriously studied the phenomena of nature He supposed water to he the general principle from which all material things are formed, and into which they are resolved; an opinion which was without doubt suggested to him by the obvious effects of water in the nutrition of plants and of animalss He particularly noticed the properties of the magnet, which had been before observed to attract iron, as well as the effect of friction in exciting the eleetricity of amber; and he attributed to both of these substances a certain degree of animation, which he considered as the only original source of motion of any kind. Anaximander appears to have paid some attention to meteorology; he derived the winds from the rarefaction of the air, produced by the operation of heat: thunder and lightning he attributed to the violent explosion or bursting of the clouds, which he seems to have considered as bags, filled with a mixture of wind and water. The same mistaken notion was entertained hy Anaximenes, who compared the light attending the explosion, to that which is frequently exhibited by the sea, vhen struck with an oar. Pythagoras, great as he was in some other departments of seience, reasoned respecting physical effects in a manner too mathematical and visionary, to allov him much claim to be ranked among those, who have studied to investigate the minute operations of nature. Anaxagoras was so far from conſining himself to the supposition of four elements, which was most generally received by the philosophers of antiquity, that he imagined the number of elements nearly if not absolutely inſinite. He conceived that the ultimate atoms, composiug every substance, were of the same kind vith that substance, and his system was thence called the homoeomeria; it erred perhaps less from the truth than many of the more prevalent opinions. Democritus, adopting the sentiments of Leucippus, proposed à still more correet theory of the constitution of matter, supposing it to be ultimately so far homogeneous, that the weight of its atoms was proportional to their bulk. He asserted that the forms of these atoms were different and unalterable; that they were always in motion, and that besides their primitive difference of form, they vere also susceptible of a variety in the mode of their arrangement. The space not occupied hy the atoms of matter, he considered as a perfect vacuum. As Thales had supposed water to be the first principle of all things, and Anaximenes air, so Heraclitus fixed on fire as the foundation of his system, attributing to it the property of constant motion, and deriving all kinds of grosser matter from its condensation in difſerent degrees. This doctrine vas wholly unsupported by any thing like reason or observation Plato introduced into philosophy a variety of imaginations, vhich resembled the fictions of poetry much more than the truths of science. He maintained, for example, that ideas existed independently of the human mind, and of the external vorld, and that they composed beings of different kinds, by their union with an imperfect matter. It is observed by Bacon, in his essay on the opinions of Parmenides, that the most ancient philosophers, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Anaximenes, Heraclitus, and Democritus, submitted their minds to things as they found them; but that Plato made the vorld subject to ideas, and Aristotle made even ideas, as well as all other things, subservient to vords; the minds of men beginning to be occupied, in those times, with ĩdle discussions and verbal disputations, and the correet investigation of nature being wholly neglected. Plato entertained, hovever, some correet notions respecting the distinetion of denser from rarer matter by its greater inertia; and it would be extremely unjust to deny a very high degree of merit to Aristotle's experimental researches, in various parts of natural philosophy, and in particular to the vast collection of real information contained in his vorks on natural history. Aristotle attributed ahsolute levity to fire, and gravity to the earth, considering air and vater as of an intermediate nature. By gravity the ancients appear in general to have understood a tendency towards the centre of the earth, which they considered as identical with that of the universe; and as long as they entertained this opinion, it was almost impossihle that they should suspect the operation of a mutual attraction in all matter, as a cause of gravitation. The ſirst traces of this more correct opinion respecting it are found in the works oſ Plutarch. Epicurus appears to have reasoned as justly respecting many particular subjects of natural philosophy, as he did absurdly respecting the origin of the verld, and of the animals which inhabit it. He adopted in great mẽasure the principles of Democritus respecting atoms, but attributed to them an innate pover of affecting each other's motions, and of declining, in such a manner, as to constitute, by the diversity of their spontaneous arrangements, all the varieties of natural bodies. He considered hoth heat and cold as material; the heat emitted by the sun he thought not absolutely identical with light, and even vent 50 far as to conjecture that some of the sun's rays might possibly possess the power of heating bodies, and yet not affect the sense of vision. In order to explain the phenomena of magnetism, he supposed a current of atoms, passing, in certain directions, through the magnet and through iron, which produced all the effects by their interference with each other. Earthquakes and voleanos he derived from the violent explosions'of imprisoned air. : Among all these opinions and conjectures, there is scareely any one which was scientiſically established upon sure foundations. Some insulated observations had a certain degree of merit; and we ſind many interesting facts relating to diſſerent depurtments of natural knovledge, not only in Aristotle, but also in Theophrastus, Dioscorides, and Pliny, as well as in some of the historical writers of antiquity. Protagorides of Cyzicum, vho is quoted by Athenacus, relates that in the time of king Antiochus, it was usual, as a luxury, to cool vater by evaporation; and it is not impossible that the custom may have been introduced from the east, where even ice is ſrequently made at present by a similar process; others oſ the ancients had remarked, according to Dr. Falconer, that water usually ſroze the more readily for having been boiled; and it is possible that some other detached observations oſ a similar nature may occur to those who have the curiosity to make them objects of research. The thirteenth century may he considered as the date of the revival, if not of the commencement, of physical discoveriess Our countryman, Roger Bacon, was one of its principal ornaments: he appears to have anticipated in his knowledge of chemistry, as well as of many other parts of natural philosophy, the labours of later times. The polarity of the magnetic needle is deseribed in some lines which are attributed to Guyot, a French poet, vho lived about 1180; but some persons are of opinion that this description was actually written by Hugo Bertius, in the middle of the succeeding century; and it is generally believed that the compass vas first employed in navigation by Gioja of Amalſi, about the year 1260; he is said to have marked the north vith a ſleur de lis, in compliment to a branch of the royal family of France, then reigning at Naples. The declination of the needle from the true meridian is mentioned by Peter Adsiger, the author of a manuseript vhich bears the date 1969. The poet Dante, who flourished at the close of this century, distinguished himsel? not only by his literary, but also by his philosophical pursuits; and we find among his numerous works an essay on the nature of the elements. . The learned and voluminous labours, by which Gesner and Aldrovandus enriched the various departments of naturul history, may be considered as comprehending the greatest part of what had been done by the ancients in the investigation of the economy of the animal world; but their works have too much the appearance of eollections of what others had asserted, rather than of original observations of their own. The ſirst of the moderns, vhose discoveries rospecting the properties oſ natural bodies excite our attention, by their novelty and importance, is Dr. Gilbert, of Colchester: his vork on magnetism, published in 1590, contains a copious collection of valuable facts, and ingenious reasonings. Ile also extended his researches to many other branches of science, and in particular to the subject of electricity. It had been found, in the preceding century, that sulfur, as well as amber, vas capable of electric excitation, and Gilbert made many further experiments on the nature of electric phenomena. The chunge or variation of the declination oſ the needle is commonly said to have heen discovered by Gellibrand, a professor at Gresham college, in the year 1695; but it must have been inferred from Gunter's observations, made in 1622, if not from those of Mair, or of some other person, as early as 1G19; for at this time the declination was considerably less than Burrows had found it in I580. In the beginning of the seventeenth century, Lord Bacon acquired, by his laudable eſforts to explode the incorrect modes of reasoning, which had ocecupied the sehools, the just character of a reformer of philosophy: but his immediate discoveries were neither striking nor numerouss. In I620, he proposed, with respect to heat, an opinion which appears to have heen at that time ne, inferring, frum a variety of considerations, which he has very minutely detailed in his Novum organum, that it consisted in an expansive motion, confined and reflected within a body, so as to hecome alternate and tremulous; having also a certain tendency to ascend. A similar opinion, respecting the vibratory nature of heat, was also suggested, about the same time, by David Gorlaeus, and it was afterwards adopted hy Descartes, as a part of his hypothesis respecting the constitution of matter; which he imagined to consist of atoms of different forms, possessing no property hesides extension, and to derive all its other qualities from the operation of an ethereal and inſinitely elastic fluid, continually revolving in difſerent orders of vortices. A much more important step, than the proposal of any hypothesis concerning the nature of heat, was also made about the year 1620, by Cornelius Drebel, who appears tohave been the original inventor of the method of measuring the degrees of heat by a thermometer. The utility oſ the instrument remaineq, however, much limited, for want of an accurate method oſ adjusting its scale, and it was not till the close of the century, that Dr. Hooke's discovery, of the permanency of the temperature of boilmg water, aſforded a correct and convenient limit to the scale on one side, while the melting of snow served ſor fixing a similar point on the other; although there would have been no great diſficulty in forming a scale suſficiently natural, from the proportion of the expansion of the fluid contained in the thrmomeeter to its whole bulk. It was about the year 1628, that Dr. Harvey succeeded in demonstrating, hy a judicious and. conclusive train of experiments, the true course of the circulation of the blood, through the veins and arteries, both in the perſect state of the animal, and during its existence as an embryo. Servetus had explicitly asserted, in his work on the Trinity, as early as the year 1553, that the blood performed, in its passage through the lungs, a complete revolution, beginning and ending in the heart; and Cisalpinus had even expressed, in 1569, some suspicions that the circulation of the whole body was of a similar nature; but neither of these authors had advanced any satisfactory proofs in confirmation of his opinions. In the middle of the seventeenth century, the barometer was invented by Torricelli; the variation of the atmospheric pressure was discovered by Descartes; and Pascal made several experiments on the diſference of its magnitude at different places, which tended to illustrate the principles, on which the method of determining heights by barometrical observations is founded. What Gesner and Aldrovandus had hefore done with regard to the animal Kingdom, was performed, a century later, for the vegetable world by John and Caspar Bauhin, vhose works, as collections of all that was to be found on record respeeting the distinctions and properties of plants, have not yet been superseded by the latest publications. Our countrymen, Ray and Willughby, contributed also to add much new matter to the stores of natural history, in all its departments; and their labours, as well as those oſ Tournefort and Rcaumur, are of the more value, as they vere far more studious than their predecessors to discriminate truth from fiction. The foundation of the most celebrated of the philosophical societies of Europe renders the latter half of the seventeenth century a very interesting period in the history of natural knowledge. The Royal Society of London, and the Academy of Sciences of Paris, have always been the most distinguished of these: and the Florentine Academy del Cimento, although its labours were not of long duration, produced at first in a short time a very copious and interesting collection of experiments, relating to various subjects of physical research. In the Royal Society, Boyle, Hooke, and Newton were the most industrious, as well as the most suceessſul investigators of natural phenomena: the elementary doctrines of chemistry, the nature of combustion, the effects of heatand cold, and the laws of attraction, repulsion, and cohesion vere attentively examined and discussed. The expansion of water, by a reduction of its temperature, near the freezing point, was first observed by Dr. Croune; although his experiments were considered hy Dr. Hooke as inconclusive. The attention of the society was directed by Newton to the phenomena of electricity, some oſ which had been a short time before particularly noticed by Guericke; the mode of making electrical experiments was greatly improved by Hauksbee; this accurate observer investigated also the nature of capillary attraction with considerable success. Early in the succeeding century, many of the members of the Academy of Petersburg followed the example of other societies with great industry; and the experiments of Richmann on heat were among the ſirst and best fruits of their researches. Dr. Halley employed himself, with the most laudable zeal, in procuring information respecting the variation of the compass; he undertook a voyage round the world, for the express purpose of making magnetical observations; and he published a chart of variation, adapted to the year 1700. He also collected many particulars respecting the trade winds and monsoons, and he endeavoured to explain them by a theory which has been adopted by some of the Ilatest authors, but which is in reality much less satisſfactory than the hypothesis proposed some time aſterwards by Hadley. His magnetical investigations were continued vith great diligence by Mountaine and Dodson, who published, at different periods, two charts representing the successive states of the variation. Euler, Mayer, and others have attempted, in later times, to discover such general laws as might be suſſicient to determine the magnitude VOoL. I. 5 A of the variation for every part of the globe; but their success has been very much limited. The science of electricity was diligently cultivated in the middle of the last century by Stephen Gray, Dufay, Winkler, Nollet, Musschenbroek, and Franklin. As early as 1735 it was remarked by Gray, that  the electric fire seemed to be of the same nature as lightning, and their identity was aſterards more strongly asserted by Winkler, and experimentally demonstrated by Franklin. The shock of a charged jar was first discovered by Kleist, in 1745; and the experiment was repeated by Lallamand and Musschenbroek, who described its disagreeable effects on the sensations with an exaggeration not the most philosophica. The theory of the nature of the charge vas the second great improvement made by Dr. Franklin in this science. The introduction of the Linnean system of botany and zoology is to be considered as bringing near to perfection the logic and phraseology of natural history; nor has its celebrated author wholly neglected the philosophy of the science. The number and the diligence oſ his successors have already furnished to the different departments of natural history a much ampler store of observations thau ecould easily have been expected from the short time vhich their labours have occupied. Buffon had merit of a difſerent kind, and though his fancy was too little regulated by mathematical accuracy, the elegance of his writings have made their subjects highly interesting to the general reader. Among other modern naturalists of great respectability, Spallanzani, Daubenton, Degeer, Geoſſroy, Pennant, the Jussieus, Lacepede and Haliy, have particularly distinguished themselves by the importance of their discoveries, and the accuracy of their descriptions. The absorption of heat, during the conversion of ice into water, appears to have been separately observed by Delue, Black, and Wilke, about the year 1755. On this experiment Dr. Black principally founded his doctrine of latent heat, supposed to be retained in chemical combination by the particles of ſluidss. Dr. Irvine and Dr. Crawford explained the circumstances somevhat differently, by the theory of a change of capacity for heat only. Bergmann, Lavoisier, Laplace, Kirwan, Seguin, and many other philosophers have n z illustrated, by experiments and caleulations, the various opinions which have been entertained on this subject; and few chemists, from the times of Boerhaave, Stahl, and Scheele to those of Priestley and other later authors, have left the properties of heat vholly unnoticed. The elegant hypothesis of Aepinus, respecting magnetism and electricity, founded in great measure on the theory of Franklin, was advanced in 1759: our venerable countryman, Mr. Cavendish, had invented a similar theory, and had entered in many respects more minutely into the detail of its consequences, without being acquainted vith Aepinus's work; although the publication of his paper on the subject vas 12 years later. Lamhert, Mayer, Coulomb, and Robison have also pursued inquiries of a similar nature, boſl theoretically and experimentally, with great success The electrophorus of Wilke, and the condenser of Volta, are among the earliest fruits of the cultivation of a rational system of electricity, and Mr. Cavendish's investigation of the properties of the torpedo may serve as a model of accuracy and precision m the conduct of ex perimental researches. The speculations of Boscovich respecting the fundamental properties of matter, and the general laws of the mutual action of bodies on each other, have been considered by some candid judges as deserving the highest commendation; they remain however almost in all cases speculations only; and some of the most intricate oſ them, being calculated for the explanation of some facts, vhich have perhaps been much misunderstood, must consequently be both inaceurate and superſluous. The attention of several experienced philosophers, who are now living, has been devoted, with much perseverance, to the difficult subject of hygromeiry. Deluc's experiments have offered us a very useful comparison of the hygrometrical qualities of various substances: Saussure has investigated, vith great labour, the indieations of the hygrometer and the thermometer, as connected with the presence of a eertain portion of vapour, contained in air of various densities; and Pictet has ascertained some similar circumstances respecting vapours of different kinds wholly unmixed with any air. The hypotheses, which have usually accompunied ſhe relation of most of these expe- riments, have however been in general too little supported by facts to be entitled to universal adoption. For some years past, the philosophical, as vell as the unphilosophical world, has been much occupied and entertained hy the discoveries of Galvani, Volta, and others, respecting the operations of the electric ſluid. The first circumstance, that attracted Galvani's attention to the subject of animal electricity, was the agitation of a frog, that had a nerve armed, that is, laid bare and covered with a metal, when a spark was taken in its neighbourhood. A person acquainted with the well known laws of induced electricity might easily have foreseen this effect: it proved, however, that a frog so prepared was a very delicate electrometer, and it led Galvani to further experiments. It has been shown by Volta, that an entire frog may be convulsed by a degree of electricity which affects an electrometer but very weakly; but that when prepared in Galvani's manner, it will be agitated by an electricity one ſiftieth part as great, which cannot be discovered, by any other means, vithout the assistance of a condenser. Galvani, however, found that a communication made between the armed nerve and its muscle, by means of any conducting substance, was suſficient to produce a convulsion, without the presence of foreign electricity: hence he concluded that the nerve and muscle, like the opposite surfaces of a charged jar, were in contrary states of electricity, and that the communication produced a discharge between them. He observed, however, a considerable difference in the effects, vhen different metals were employed for forming the circuit; and this circumstance led to the discovery of the excitation of electricity by means of a combination of different inanimate substances only, which Mr. Davy attributes to Fabroni, Creve, and Dr. Ash. It was, however, still more satisfactorily demonstrated by Volta; and he at first supposed that all the phenomena observed by Galvani vere derived from effects of this kind, but on further examination he vas obliged to allow the independent existence of animal electricity. This industrious and ingenious philosopher has the sole merit of the invention of the pile or battery, which has rendered every other mode of exciting the galvanic action comparatively insignificant. No sooner vas Volta's essay communicated to the Royal Society, than a 4 pile was constructed by Mr. Carlisle, and its singular effects in the decomposition of water were jointly observed by himself and Mr. Nicholsonn. The original existence of animal elecetricity, as asserted by Galvani and Volta, has been in some degree confirmed by the experiments of Aldini, the nephew of Galvani. A number of detached observations, of considerable merit, have also been made by Pfaſf, Ritter, Cruikshank, Wollaston, Fourcroy, and many other chemists, both in this country and on the continent. But Mr. Davys late experiments must be considered as exceeding in importance every thing that has been done upon the subject of electricity, since the discovery of the pile of Volta. The conclusions which they have enabled him to form respecting the electrical properties of such bodies as have the strongest tendencies to act chemically on each other, and the power of modifying and counteracting those tendencies which the electric fluid possesses, have greatly extended our views of the minute operations of nature, and have opened a new field for future investigations. I hope that I shall be pardoned by astronomers for having inserted, on this occasion, in a vacant space among the constellations, in the neighbourhood of Pegasus, the ſigure of a galvanic battery; which must now be allowed to have as great pretensions to such a distinetion as the electrical machine and the chemical furnace. The late experiments and speculations of Mr. Dalton, on various subjects, helonging to different branches of physics, have tended to place some parts of the science oſ meteorology in a nev light. It is true that many of his hypotheses are very arbitrarily assumed; some of them are maniſestly contrary to experiment, and others to analogy and probability; at the same time his remarks appear in some cases to be either perfectly correct, or to lead to determinations which are sufficiently accurate for every practical purpose. ſhave attempted to borrow from Mr. Dalton's ideas some hints, which I have incorporated with a less exceptionable system; and by a comparison of his experiments with those of many other philosophers, I have deduced some methods of calculation which may perhaps be practically useful; in particular a simple rule for determining the elasticity of steam, and a mode of reducing the indications of hygrometers of different kinds to a natural scale. Count Rumfords establishment of a prize medal, to be given every threo years by the Royal Society to the author of the most valuable discovery respecting heat or light, forms an era less remarkable, than the first adjudication of the medal to himselſ, and the second to Mr. Leslie. Count Rumford's numerous experiments on the production and communication of heat are highly important, both for the utility which may be derived from their economical application, and for the assistance which they afford us in the investigation oſ the intimate nature of heatt. Mr. Leslie's discovery of the different properties possessed by surfaces of different kincs, with regard to emitting and receiving radiant heat, is im every respect highly interesting; and the multiplicity and diversity of his experiments would have entitled him to still higher commendation than he has ohtained, if they had heen more simply and circumstantially related. Perhaps, however, none oſ the modern improvements in speculative science deserves a higher rank than Dr. Herschel's discovery of the separation of heat from light by refraction. Mr. Prẽvost has made some just remarks on the experiments of other philosophers respecting heat; and his own theory of radiant heat, and his original investigations, on the effect of the solar heat on the earth, have tended materially to illustrate the subject of his researches. The general laws of the ascent and descent of ſluids in capillary tubes, and between plates, of different kinds, had long ago been established by the experiments of Haukshee, Jurin, and Musschenbroek; many other circumstances, depending on the same principles, had been examined by Taylor, Achard, and Guyton; and some advances towards a theory oſ the forms assumed by the surfaces of liquids, had been made by Clairaut, Segner. and Monge. In an essay on the cohesion of ſluids, read before the Royal Society in the year 1804, I have reduced all effects of this nature to the joint operation of a cohesive and repulsive foree, which bulance each other; assuming only that the repulsion is more augmented by the approach of the particles to each other than the cohesion; and I have had the satisfaction of discovering in this manner a perfect correspondence between many facts, hich had not heen supposed to have the slightest counexion with each other. Almost a year after the publication of this paper, Mr. Laplace read to the National Institute a memoir on capillary tubes, in which, as far as he has pursued the subject, he has precisely confirmed the most obvious of my conolusions; although his mode of calculation appears to be by nc means unexceptionable, as it does not include the consideration of the effects of repulsion. Had my paper been so fortunate as to attract Mr. Laplaces attention before his memoir vas presented to the Institute, he would perhaps have extended the results of my theory with the same success, which has uniformly distinguished his labours in every other department of natural philosophy. When ve reſlect on the state of the sciences in general, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, and compare it with the progress which has been since made in all of them, we shall be convinced that the last two hundred years have done much more for the promotion of knowledge, than the two thousand that preceded them: and ve shall be still more encouraged by the consideration, that perhaps the greater part of these acquisitions has been made within ſifty or sixty years only. We have therefore the satisfaction of viewing the knovledge of nature not only in a state of advancement, but even advancing vith increasing rapidity; and the universal diffusion of a taste for science appears to promise, that, as the number of its cultivators increases, new facts will be continually discovered, and those, which are alrendy Enown, vill be better understood, and more beneſicially applied. The Royal Institution, with other societies oſ a similar nature, will have the merit of assisting in the dissemination of knowledge, and in the cultivation oſ a taste for its pursuit; and the advantages arising from the general introduction of philosophical sturies, and from the adoption of the practical improvements depending on them, will amply repay the labours of those, vho have been active in the establishment and support of associations so truly laudable. CHEONOLOGY OF PHYSICAL AUTHORS. joo B. C. 6 00 3l00 lii Dmnn4æX TE 5. ANAXAGOGRAS. l THEOPHEASTIUS. ANAXIMANDE. R D E M O C RITUS. E P ICIURUS. ANAXIMENES. ?P LAT O PYTHAGORAS. ARISTOTLE. HE R A CLITUS 1200 B. C. li BIRTH OFICHRIST. 1joo l DIOSCOR IDES Ll v. 300 4aſo0 àou 6 0O V nnoo 00 1000 11j080 1300 la43mm 13 1600 i T E. GESNE R. æ v : Tĩ ALDROVANDUSI WILLU GHBY BERGMANYN i G I L BE RTI. H O O  EI IR VINE J. BA U H IN. N E W T O N. G ALVAN G O R L AEUS. C R O UINE R O BISO B A ClO N.  O U R IN.EFORT SCHEELE . B A UH IN. H A LIL E Y 8 AUSSURE G A LIlL E O. 5T A  H L LAVOISIER] DR EB E L BOERHAAVEE. CRAV : . IDESCARTES. J ul  R 1 N IGELLIBR.AND 5. JGRAV. G U E R I C K E. HIAUKSBEE j TORRIC. ELLI R EAUM UR. l PASCAL ICH MA NN. l B O Y L E. IMUSSCHENBROEE  DUFAVY l la u s s 1 EU l IN O L L ET l l F R A N E LIX p l E U L E I l L 1T E B OS C OVICſ. EL E IS T i ĩ D A UB ENTON . D E G EER l M AVER P ENNANT B IL. A C v I L xE AEPI NUS : LAMB ERT SPAL L ANIAV lil —————————— ——————— —e - ll lll lll uuiil LECTURE LX. PLAT Fig. 1. The point A being supposed to move in a right line to B, AB is the ilirection of its motion. P. qal. Fig. . The lines AB, BC, CD, are the successive directions oſ the point A, moving from A to D ĩn the figure ABCD. P. 21. Fig 3. The tangent A B is the direction oſ the motion oſ the point C, moving in the curve CD, when it urrives at E. P. 9l. Fiz. . The square A B, moving on the board CD, 20 that the poinis E, F, describe the parallel lines EG, EH, with equal velocities, the plane AEF B is in rectilinear motion with respect to the surſace CD. P. 94. Fig. 5. The cycloid ABC, and the trochoĩd DEF are the results oſ the rotatory motion oſ the puints B and E round the centre oſ the wheel, combined with the progressivo motion oſ the whecl alung the buse AC. P. 24, 44. Fig. 6. AB is a ſixed bur, CD an arm which slides on it, ECF a thread passing round the pulley at C, nnd cither ſized to the pin on ſe slider F, or pussed over the pulley G, and ſixed again at H. The orm turns round the same axis that carries the pulley at C, and may be ſixed by means oſ the screw v hich is cut on the axis, while two olher screws keep it stendy by pressing on the slider below it. The point I describes, by its compound motion, the oblique line KI. P. 21. Fig. 7. The diagonnl AB oſ the parallelogram CD is the joint result oſ the motions, represented hy its rides AC, AD. P. à5. . Vig. 8. The line AB may be either simply draw n the direction A B, or it may be traced by the equal motions A C and AD of the arm and its slider, or by the unequal motions AE and AF. P. 95 Fig. 9. The body A, moving uniſormly along the line AB, ſirst approaches to the point C, and then recedes from it, as iſ repelled. P. 27. Fig. 100. When AB and AC approach each other, und coineide, the diagonal AD becomes equul 1o thęir m P. 50. . Lui ſ dohnsm Iviie tul? i7o⸗ TE II. l and the balls B, E, de-cending ſrom any tæo points of the curve, will meet at E, in the same time that the ball G ſalls ſrom a point nearly ; oſA F: ubove A. The space described by the pendulum in descending is always proportional to the height H T, to which a body setting out from E, and revolving uniſormly in a circle, vill rise in the samo time. The circle EI lies without the eycloid CE D, and is 5omowhat lesi inelined to the horizon at equal distances from E. D. 44, a5. Fig. 25. The ball A, descending ſrom B in the curve BA, arrives ut C beſore the ball D moving in æ right line on the plane BC. T. 46. Fig. 26. The balls A, B, C, being made to revolve by means oſ the whirling table, they are always ſfound in the same horizontal plane. The joint connecting tiom with the axis is represented at D, as seœn ſrom above. P. a47. Fig. a7. The equal vibrations, represented by A B, CD, compote, when united, the cireular revolutionAEB: the unequal vibrations AB, ?G, compos the ellipsis AH B; the place of the body being always acortuined by combining the versed sines of to circular ures inerensing uniſormly. P. 47. Fig. 25. The balls A, B, as their rerolution becomes more rupid, ſly out, and the point C is depressed P. 48. Fig. 29. The mass oſ the body A being 1 and that o B 9, and AC being twice BC, C is the cœntre of inertin. P. 51. i Fig. 30. The balls A and B are suspended by long thrends, which allow :iem to move in the ares AC, D; the ball A is perſorated in a horizontal diretion, and contains u spiral spring, which is confined by the thread E, and heing set at liberty by burning this threud, strikes the ball B, 20 as to cause each oſ the balls to move through un are, of which the chord is proportional to the weight of the other bal. P. 32. Fig. 31. The ceutre of inertio oſ the bodies A, IB, C, D, may he determined either by ſndiog P the conrœ oſ nertia of A and B, and æup; œæng à hudy equnl 16 their sum i0 be placed iu it, then determmmnz V from E and C; and ũ, the pont requird, ſrom F and D; or hy ſinding ſirst Il and Iſrom A, C, B, D, tulen in puirs, and diriding HI in due proporton in the rame point G. P. 5.. Fig. 57. The point A Leing the centre oſ mertin of the bodies B, C, D, F, ihe produets obtained by multiplying B ly BF, Chy Cſ, D hy DII, and E Ly VI, are equal, when adde: torether©, to the product oſ ihe musses oſ all the builes hy the distũnee AK; all the lines drawn to the plane I bring parallel. P. 55. Fiz. s3. The weights ABC vill remain nt rest 5hen they are in the sume proportion to ench other ns the respective siũes oſ the triuge D E F; DVFbeing ꝓumlieln EG. P. 61. Fig. 34. The bodies A, ſ, remain in cquiſlihrim uhen their centre oſ inertin C is immediately below ithe Jõint of suspension D. P. õ1. Fig. 35. The s5stem of budies A, I, , ĩæ nt rest when the eentre oſ inertin D ĩs iume lintely below ile point oſ suspension E. P. G1. Fiz. à56. The lulies A, , remain ut rest ulen the centre oſ nertin C is mmediniely above the puint oſ support D. P. G1. Fig. 57. The hodies A, B, remain at rest when ſhe centre oſ inertia C coinciles with the fulcrum or puint oſ support. P. 61. Vig. 38. The irrogular bidy AB remuius at rest nhen the contte of ncrtia Cis immediately below the pont oſ suspension D. P. 61. Fig. 30. A bcing the centre of grvity oſ ihe bosrd E, C, the point oſ suspensiun leing D, E, or F, the pusition oſ the vertinl lne willbt DA, EA, or FA. P. 6ã. Fig. 10. Iie cquilibrium oſ the ve⸗ææl A bs stable; Fig. 31. The centre oſ inertin oſ ſhe bodies A, B, C, D, may he determined eiher by ſutiing F the contre oſ inertin of A and B, and sup;sng a huily equil 16 their sum 1o be placed in it, then determinng P ſrom E and C; and ũ, the pont requircd, ſrom F and D; or by ſinding first Il ani I ſrom A, , B, D, tlen n puirs, and diriding HI in due proportion in the rame poimt G. P. 7. Fig. 32. The point A being the centre o mertin oſ the bodies B, C, D, E, ihe products obinined by multiplying B by BF, Chy Cũ, D4y DII, and F ly EI, are equal, when added Węcether, io the product oſ the musses oſ all the builles hy the distũnce AK; ull the lines drawn to the plunc FI bring parallel. P. 55. Fiz. 53. The ueights ABC uill remnin at rest »hen they are in the sume proportion 10 each other as the respective sides oſ the irinngle D EF; DFbuing parllcl io EG. P. 61. Fiz. 33. The budies A, B, remain in equilibrium when their centre oſ inertin C is immediately below the puint oſ susperon D. P. õ1. Fig. 35 The æystem oſ builies A, 1i, C, is at rest when the centre oſ inertim D ĩs nume ſintely beluw the point oſ suspension E,. P. 61. j Fiz. 36. The builies A, B, remain at rest ulen the centre oſ inertin C ĩs ĩnmeilntely abuve the point of support D. V. GI. Fig. 37. The hodies A, B, rcmain æt rest when the centre oſ nertia C cuincides with the fulcrum or point oſ support. P. 61. Fig. 35. The irrogular hudy AB remuius at rest when the contre oſ intrtin Cĩs immedintely below the poit oſ suspension D. P. 61. Fig. 30. A beſng the centre oſ gravity oſ ihe bonrd B, C, the poĩnt oſsuspension heing D, E, or F, the positiun oſ the vertienl lIne willbe DA, EA, or F A. P. 32. Fig. 10. The cquilibrium oſ ithe vesel A s stable; Fig. 81. The ceutre oſ inertia oſ ſle bodies A, ſ, C, D, iny he detcrmined either by ſinding E the centre oſ inertia of A and B, and up;sng a hoiy equl 16 theit sum 1o be plred in it, then determning V from E und C; and ũ, the poim required, ſrom F nual D; or by ſinding first ſ and I ſrom à, C, B, D, taken in puirs, and diriding HI in due proportion in the rame point G. P. à4. Fi”. 32. The pomt A being the centre oſ nertin of the bodies B, C, D, T, ihe nroducts obtaimed hy multiplying B ly BF, Cby Cũ, Dby DII, and E ly VI, are equal, when added ⸗ether, t the product oſ the mus:es oſ all the budæs hy the distũnce A K; all the lines drawn to the plane TI being parallel. P. à5. Fig. u5. The weights ABC vill romain at rest »hen they are in the sume projortion to each oũier as the respective sides oſ the trinngle D EF; DF buing ꝓurllęl to EG. P. 61. Fiz. 834. The bodies A, B, remain in equilibrium when their cntre oſ inertin C is immediately below the puint oſ suspension D. P. õ1. Fig. a5. The system oſ hodies A, 3, C, is ut re when the contre oſ nertiu D is inmediately belun the point oſ suspension E. P. 61. j Fig. 36. The hudics A, Ii, remain at rest uhen the centre oſ inertin C ĩs immediately abuve the point oſ support D. V. 6I. Fig. 37. The hodies A, B, rcmnin st rest when the centre oſ iuertin C coincides with the fulerum or point of support. P. G1. Vig. 36. The irregular huily AB remuius at rest vhen the centre oſ incrtin Cĩs immeiintely below the pomt of suspension D. P. 61. TVig. 309. A leing the centre oſ gravity oſ the bonrd B, C, the point oſsuspensinn leing D), E, or V, the position oſ the vertial Ime willhe DA, EA, or FA. P. 5⸗. Fig. 10. The equilibrium oſ the veel A is stable; nated Spanish hartons, in which two oſ the pullies are suspended by the sume rope: the one has a power oſ 4, the other oſ 5. ſ. ũn, . Iig. 61. A. The depression oſ the middle weizht lheing one ithird of its distance ſrom the pullies, it sustalns two equl weights, which are together three times ns great ns ĩisclſ. B. The depression oſ ihe snmnller weight huing one ſourth oſ its distance ſrom the pulley, it supports n weight tnice as great as ĩtslſ. P. 70. Fig. cà. A jolner's saw, streiched hy twisting a double cord, hy means oſ u lever passing through it. Fig. 65. The weight A, resting on an inclined plane oſ which the height ĩs to the oblique length as õ to à, is sustaiued by a weight B three ſ;ſths as great as ĩtslſ; ani iſ ſor the resistunce oſ the plane we substitute the netion oſ the weight C, reduced to the direction AD perpendiculur to the plane, this weight must he ſour ſiſihs oſ the weght A, the horizontal length oſ the weige helug ſous ſiſths of its oblique length. I. 70. Fig. 61. The weights A, B. and C, acting, by moans uſ threais pussing over pullies, which are ſixcd to uny roquired purt oſ a horzontal talle, on the rollers which press ngainst the sides oſ a wedge, proportional in length to the respective weights, retain each orher in equilibrium, when their directions meet in one jmint. Inu order thut the threads may pass on cach sũle oſ the wedge, it may be suppoited hy thee or more bulls. P.7 Fig. 65. By meam oſ the moveable inclined ꝓlane AB, of which the hoight AC is one third oſ the hori zontal lengih BC, the weight D, acting horizontally, sustains a triple weight E, acting in a vertical diretion. P. 7I. Fig. 66. A D being one ſourth oſ BC, the rope AB must exert a force oſ tension equal to one ſourth of the weight C, in order, to support it, supposing the surſaces to be without ſrietion. Inut ĩſ the friction of the end oſ the beam AC vere equal to one ſourth oſ the pressure, it would support the weight C ithout nny other force, whatever might he its magnitude P. T2. Fig. 57. AB being hulſ oſ BC, or one ſourth oſ CD, the ſorce extending the rope CD each woy is equal Lo the weight E. P. 79. Fig. 60. The thin wedge AB, oſ which the height is one fiſth of the length, being rolled round the cylinder C, makes the screw D, hy means of which the weight E is capable of supportng a weight ſive times as grent as F. P. 72. ig. 69. A ĩs a screw, und B the nut belonging to t. P. 72. l Vig. 70. The fudless serew A  acta on the tecth oſ the wheel CD. P. 72. Fig. 71. The distance oſ the threads oſ the iuterior seren is ſour ſths oſ thnt o the exterior or perforutæd screw, and this distunce is one thirtieth oſ tha cireumſurence. Ilence the weight A ĩs ca;able of sustaiming a veight B 130 times as greut as ielſ. y. 75. Fig. 72. The apparatus ſor experiments on collision. Those bulls which are not employed may hie leſt hehind the grluated are, as at A and l; some oſ the strings have halls oſ halſ the weight oſ the rest, ohers have a small dish C, on  hich balls oſ clay, or of wax oſtcucd with one ſourth ts wei;ght oſ oll, may he uppuricd, P. 76. : Fis, 71. Iſ the hall A sirike the bull B in the llique dircetion AC, the ĩnll B will he impelled ĩn the dirertum CD perpendicutar tu the surfuce or contact; æud the velocity EC heing reolved into EP nud PC, tæ part VU uill continne mmalivreid; ani iſ he balls ure equãl, the 7art EF uill Le destroyed, so thut ihie hall A iſinue nſter the strule in the dircetin Cũ, exeepting the eſ ęt oſ any accilentul dis1 PLATE VI Tig. 77. The proportions oſ the diameters oſ the diſferent parta of the double pullies being 3 to 2, 5 2, and õ to ꝗ, the middle weight may be obserred 1 rise the most rapidly. P. 83. Fig. 7183. A wheel supposed 10 be capable oſ producing a perpetual motion; the desconding balls, acting at a greater distunce ſrom the centre, hut being fower in number, thãn the ascending. In the model, the balls may be kept in their plocos by a plate of glnss covering the wheel. P. 09. Fig. 70. A, the inclination of cross lines generally most convenient ſor producing the eſſect oſ a tint, in drawing. B shows the eſſcct oſ lines crosing ench other perpendicularly, and C that oſ lines crossing too obliquely. Where the surſuce to be shaded is large, the separate lines or hatches should begin and end with a point, in order that the junction oſ the diſſerent potons may escupe observation. P. 05. Vig. 50. Dr. Hookes telegraph, in which the claracters are arranged behind a screen, and dravn out us they are required. P. 100. Fig. 81. Dr. Hooke's alphabet, with some other urhitrary chamcters ſor his telegraph. P. 100. Fig. 82. A beam compass, with a iale. P. 102. Fig. 83.. 85. Instruments ſor drawing ares oſ lorge cireles P. 109. Fig. 86. A puir oſ triangular compusses. P. 102. Fig. 87. Murquoia's scles, ſor drawing parallel lines P. 108. Fig. 88. A pen ſor ruling musical lines. P. 108. Fig. 89. A pantograph. A being the centre oſ motion, B the tracing point, und C the describing point, A B is always to AC as AD to AE, and the copy F is similar to the original G. P. 103. Fig. 90. A poir oſ proportional compasses. P. 103 PLAT Viz. n1. A fector. The seale of equal ports is murked L. As A is to AC, su is BD io CE; and iſ nuy lne Ii D be pliced with its extremities in the third division of the æ⸗le on eh leg, the distunce CV. hetween the scventh divisinns will eontãin 7 equsl paris, o which B D contains ; aul the sume is true oſ any ntber numbers. P. 101. Viu. 72. A vernicer, indieating 8,5 oſ the divisions oſits seale. . 105. Hili Vig. u3. A sliding rule. The slider being drawn out, so that ihe divi-ion mãiheil Iia opposite to 3 on the rule; all the other ſiurs on the rule are triple oſ those uhich stand opposite to them. P. 107. Iĩz. . A circulur logorithmic instrument. The nnereirele alides within the onter, nnd us ĩt is repre-rnted in thę ſignre, each number stands opposite ſn another which is twice as grẽnt. P. 107. j Iig. o5. A stecel cliim, made hy lumsden. A, the screw ſar hitinging the marh I prociæly to the noim requbred; Ca joint hetwern the adjoĩing linbs; D, au cros juont at every tnth Iink; E, a pulluy and weĩg©t ſor stretehing the cluin. I', 111. Fiz ti. A micromctrieal seale maie by Troughton. The compound microscopes A and B are ſixed ncaly ul the requieel distance on ſhe sealc C A ĩs then mnde to œnt cxactly  a diviion oſ the sianãard æale D by incans of the screw ſ, and 3 to nunther dirision, at ſhe requirei distance, by means oſ the serev F, the ſruetionn purts being ndied hy the turus oſ the serev G. The scale D ĩs then rumoveil, ænd ſhe olject to be compared with it is put in ĩts place. P. 11Z Fig. o7. A diagonal seale. The line A l eontains 274 uts, oſ which the units oſ the seale contain 100. P. 112, li Vig. u. The stutuary's compuss, seen sidoways. The pin AB ĩs ſorced down, till ĩt is stoppe l by the axis in the ſurks at ĩts upper part, in order to remove the pressure on the sharp edges oſ the axis within the ſorks. The scules are occasionally supported by the pillars C and D, which ure elevated or depressed by turning the handle E. The screw F serves for rising or lowering a weight within the conical beam, by meꝶns of which the place oſ the contre oſ gravity is regulated. The extent o the vibrations is measured on the grnduated are G. P. 195. Fig. 108. A Lalance ſor the illustration of the diforent Einis oſ equilibrium. When the scales are hung on the middle pins, A, B, which are in the same horiz0ntal line with the support oſ the beam, the equilibrium is neutral, the weights acting ns iſ the centre oſ gravity coincided with the point of suspension. If the scales be hung on the lowest pins C, D, the centre oſ gravity will be nearly in the line CD, and its path the curve E, which has its concavity upwards; but iſ the scules are hung on the pins F, G, the puth oſ the centre oſ gravity wil he convex upwards, and the beam will overset. In roality the true paths oſ the cœntre oſ gravity would be nearly in the curves Il and I situntod between the weights in the scales: but these are similar to the other curves. P. 195. Fiz. 109. When the equilibrium oſa balance is tottering, the lower weĩght ncts with the greatest advantuge: thus the eſtet oſ the weight A is reduced in the jroportion of BC o DC, by the obliquity oſ the arm C A, uhile the weight F acts on the whole length oſ its arm C F. P. 125. Fig. 110. Iſ A BC be a semicircle, and BD represent a given weight, and A D its counterpoiæ in onæ oſ the scules oſ an unequal halunce  C will be the counterpoise in the other scale. It is obvious that AC is more than twic a as greatus BD, P. 126. 5cC Fig. 111. A weqghung muchine,. The plutſorm supporting the weight rests on the pinæ A, B, C, D, at equal distances ſrum the ſulera E, F, G, ll; s0 that wherever the weight moy be pluced, ĩt preses equully on thæ lever IE, at L, und is counterpoised by a much rmaller weight placed in the scale M. P. 196. Fig. 112. A steclyard resembling that oſ Mr. Paul, in whirh diſſerent weights muy be employed. A, a loop 10 eheck the vibrations; B a scule to be æuspeuded by the hook C. Iſ great delieacy be required in the weights, the ſractional parts may be expresed by the turns oſ a micrometer screw D, ſurnished with au index. P. 126. Fig. 113. A bent lever bulance. P. 17. VFi; 113. A ⸗pring steclyard: halſ the case being removed, to show the spring. P. 127. Fig. 115. AB, the puth of the centre oſ gravity oſ the human body, such as it would be described in walking, iſ the legs were inſlexible. CD, the path deacribed in running, on the same supposition. P. 150. Fig. 116. The actual path oſ the centre oſ gravity, ns it is usually described, P. 150, Tig. 117. An elastic column, compressed by a we”ht acting at the distance of one third oſ its depth from the concave surſace; the cumpression belng every uhere as the distance of the lines AB, A C. P. 180. Fig. 118. An elustic column, extended by a weight artng at the distance oſ ouc third oſ its depth from the convex surſuce, the exteusion being every where us the distance oſ A B, A C. P. 190. Fig. 119. An elustic eolumn, compressed by a weight ncting immediately on the concave surſace: the compression extends only to the line AB, the parts beyond this line being extended. P. 139. Fig. 120. A column hent, by a wright arting longitudinally, into the form oſ a harmonic curve: the line A BCD is the limit between the purts which are compressed, and those which are extended. P. 139. Fig. 121. An elastic plute or rod, considerably bent by a weight acting at ĩts extremity. P. 139. Fig. 122. An elastic rod ſixed at one end, and bent by its own weight. P. 139. Fig. 123. An elustic rod supported at each end, and bent by its own weight. P. 159. Iui ty I Iohnron London 1luly 16 ig 129. Fig.ado » , uææũũ VEn ꝶmt  snæ àmſiuymum mr⸗mFiæa37 l s1 a b 4 a à 2 Fig 1a0. n Pub iv I ſnbns n, hudon : ſuly i7 6 E X. weight equally ditributed throughout its length. P. a50. llGãt li Fig. 137. Thè strongest ſorm ſor a square or rned heam, ſixed at one end, and supportn” à weiuht equally distributed throughout its length; outline heing u semicubic purubola, in which the cube oſ the thickis ns the square uſ the distance ſrom the end. . 1hn. i Fig. 138. The strongest ſorm ſor a beam cut out oſ a vertical plank, for supporting its own weight; the outline heing a parahola. P. 150. Fig. 139. The strongest ſorm ſor n turned heam, ſor suppurting ils own weight; the outline buing parabolic. . 150, Fig. 140. The strongest ſorm oſ a beam calculated to resist the pressure oſ its own weight by lnteral adhesion only. The outline is à logarithmic curve, which nevèr comes into contact with the axis, and in order that the condition oſ æqual strength may possible, the beam must be londed with a weięht, at its extremity, ęquul to that oſ the portivn which is wanting to complete the figure. P. 150. Fig. 141. The strongest ſorm ſor a beam cut out of n horzontal pluni, upporiæ at both ends, aud bearing æ weight at the middle. P. 150. VFig, 142. The strongest ſorm ſor a beam cut out of n horZontal plank, supported at hoth ends, and bearing a weight equally distributed throughout its lengrh; the outline being puraboliec. P. 150. Fig. 1a3. Tht strongest ſorm ſor a heam cut out of a vertieal plunk, supported at both ends, und benring a weight equally distributed throughout, the outIine being elliptic. I. 150. Fig. 144. Tie strongest ſorm for a beam cut out of a horizontal plnl, firnly ſixed at both ends ſand supportiug a weight at the niddle. P. 150. Fig. 1a5. The atrongest ſorm ſor a heam cut out oſ a vertical glank, ſirmly fixed at buth ends, and supporting a neight ut thẽ middle, the curves heing paraholic. V. 150.Fig. 1a6. ſThe stronzest ſorm ſor a beam cut out oſ n vertienl plnk, anil supporting every where a weight projortion to the distance the extremity: the vutſline heing a enbic parahols. P. 160. Fig. 1a7. Ile strongest ſorm ſor a square or turned beam, supporting every where a weight, proportional to the distance ſrom the extremity, and represented by the secton oſ the aame ſizure, hich is u pyramid or a cone. I, 150. l PLAT Fig. 148. A mnchine ſor examining the strengih oſ materialss. The ſorce is applied by means oſ the winch A, which winds up the rope BC, passing over the ſirst pulley, and under the second, which is directly under the point D, at which the ſoree acts on the piece EF to be broken; the pullies slide on two parallel burs, ſixed in a ſrume, which is held down by a point projecting at G, ſrom the lever G ll, which is gradunted like a steelyard, and measures the ſorce. The piece 10 be broken is held hy a double vice, I, , with four screws, two oſ them hiding the other two in the fixure: i a wite is to be tom, it may be fised to he the cross bar LM; and a substance to be crushed must be pluced under the lever NO, the end N receiving the rope, and the end O being held down by ihelclick, which acts on the double ratchet OP. The lever is double ſfrom O 1o Q, and acts on the substunce by u loop, ſixed  it by a pin. P. 1531. Fig. 149. The outline oſ a column diminished one ſſth oſ its dinmeter, in two diſſerent ways: the side A being an arc oſ an ellipsis, of which the semidiameter AB is the lesser semiaxis, joined at A 1o a right line AC, of one third oſ the length oſ the column, the purt AD being eylindrical; the side DE is a cubie parabola, and may be drawn mechanically hy ſixing a straight ruler EF, in suchu position that DF may be twice the diminution at E, and then bending it to D: the diminution being every where as the cube oſ the distance ſrom D. These two methods are compared in a enntructed scale at G: ihe outer line represents the ſirst method, and the next line the second; the third, vhich is nearest to, G the conchoid oſ Nicomedes, recommended by Chambers, snid to be found in the columns of the Pantheon; the curve heginning at the base. Palladio fixes the ruler at A, and bends it to H, which makes the currature abruptly greater at II. P. 158. Fig. 150. A section oſ Mr. Smeaton's light house at the Eddystone. P. 159. PLATE XII. Fig. 156. os nidilo uh of Buck Frian ridge. P. 164. Fig. 157. A spherical dome, oſ which the lower parts are made thicker, in order that they may be oſ equal stability throughout. From A to B the dome is oſ equahle thickness: below C und D the thickness cannot be incrensed suſficiently to procure àan equilibrium, without the application oſ a chaim or hoop, of which the section is represented at C, D. I the thickness nere not at all increased, a hoop would be required at E, F, or still higher Pa85. Fig. 158. A nection oPthe roof of St. Puſs Casedral. The section of the dome eonsists of two cirelar arcs, of which the centres are ũ litile beyond the nxis: it is supported by carpentry, resting on a cone of brickwork. The internal dome is of brickwork only, and is open at the summit. P. 165. Fig. 159. A section ofthe dome of he Pantheon at Rome. P. 165. Fig. 160. ATuscan column, with its pedestal, capital, and entablature. P. 165. Fig. 161. A Doric column. P. 165. Fig. 162. An Ionic column. P. 165. Fig. 183. A Corinthian columin. P. 165. Fig. 164. A Composite column. P. 165. Fig. 165. An elevation oſ the end oſ King's College Chapel, Cambridge; showing on one side the buttresses, the tower being supposed to be removed, and on the other the tower, which not only supplies the place oſ a buttress at the end, hut assists also in suppurting a considerable portion o the thrust in the direction or the length oſ the chapel; the rooſ, which is oſ stone, being vaultæd in this direction as well na tranversely. There is also a rooſ oſ carpentry, coverãd with lead above the stone roo. P. 166. : Ti 166. Joints ſor a le beam. The Jonts nt A and It cannot he more than halt as strong as the ontire: henm, supporing the adhe: ion, produced by the pressure oſ the holis, as strong us could be requiredl. The jnint at C is called a dovetail joint; its strength is n Iittle less than that oſ A and B, hut the adhesion is mote easily secured, since a ſorce tending to separate the hcams must ſighten the joint. P. 167. : Tig. 167. Joiuts ſor a tie beam. The joint A, i& sufticiently tight, mny possess ; oſ the strength of the Leam. The joint B might be as strong us the heam, iſ the adhesion were great enough, but it would be diicult to apply suficient pressure to create such an adhesiim, and iſ the heam were subjeet to be much sluibæn; ithe jnint wouli be a very had one. P. 167. Tig. 1853. A gnod joint ſor a tie beam; the adlesion heing secured hy u slght diminution of the strength. P. 167. Fig. 169. A, a simple scarſei joint, which may he tightened by a wedue nt the centre; it is not strong. B, a scaricd joint which is much stronger. P. 167. Tig. 170. A joint ſor a heam supporting a weight Ly its trunsvers strength. The junction might be made, iſ it ere neceasary, by means oſ a third piece, oſ which the limits are marked hy the dotted line. The strength ĩs hut liule diminished by the joint. I. 168. Fig. 171. A bean supporting a weight hy its transverse strength, joined to another hy means oſ a third piece oſ hulſ the depth, spliced or fished on, below the beum, avd sccured by pins, md by blocks or joggles. The strengii ĩs a little grenter than that oſ the original heam. The dutied lines show the proportion in which the strata are extended or compressed, the lower part oſ the originul beam renmining in its ntural state, without sustaining any pressure, as far us one ſuurth oſ the depth, and a little ſurther. P. 168. — ——-—— ——m-m—— - —>/mS~stmm— o-o Lubsy  Johnson London i Tuly ibo5 dosrph ſieliom rlp l ' l i ælll- Digitizeò by Google Fig. 161. A whoel with a crni, ſor producing altor nate motion in a rod. P. 174, 536. Fig. 185. A wheel with an inclined and undulatod surſace, ſor producing alternate motion in a rod, vith the interposition oſ a ſriction wheel. P. 175, 396. Fig. 186. A ſrume ſor guiding the motion oſ a point A in a direction nearly rectilinear, A B being in CD as CD to BE. The dotted line shows the puth oſ the point A. P. 175, 386. Fig. 187. A frume ſor producing a motion nearly rectilinear in the point A. It muy be applied 10 a pump rod BC, worked by a cmnk, or otherwise P. m35, 336. . Fig. 188. A compound ſrame, ſor keeping two rods AB, CD, in a direction very nenly puralle. EF is 36 puris oſ the æale, ?G, 6, GH and H I each 80, EII und HE 20, GL i GK, or 10635, KM 855, and LM and MN each 1853. P. 175. PLATE XV. VFig. 189. The ſorm oſ u wheel or pulley, on which a broad strap runs, the surſace heing convex: the wheel hich drives it is of a smlar ſorm but ĩts upper part only is shown in the figure. P. 175. Fig. 190. The teeth oſ two wheuls, formed into epie5clnidul curves, octing on planes: the dotted lines show the eſcetive magnitude oſ the wheels. P. 196. Fig. 101. The ieeth oſ to wheels, formed imo nvolutes oſ cireles, described by uncoiling a thrend ſrom the doned crcles; the pomt of contact of the teeth heing aluays in the straight line which touches buth circles. P. 176. j Figſ102. Two surſaces ſormed into involutes oſ cieles, revolving in contact with each other, the equidistant lines, dmæn on them, continuing to meet each other throughout the revolution. P. 176. Fig. 108. The ſinion A is oſ the kind called n spur wheel; B is a crown wheel, or a contrate wheel. P. 1m Fig. 104. The wheel and pinion are both bevilled: the ſaces oſ the teeth being directed to the point A. P. 17. Fig. 195. Two wheels a litile eccentric, acting on each other. P. 178. Fig. 196. An eccentric contrate whecl, acting on a long pinion. P. 178 Fig. 197. A marhine ſor cutting the teeth oſ wheels. Ais the wheel, of which the teeth are formeã by the revolving suv B, tumed by the wheel and pnion C, D, hy memns of the hunũle E, while the ſmme, which holds the suw, moving on hinges, und resiing on æ spring, B depressed by the handle ?, ũs placè having been previously adiusted hy the screw G. The large rate H eantuinæ a rumber oſ concentrie eeles, oriously divided by pomis, into which the end oſ the spring I siuks at each stœp, s0 ns o fix the appurætus n the required position. P. 178. Fig. 198. A chronometer ſor measurng minute portions of time. The nxis A B being turned, eĩther by the handle A or hy the weight C, the hulls' D, E qy out, and carry. the weights F, G ſurther from the axis; in consequence oſ which the increased eſſcet oſ ſriction retards the motion, when it becomes too rapid. The harrel H is turned in the mean time, with the uxis, and is allowed  descend as the thrend at I is uncoiled, so that the point K, which is pressed against it by a spring, describes on ĩt a spiral, which is interrupted whenever the pin K is touched. P. 191. Fig. 199. The ſusee oſ a wateh or clock, the general outline oſ which forms part oſ the hyperbola A B, in which the distance oſ each point ſrom the axis CD is inversely as its distance ſrom the line D E. P. 103. i weight equally distributed throughout ĩts length. P. a50. Fig. 137. The ,trongest ſorm ſor a square or turnod heum, ſixed at one end, and supportng æ weię©;t equolly distributerd throughout ĩts length; the uſne heins a semicubic purabola, in which the cube oſ the thickv; is as the square of the distance ſrom the end. . I5n. Fig. 108. The strongest ſorm ſor a beum cut out oſ a vertical plank, ſor supporting its ovn weight; the outline heing a parabula. P, 150. Fig. 180. The strongest ſorm ſor a tumed heam, for supporting its own weight; the outline buing parabolic. P. 150. Fig. o. The strongeat form of ſeuæ to rusist the pressure oſ its own neĩ ate hesion only. The outline is ru curve, which nevẽr comes into contact with the axis, and in order that the conditinn oF equal strength may be possible, the beam must be londed with a weight, at its extremity, equal to thut oſ the portion which ĩs waonting to complete the figure. P. 150. Fig. 141. The strongest ſorm ſor a heam cut out of n horizontal plank, supportæd at both ends, and bearing n weight at the middle. P. 150. VFig. 142. The strongest ſorm ſor a beam cut out of a horizontal plank, supported at hoth ends, and bearing a weight equally distributed throughout its length; the outline being puraboliee. P. 150. Fig. 1a3. The strongest form for a heam cut out of a vertical plank, supported at both ends, und benring a weight cquully distributed throughout, the outline being elliptiec P. 150. Fig. 141, The strongest ſorm for a hbeam cut out of n horizontal planl, ſirmly ſixed at both ends,ſund supporting a wei⸗ht at the middle. P. 150. TVig. 1a5. The strongest ſorm ſor a heam ent out of a vertical plunk, ſiruly ſixed at buth ends, and supporting a weight at thẽ middle, the curves being paraholic. P, 1o0. Fig. 146, The strongest form ſor a beam cut out oſ a verticul plank, ani supporting every where a neih proportional tu the distance the extremity: butline heing a cubic parabolu. P. 160. Fig. 1a7. The strongest ſorm ſor a square or turned benm, supportih every where a weight, proportionul  the distance ſrom the extremity, and represented hy the secton oſ the sume ſizure, which is æ pyramid or a cone. I. 150. I E X. : li weight equally distributed throughout its length. P. 150 Fig. 137. Thè ;trongest ſorm ſor a square or turned beam, ſixed at one end, and supporting a weirht equally distributer throughout its length; the onſine beins n emicubic purubolu, in which the cube oſ the thickv; is ns the square of the distance ſron the end. 130 j i Fig. 18. The strongest form ſor a beam cut out oſ a vertical plank, for supporting its own weight; the outline heing a parabola. P, 150. Fig. 139. The strongest ſorm for a turned beam, ſor supporting its own weight; the vutline being paraholiec T. 150. Fig. 140. The strongest ſorm oſ a beam caleulated to rcsist the pressure oſ its oWn weight by lateral adhesion only. The outline is à lugarithmic curve, which never comes intu contact with the axis, and in order thut the condition o equal strength may bo possible, the beam must he londed with a weight, at Its extremity, ęquul to that oſ the portion which is wanting to complete the figure. P. ĩ50. Fig. 141. The strongest ſorm ſor a heam cut out of n horizontal plunt, mupport at buth euds, and beuring n weight at the middle.. P. 150. VFig. 142. The strongest ſorm for a beam cut out of a horæontal ;lank, supponea at hoth ends, and bearing a weight equally distributed throughout its length; the outline being purabolic. P. 150. Fig. 1a3. Thę strungest ſorm ſor a heam ent out of a vertieal plank, ppone at both ends, and bearing a weight equally distributed throughout, the outline being elliptic. P. 150. Fig. 141. The strongest ſorm ſor a heam cut out oſ n horizontal plank, firmly ſixed at both ends,ſund supporting a neiht at the niddle. P. 150. Fig. 1a5. Ihe strongest ſorm ſor a heam cut out oſ u verticul plank, ſirly ſixed at hoth ends, and supporting a weight at the middle, the curves being parahulic. P. IHn.Fig. 1a6. The stronzest form ſor a beam cut out oſ a vertieul plauk, nnit supporting every where a neight propurtionul to the distance the extremity: the vutline heing a cubic parahola. P. 160. Fig. 1a7. The strungest ſurm ſor æ square or turned beam, supportng every where a weight, proportional o the distance ſrom extremity, and represented by the secton oſ the sume ſizure, which is u pyramid or a cone. P. 150. I Fig.a6. Figi7. prr;y?7?,  itis _t à B ĩ li hE ⸗ 59 Figado Fig134 ſ ] j amm-r. - à àa àa àa25p492 Fig 10 Pub iy I dotnsn, butin i dulv iẽcè 'E X. weight equally distributed throughout its length. P. 150 3ii : Fig. 187. The strongest ſorm ſor n square or wrned beom, ſixed at one end, and supportũg à Weizht equally distributed throughout ĩts length; the ontline heing u semicubic parabola, in which the cube oſ the thickv is as the square of the distance ſrom the end. . 150. I i : Fig. 108. The strongest ſorm ſor a hbeam cut out oſ a vertical plank, ſor Supporting its oWn weight; the outline heing n P. 150. Fig. 1389. The strongest ſorm for a turned beam, ſor sujporting its own weight; the outline being paraboliec. . 150. Fig. 140, The strongest ſorm oſ a beam calculated to resist the pressure oſ its own weight by lateral adhesion only. The outline 1s à lugarithmic curve, which never comes into contact with the axis, and in order that the condition of equal strength may be possible, the beam must he londed with a weight, at Its extremity, ęqual to that oſ the] portion which is anting to complete the figure. P. 150. Fig. 141. The strongest ſorm ſor a heam cut out of n horizontal plan, supportæd at both ends, aud bearing æ weight at the middle. P. 150. VFig. 142. The strongest ſorm ſor a beam cut out oſ an horzontal plank, supported at hoth ends, and Learing a weight equally distributed throughout its length; the outline being pumbolic. P. 150. Fig. 1a3. The strongest form for n heam cut out of a verticul plank, supported at hoth ends, and bearing a weight equally distributed throughout, the outline being elipie P. 150. Vig. 141. The strongest ſorm ſor a beam eut out oſ a horizontal plank, ſirmly ſixed at both ends,ſand supporting a neiht at the niddle. P. 150. Vig. 145. The trongest ſorm ſor a heam cut out oſ a vertical plank, ſirmly ſixed at hoth ends, and supporting a weight at thè middle, the curves heing parahulic. P. 160. Fig. 146. The stronzest ſorm ſor a beam cut out oſ a vertieal plun, aul jupporin enei; where a weight proportionml to the distance the extremity: the outline heing a enbic parahula. P. 150. Fig. 197. Ile strongest ſorm ſor a square or turned beam, supportiię every where a weight, proportional o the distance ſrom the extremity, and re ted by the section of the same ſizure, Which iæ u pyramid or a cone. I. 150. Fig. 913. A jach ſur misnz Weig©hts hy the alterOte motions oſ a lever, ſhe clicks on each æule hæing detained in the tecth of the rutchets by the ns.istanre oſ the springs in which they terminate, and which aro connecied tgether. V. 204. Fig E The mode of supporting a tackle ſor raising stunes in building; te summiũt oſ the triangle, which is composed oſ three pules, being rmied or lowered by means oſ a rope ani pullies. P. 90T. Fig. 215. A method oſ ruiing weights obliquely, by menuns oſ a rope, pasing orer a pulley, whiqh is drawn along horizontally. P. ę07. Fig. 216. AB, u section oſ an inclined plant, belonging to the Duke oſ Bridęwators cunal: the boats are dravn into the locks at A, which ãre then ſilled wili water; C is the plan oſ the windluss, by which the descending and ascending hoats are connecter ogether, and which ĩs turned by a winch; D and E are the locks. P. 908. Fig. 217. A crane, with an oblique walling wheel, ſor oxen or hores. The whecl is taken ſrom a mill oſ Leupold. P. 200. Fig. 218. A crane with a wheel i brea like Mr. White's. The mun volks at any required distunce Iom the nxis is of. * motion, and pushes ſorwards the lever 'E X. weight equally distributed ithroughout its length. P. 50 iũ Fig. 187. The strongest form for a square or wrned beam, ſixed at one end, and supportũg à Weięht equally distributeq throughout its length; the ta bem u semicubic parabola, in which the eube oſ the thick? is as the square of the distance ſrom the end  150. l Fig. 138. The stronge:t ſorm ſor a beum cut out oſ n vertical plunk, ſor supporting its own weight; the outline being a parabolu. P, 150. Fig. 139. The strongest ſorm for a turned heam, ſor suppurting its own weight; the outline being paraholie. P. 160. Fig. 140, The strongest ſorm oſ a heam calculated to rosist the presure oſ its own weight by lateral ndhesion only. The outline is à lugarithmic curve, which nevẽr comes into contact with the axis, and in order that the conditinn of equal strength may bo possible, the beam must be londed with a weight, at its extremity, equnl to that oſ iæe portion which is wanting to complete the figure. P. 150. Fig. 1a1. The strongest ſnrm ſor a beam cut ont of n horizontal plank, supportæd at both ends, and bouring æ weight at the middle. P. 150. VFig, 142. The strongest ſorm ſor a beam cnt ont oſ n horizontal plank, supported ut hoth ends, nnd bearing a weight equally distributed throughout its length; the outline being purabolic. P. 150. VFig. 1a3. The strungest ſorm ſor a heam cut out of a semel plant, nea⸗ ho ends, and hearng a weight tribu roughout, outline being clipe ſ 150. Fig. 141. The strongest ſorm ſor a beam cut out of a horizontal plank, firmly fixed at both ends,ſand supportiug a weizſt at the niddle. P. 150. Vig. 145. The strongest ſorm ſor a heam cut out oſ u vertical plank, ſirmly ſixed at hoth ends, and supporting a wright ut the middle, the curves being paralnlic. P. Ion.Fig. :at. The strongest ſorm ſor a beam cut nut of a vertieal plan, nnl upporting every where a weight proportional to the distance om the extremity: the ouiline heing a cubic parubola. P. 150. Vig. 1a7. The strongest ſorm ſor a square or turned benm, supportiha every where a eight, proportional  the distance ſcom the extremity, and represented by the section oſ the sume ſizure, which is u pyramid or a cone. . 150. : E VI . Fig. B0. Dr. Hocke's telegraph, in which the characters are arranged behind a sreen, and dravn out as they are required. P. 100. Fig. 81. Dr. Ilooke's alphabet, with some other arhitrary chumcters ſor his telegraph. P. 100. Fig. 82. A beam compnss, with a scale. P. 102. Fig. 83.. 85. Instruments for drawing ares oſ large circles P. 102. Fig. 86. A puir oſ triangular compasses. P. 102. VFig, 87. Marquois's scles, for drawing purallel lines. P. 108. Fiz. 88. A pen ſor ruling musical lines. P. 103. Fig. 89. A pantograph. A being the centro oſ motion, B the tracing point, and C the describing point, A B is always to AC as AD to AE, and the copy F is similar to the original G. P. 108. Fig, 90. A pair oſ proportional compusses. P, 104. E VII i Vig. 50. Dr. Hockes telegraph, in which the chamacters ure arranged behind a screen, and dravn out us they ure required. P. 100. Fig. 81. Dr. Ilooke's alphabet, with some other arbitrury chamcters ſor his telegraph. P. 100. Fig. 83. A beam compass, nith a iale. P. 102. Fig. 88.. 85. Instruments ſor drawing ares oſ lorge circles. P. 102. Fig. 8. A puir oſ triangular compusses. P. 102. Fig. 87. Marquois scules, for drawing purallel lines. P. 108. Fig. 88. A pen ſor ruling musical lines. P. 103. Fig. 89. A pantograph. A being the centre oſ motion, B the tracing point, und C the describing point, AB is always to AC as AD to AE, and the copy F is smilar to the original G. P. 103. Fig. 90. A puir oſ proportional compasses. P. 104. PLATI Fig. 230. The surſoces oſ the ſitid in the bent tube AB remain on the 2ame level, in the same manner ns iſ the tuhe were ahsænt, ani the ſuid mare a part oſ that which is contained in the reservoir CD, P. 260. Fig. 230. The hucket A being suspended by the rope B, and muile to revolve rapidly round its axis, the surſuce oſ the wnter assumes a parubolic ſorm. P. aw. Fig. 231. A heier ſluid being contained ĩn the upper part oſ the hent tube A B, which is immered in the lighter ſluid filling the vessel CD, the ſluid in the tube remains in u stute oſ tern” equilibrium, when its surfaces are in the same level. P. à61. Fig. 212. The ſluid A BC presses on the huttom oſ the vesel BC with the same ſoree as iſ the vesæl were oſ the form BC D E. P. u61. Fig. 213. The portion ABCD of the ſuid hein⸗ supporei 10 he congealui, anit theo to ſurm a part of the vessel, the pressure on the bottom nould remain unaltered. P. 968. Fig. 218. The weight A may be supported by the pressure oſ a small quantity oſ ſuid, either hy making the surſace of the versel BC very lurge, and the height oſthe tube D E moderate, or, while the vesel F remnains of a moderate siz?e, by muking the height of the tube GII very great. P. 263. Fig. 215 The pressure on any small part of4lie æſde oſ the vessel AB, at C or D may be reprcscnted hy the line CE, DF, ani the whole presure on the side hy the triangle Bũ, of which the contre oſ gravity is at II; and iſ the side Al be supported by a single prop, ĩt must be placed nt the puint K, the height oſ which is equal to thæt oſ II. P. 965. Fig. 2a6, Iſ the lieight oſ the surſace A nhove B he to BC as the speciſic gravity oſ the ſuid in BC o hut oſ the ſluid in A ſ, the ſiuids will support each otler. P. àũ5. i Fiz. 237. Two square heams ſloating at the depils E VI: . Vig. 50. Dr. Hooke's telegraph, in which the characters are arranged behind a sereen, and dravu out us they ore required. P. 100. Fig. 81. Dr. Hooke's alphahet, with some other orbitrary chamcters ſor his telegraph. P. 100. Fig. 83. A beam compass, with a ieale. P. 102. Fig. 88.. 85. Instruments ſor druwing nrœs oſ lorge circles P. 102. Fig. 85. A puir oſ triungular compasses. P. 102. Fig. 87.. Marquois scoles, for drawing parallel lines. P. 108. Fig. 88. A pen ſor ruling musical lines. P. 103. Fig. 89. A pantograph. A being the centre oſ motion, B the tracing point, and C the describing point, AB is always to AC us AD to AE, and the copy F is 5imilar to the original G. P. 108. Fig. 90. A pair oſ proportional compusses. P. 103. Fig. 2562. Tho ſorms oſ jets issuing ſrom various purts oſ a reservoir, the amplitude A B being tvice CD, mnd AE ſour times F G. P. à86. Fig. 203. Aseries oſ waves, moving in ſhe diretion AB, and reficcted by the obstacle ſ, loses the nppearance oſ progressive motion, and vibrates up and down within the limits oſ the curves ACD E B, and FGIIIK; the elovation and depression become however twice as grent us beſore reſlection. P. 280. Fig. 263. A series oſ waves diverging ſrom a contre A, nnd striking a ſixed ohstacle BC, ure reſlected hy ĩt into the same ſorm as iſ they proceeded ſrom the centæ D, at an equnl distance on the oppusIte side oſ ihe jurſace BC. P. 299° . VFig. 265. An apparatus ſor ohserving the motions oſ waves excited, in a ſluid poured into the trongh AB, by the vibrations oſ the elustic wire C, londed with a movesble weight D; the shadow oſ the waves heing thrown on a screen E by the lamp F, through the bottom oſ the trough, which is oſ ”luss. P. 200. Fig. 266. A series of woves, diverging ſrom the centre A, und pussing through the nperiure BC, extend themselves on ench side s as io ſill the spuco BCDE, hile they uffect the ports without this space much less sensibly. P. 200, 458. Fig. 267. Two equal series oſ waves, diverging ſrom the centres A nni B, and crossing ench other in such a manner, that in the lines tending towards C, D, E, nnd F, tley counternct each other's eiects, and the water remains nearly smooth, while in the iotermediate spuces it b ngũatel. P. 290, 161. ] Vig. 268 A struam oſ air buing ſoręed through the pipes A and B, the mercury in the harumeter CD fallæ ſrom Ctu D. P. 29T. Vig. 20. Astruam entering the reservoir A, hy the ripœ B,corrvs uith it all the water C, which stunds above le level ul ĩts npper surſuce. P, 207, Fig. 270. The hall A is permanontly supported by the jet B, heeaus, when it ſnlla into the position here representied, the contriſugal ſorcæ oſ the water nt A enrries it hack u the midqle oſ the jet. P. 271. Vig. 771. A plnte, bent into the ſorm A BC, turning on the centre ſi, is impelled hy a strenm oſ a? D iu the direction CD. P. 208. ii Fig. 272. A eylinder moveuble on an axꝶ, with twn urvel pipes inserted in its lower part, seœn ſrom ahove. The streum A enters at the top of the c5lIinder, ani is lihurged by the oriſices H, C, s0 as to ium the voœcl ĩn the direction BD. P. 301. Vig. 275. A jet oſ n ſluul, striking on an obiacle oſ equal diameter, and separated by it s n to continue its motion obliquely. P. 50, Fig. 214. The whole resi-tance directly opposeil tn the surſace A B belng represented hy B G, the porron which, aceording to the prineiples oſ the reslution oſ ſurces, nught t art on the nedze A llD, ĩs reprosented hy BE; and in the sume manmer ihe r- istunee on ABF is to the whole ns BG tn BC. ꝑ. Mũ; Fig. 215. The form oſ the denil water ſuving ntore an ohtus body i nearly lihe that of A lt~; and the form adupted ſor moring through the water with the læast pmsible revntuncæ live A i C. ãnI. Vig. 276. The direction in which the pmricles oſa Auid are supposed to move when they strib ngolust a cuncive surface. . 305. Vig. 277. A hydrus tutic Lulance P. S00. Dig. 178. Mr. Nicholons hydrometer, to hæ ſinplyed with weights, ſor finding the æperiũc ”rvity of fluids or solids. P. J00. Fig. a79. A3iſt level. P, 511. Fig. am An oreluwing lump. The hemi-pheri- xxII the surſace of the kite; and this, compounded with ilæ furee oſ the cord A C, produces the result AD, which sustains the weirht of the hite. I. 324. Fig. 205. A shij working ugainst u wind; the force of the winid aeting neurly in the direction A B, perpendicular to the sils, the shij's real course is BC, the angle Cſ_D Leiog the lee way. P. àũn. Fig. 206. The unoria, ur norin, used in Spain, ſor drawing water, by a series oſ enthen jitęhers, connected by ropes, and passing uver a sprocket ulheeſ. P. ò07. li Fig. 207. An undehot water5hecl, earryiny ſixed buckets, which raise a portion oſ water, aud deliver it nto n trough, ſumislicd w”hi a projection, » hieh ætands under the buckets, at the upper part oſ tæe wheel. P. 501. Tiu. 23. A throwing wheel, ſor draining ſens, worked hy a windmill or otherwise, and car?; ſng the wnter upon a sueep ſrom à lower o a higher level P. næ1. Iig. ano. The rope pump oſ Vera, ſor raising water by menns oſ ſrictiun: the rope ĩs kept stretched hy a pulley under the water, which is loaded with a weight, und slides in a grmove. P. ĩun. Fig. 300. The screw oſ Archimedes, nearly us desribeq by Vitruvius. P. àu9. Fig. in1l. The screw of Archimedes, ns recommenied by D. Bernoulli. P. 520. Fig. :n2, A waterscrew, revolving within a fixed cylinder. P. àu9. Fig. 03. Elie spiral pump of Wirt2, P. 350. PLATI Yiz à01. A cenirifugal pump. The machine ſmt ſillœ throngh the ſuimel A, anil when it is made 10 revolve, the water is discharged into a cirenlor traugh, oſ whieh a æction is seen at B and C. The valve at D remuins shut while the pump is ſilling. P. l. Fig. 505. A pump consſeting oſ two plungers, conmuei nesrly to ihe height at which the water is dediverd. P ꝶm. ViL. 06. Lahire's doulile ſurcing pump When the piston ĩs depressæi, the water enters the barrel at the valve A, ani goes out at i; when it ĩs elevated, it enters at  and escapes at D. P. àò2. Fiz. 307. The commęn piston, ſtuted with lenther. P. àãn. Vig. ?]oB. Mr. Bramols ſræss. The juump A forces the warer through the pie B into the Lurrel C, in which it acts very powerſully on the lurze piston D, and mies the hottom oſ the press E. P. ũã⸗. Ii. 305. The common sucking pump. P. àã. Tag. à10. A hat pump, the hag or puſſ A heing extenided and contracted by the motion of the piston. P. 513. Fig. 311. A liſting pump, the piston rod A B being drnen up hy a frume. P. õũ53. Fiz. 318. A sucking pump, converted, hy the adilition of a eollar oſ leathers at A, into a ſoreing puup;. P. nuò. Yig. 2138. Aſire engine, on a construction similar to some marhines described hy ſtumelli. Alb is the pitan, working within a eylindieal burrel, unil moved hy the ludles CH. When the end C is depresscd, the witer enters throngh the valves E and I, and ĩs aischarget ut G aml H; when D is depresscd, the naier enters at I and K, and is disclurged at L and M, into the nir vessel N, whenee ĩtĩs ex;elled hy the pipe O. The pipes P aud Q may be unied, ĩ ĩ be reyuircd. P. 554. Fiz. 314. From Ramelli. The wheel AB, revolving in the direction BA, earries a purtion oſ wuter C hetween ĩtseli and the sweep DE, which is intercepted Ly the slider F, and ſurccd up the pipe FG. P. 5. Vig. 15. From Itumelli. The roller A, revoluſng within the rescrvoir Ii C, uhich is nearly exlindrieal, carries with ĩt ihe slider D E, vhich is mude to sneep xXxIV. ing the height oſ the water within and without the uum I5 a coct ſp leuting oĩ the y P. 344. l E ru the "—  ———.—; , passing sirainer B, carries with it n quantity of uir tirough the ]c, which rises to the upper B ꝑſihe ut vel , nnd is discharged by the pipæ . 344. Fig. 334. The centriſugal bellows. By the revolution oſ the ſly, the air is caused Io enter ut A, and is  ſẽ. ſte orum ngine of Savery, The Sus. ori stenm æ oſ Suvery. . ã àla ——— sopcock turnod, the steam cools is condensed, and water is ſorced into ĩts place by the pressure oſ the atmosphere, through the valie C: the steam is thon readmitted, and ſorœs the water nscondthrough the vulve D aud te pipe D E. The vessel F ncts altiernutely with A. P. 3a7. Yig. 336. The common steam engine oſ Newcomen and Beighton. The steam being adinitted into the elinder A below the piston, the ueight B is ullowed to descend: a jet oſ water is then admined by the pipe C, which cõndenses the sieum, und the jꝑressure oſ the atmosphere then depresses ile piston: a purt of this waier is admittod by the ſipe into the boiler, in order 10 keep it suſſiciontly ſull. P. 347. Fig. 357. Mr. Wutts Steam engine. The steam, vhich i belon the piston, is suſſured o escape into the condenser A by the cock B, which is opened by ihe ſod . nd  Ina lme time mi uen  Rinithe coc nto the upper ꝑ cylinder; vhen the piston hus desceurt⸗ũ tls cos E at F aet in a similar manner in lettng out the steam ſioĩ: above and admitting it below the piston. The jet ĩs supplied by the water oſ the cistern G, which is pum up 5t H ſrom a reservoir: it is demwn out, æith the air that is extricated ſrom it, by the air pump I, hich throws it into the cistern whence the ſomp L raine it am: tiuem M. suit o suais the through a valve, & opens whenever ſfloat N descends below its oper place. The pipes O nnd P serve ulso to ascerũain lhe quantity of woter in the boiler. The piston rod is conſined ſ a motion nearly rectilinenr by the ſrame ũ; the ſly wheel R is turuęd by the sun and plunet wheeſs, T; aud ihe strap Uturns the centriſugal regulator W, which gorems the supply oſ stenn by the valve or stopęock X P. Sa40. Fig 338. Mr. Symington's stoam boar. A is the builer, B the cylinder, C the piston, D the condensution Piæ, E the air pump, F stampers ſor breaking ico. P. 340. ig. 530. An nir gun. The air is ſorced by the yringe Ainto the cavity surrounding the barrel, whence  ſchaed by the valve B, which is opened either immediately by the uction oſ the trigaer C, or by a spring, which is bent by cocking the gun, and æct at iberty by the trigger. P. 551. : 5 PLATIE Fig 310. A series of waves or pulses oſ sound, diverging ſrom one oſ the ſoci of an ellipsis, und reſlected towerds the other. P. 375. Fig. 331. Woves diverging ſrom a point near te centre oſ a cirele, nnd converging aſter reflection to a puint at an equal distance on the other side oſ the centre. P. 575. Fig. 342. A section oſ a speaing trumpet and oſ heasing trumpet: the lines representing the direction oſ the sound heſore and aſter its reſlections. P. 375. Fig. 313. A siring impelled hy the how oſ a violin, ani lightly touched at the same time at à ;oint one third oſ its length ſfrom the end: the smull picœes oſ paper ſiy o ſrom the middle oſ ſie vibrating portions, while the piece situnted at the remuining point oſ division rotains its situation. P. 2°9. Fig. 314. A vibmtion compounded with another smaller vibration, three tunes us ſrequent, in a transverse diroction, the sepurute vibrations heing such ihat ihe points may be ulwuys opposite to a print nving uniſormly in a circle. Thus ihe ribrations in tle lines AB und AC compose the complicated ſigure D E. P. 584. Vig 315. A specimen oſ the manner in 5hich the vibrations oſ n string are ususlly perſmed when it is struck with u how. P. I51. Fig. 316. Specimens oſ the simplest manmer in which sund is collected into lines, on a plate oſ glass or metal, which is made o sount by means of the bow oſ a violin. P. àu. Tig. 337. A rund jlate, perſurming some oſ ĩts most complieated vilimtions, the liues oſ division being indicad by the place oſ the sand. From Chiudni. P. an5. TIig. 333. A square jlute divided into a diversity oſ vibrating portins. From Chladui. P. 585. Fig. 519. The small buncs oſ the leſt ear, nearly diree times the natural siææ, sappued to he seen through the membrane oſ the tympanum, by looking directly into ihe auditory canal. A ĩs the membrane oſ the tympanum, C the lanmer, D the anvil, E it attachment to the surrom:ling hone, F the stirrup, G the round aperture in the bone leading to the cochlea. P. 588. Fig. 350. A view oſ the vestibule oſ the leſt eor, with the semicircular cunls and the cochlea, seen vith the eye a little more depressed than by looking straight thirough the canal, and cxctly in the direc- I r 5yr o 3 Pit ty  Johnrn Eondm s July ibos- iſuæ* Fig. 5360. A ray or pencil oſ light A-, CB, ſulling on the surſace DE, a portion of the light is reflected, and anũther portion is transmitted, in the dirction BF, BG, 50 that BG is equal to BC, und BH to B, CIK and GHL being lines perpendicular to DE ut any such distances, that BE mny be to B L in a certain proportion, which ĩs that oſ the ænes oſ the ungles of incidence A BM, CBM, to thos of ihe angles oſ rſraction PBN, GBN. BO and BP are the reſlected portions oſ the rays. P. 4ll. Fig. 570. A mode oſ determining the position oſ a reſrcted ray, which ĩs particulurly convenient ĩn the case oſ reſractions at spherical surſaces. A li C being nny circle, either touching the reſractive surſace ut A, or heing ſtselſ a section oſ the reſractiug substance, i5 unother circle DE F be dranu on the smme contre, Inving its diameter to that oſ the ſist as the sine of the ungle oſ incidence to that of reſraction, and a t;ird cirele GĩI, which ĩs less than the ũnt in the sume proportion as the second is greater; and iſ the direetion oſthe incident ray KA be conſinued 1o D, ard I. D bæ drawn ſrom the centre, cutting G ſI in G, A G will he the direction oſ the refracted my: and iſ this my pass ugain out oſ the dener medium at B, ĩts direction BM may he ſound by drawing LIF, and F IM will be thus truly determined. P. 411. Fig. 3771. A ruy or pencil AB, reſracted at B to C, nani there reflected by a perpendicular surſuce into an oppo: ie direetion C B, will return albo in the dircetion BA, a portion oſ it heing reſiecteq in the ſirst place to D, and in the second o Il. P. 412. Fig. 572. A pentiũl AB pussing through a substance CD contained between purallel surſaces, continues its coursæ in tho direction EV purullel to AB. P. a11. Fig. 573. The ray AB, entering the edum CD through the trunspurent substance  V, cuntained hetween Jarullel surſaces, acquires the direction GII, porallel to IE, into which LI is at ouce reſmeted. I. 418. li Vig. 971. The appearance oſ a prism, oſ which the lower surſace ĩs divided into a bright and a dark portion, separated by a culuured are A BC. P. 411. a P: PLATE VFig. 575. A ©s an actual ſocus oſ diverging rys B 25 nu toum bynato anios—m C a virtual ſocus oſ con rays, and D a virtũal focus oſ diverging rays; A und B, B und C, and C and D are foci conjugatẽ to each other, with respect to the misncisns aſis duns lun Ea q 576. i t int N, ſormed r apA x ſal dlstane behind the mirror; and in this manner the whole image oſ the word is ſormed in na inverted position. P. 415. Fig. 377. ABCD represenis il o purallel rays ſalling on the concave mirror CD, and collected into the principal ſocus at E, which is hulf way betwoe;n the nnd its cœntre. F ĩs the principal focus of the convex mirror G; and H that oſ the reing surſace I. P. 416. Fig. 3r8. A being the centræ oſ the conoave mirror B, the image oſ an object at C will be ſound at D, nud the reverse. P. 416. ] Fig. 579. A pencil of light, deſected from its path by n prism of æa denser , in diſferent positions. P. 416. : :i ig. 380. A pencil of light scattered into rarious Fig. directions by a multiplying glass. P. 416. Fig. 331. A ĩs a section oſ a double conve⸗ lens, Boſ 3 double concave. C is a planoconvex, D a ꝑlanoconcave; nud E and F meniscus lenses; hut n menisZus oſ the ſorni represented by F ĩs sometimes called a concavoconves lens. P. 417. Fig. 383. The pencils of light A, B are reſracted by the convex lens C in the same maimer as they woulũ have been by the circumseribed double prism D E; and in the same manner thæ concave lens F resembles in its ion the prisms G, II. P. 417. Fig. 583. A, a il oſ parallel ruys, mude to convergo, by a double convex lens of erown glhus, to the contre oſ curvature of one of its surſuces. B æ double concuve lens, causing the rays o diverge ſrom the centre oſ curvaturee C, D à plannconvex lens, of which the principal ſocus is at the distance oſ a dia-  351 io represented by the shuded - . nses t 3orſaces àrę equivalent in their hecs to those of which the æctivns are shown hy the dutted lines; the figures at A und B being oſ œqual thickness in the middle, and at C at the edges also. P. 417. Fig. 3u5. At A, a radiant point and its image are both situnted at the distance oſ iwice the ſocal l from the lens; at li, the one is inoræ remote, the r nearer; and CD is to DE as EF 1o FG; D and F being the principl ſoci of the lens. P. 4ĩ8. Fig, 386. The oblique pencils oſ rays A, B, and is ruied or depressed by the pullies at H and I.  one oſ two roums or huts for the accommodation oſ the observers nssistants. The wheels, under the ſrume, serv1o tum the wholo instrument round ĩts centre. P. 429. Fig. a07. The Newtonian telescope, with the direction oſ the central rays. These arc not the ruys by hich the object is actually seen, becouse theꝶ are intercopted by the smull speculum, but they aſorũ the simplest determination oſ the magnitude oſ the ſield oſ view. P. 490. Fig. 408. The supposed puth oſ the centrul ray in the Gregoriun tolẽscope. P. 490. Fig. a08, The supposed path oſ the central rays in Cas in's telescope. Here the rays netually r/ẽpresented would Bor onY be interceptæd hy tlie smsll mirror, but they w ulso ſull on the perſuration oſ the grent mio?r. They, however, scrve equally well to determine the magnitude oſ the field. P. à99. Fig. 410. The supposeq path of the contral rays in Dr. sour microscope. The ruys running directly the olject are intereepted by à sereen. P, 420. Vig. all. A; the dotted ſine re resents the curvæ called the cautie  of ; concave mirror, n a n rays proceeding, in section represen - ſrom æ ant point, would ſiA cullected. B; the dotied line is the eaustic oſ n convex mirror. The o5æ ing supposed to be at a greal di-tunce from the hmispherical mirrors C and ſ), the images oſ distant objects in all directions will be ſound hetween the dotted curves, the distance oſ those curves ⸗ 1he degree oſ conſusi The images oſ distunt objects in ull directions ſormed hy the small coneave and convex mirrors E and F, are ſound betveen the dotted cirele und the ight line touching itt. P. 430. Fię. a12. eſect of a ſield glas in a com microscope ? the inner lines showing what would bæ the magnitude of the field without . P. 431. Fig. 418. The manner in which Mr. Rumaden employed a planoconvex lens in the eye pieces oſ his telescopes am in his douhle ifiers, The curved doited line shows the image oſ the straight ſine Hivided into equal parts, which ĩs ſormed by the lurger lens, in 3 focus oſ the smuller, through which ĩt is viewed. . 43l. lll Fig. 414. An achromatic telescope, with æ tri ohject glass, and with Boscovich's achromatic n piece, consisting oſ tuo similar lensos, one oſ whichis cvery way threœ times ns great as the oſher, their ditance beiig twice the focal lengrh oſ the smaller. P. a52. Fig. 415. The dotted lines AB and CD represnt t. ĩnags oſ the same object, ſormed by rays diſerently reſrangible, puss ing through a simple object glass, hich are hrought, hy the eſect oſ the lens or ſield ęſass E, into such nlnces and dimensions as to subtend neorly the same angle ſfrom the eye gls F. P. 439. Fig. 416. A represents Mr. Rumsden's divided eye glnss micrometer, the two portions being moved at once in contrary directions by tuming the pinion B, until the two extremitios oſ the distance to be measUred appear to concide. P. 438. Fig. ait. Dr. Ma- kelyne's nicrometer, mude by a doulile achromatic prism A, exhibiting two images B, C, the different puris of which are made 10 eoincide, by moving the prism backwards and ſorwaris in the direẽtion oſ the axis oſ the telescope. Mr. Rumsden thinks thut any suhætunce thus interposed must interſeræ grcatly with the perſectiun of the telscope. P. 408. PLATE Fig. 218. Iſ AB and AC represent the comparative velocity oſ light aud oſ the earth, in their respective direetions, a telescope must be ꝑlaced in the direction EC, in order to see the star D, aud the star will a;reor at E. P. a97. Fig. 419. The spectrum produced by looking through a prism at a narrow line oſ lightt. P. aĩꝶ. Fig. 420. The appearance oſ a portion of the hlue Ight at the hottom oſ a candle, viewed through a prism. P. 408. Fig. 421. The appearance oſ a ciręular aperture, moderately large, when viewed through a prism. I. 430. Fig. 422. AB and CD represent the appeurance of the two ends oſ a broad white surfuce, or a window, when viewed through a prism. The ohlique stripes oſ colour show the degrees by which the lights oſ diſſerent kinds enter into the compound light. It ſollows ſrom this unalysis, that the colours, horizoutally opposite each other in AB and CD, would alvays together make up white light. P. a30. Fig. 423. The eolours on the circle A exhibit, when whirled swiſtly round, n whitish light rescuibling B. P. 440. Fig. 124.. 426. The eolours of the cirele A produce, when mudo to revolve rapidly, the tnts shown nt B. P. 440. Fig. 227. A triangular ſigure, exhibiting in theory all posible shaies of culours. The red, the green, aud the violet, are single at their respective anglts, and ure grodually shaded oſ ww5ards the oppvꝶte sdes: n little yellow and blue only are added in thęæ placcs, in order to supply the waut of brillinncy in the cęloun Fig 411. A series oſ coronae, seęn round the sun or moon. P aũ66. i ii Fig. 115. The internal hyperbolic ſringes oſ a rectangular shndow. P. 467. Vig. 116. The exterual ſringes scen on each side of the sladow oſ a huir or wire, which is also divided by its interunl ſringes. The dotied lines show the nutural magnitude oſ the shadow, independeutly oſ diſſraction. P. 468. Fig. 117. Anulysis oſ the colours oſ thiu plates scen Ly reſicction, beginning ſrom black. A line drawn neross the curved ſringes would show the portions into which the light oſ any part is divided when viewod through a prism. P. 169. Fig. 118., The coloured stripes oſ a ſim oſ soapy woter, corering a wine glass. P. 469. Fig. 419. The colours oſ a thin plute oſ air or water, contained between a couvex and a plune ꝗluss, as seen by reſloction. P. 469. Fig, 450. The colours oſ a mixed plate; ns secn by portially grensing a lens a little conver, and a ſlot glis, and liolding them together hotween the eye and the edge of a durk objert. One halſ oſ the series begins ſrom white, the other from black, and each colour ĩs the contrast to that oſ the opposite halſ oſ the ring. P. 170. Fig. 151. The. composition oſ the colours oſ the primary rainbow, when utiended by supernumerry hoæs. P. 4T1. Fig. 152. The colours oſ eoncave mirrors. The smull circles in the middle white ring represent the aperture by which the light is admitted, and ĩts imnge; the coloured rings are ſormed by the light irregularly dſæipatedq, beſore and oſter refiection. P. 471. PLATE Fig. aba, a51. The appenrance of the str Lym, riewed with ilescopes magnũ/ng 4t0 nil 6450 times respectively. From Dr. Herschel. P. 401. Fig. 455. The appearance oſ ihe nebula in Orion, about halſ a degree in length. From Messier. P. 401. Fig. 455.. 483. The a;penrances of diſerent nebulae. From Dr. llenchel. P. a02. Fig. 461. A section oſ the nebula t/⸗ u lirh the vun in suppusCũ to belong, ſs pro;ection ſurming the milky way; tuken in a plane perpendicular to its lnngest dia-meter. From Dr. Herschel. The large star in the middle re resents the sun, ant the eĩrele druwn round ĩtĩsat ſorty times the distance of the nearest ſixed stars, comprehending probably all the sturs which are risible to the naked eye. P. a03. Fig. a65. A large spot, traced through diſerent ſorms in its path across the sun. From Dr. Wilson. A ĩs its pluce 23 Nov. 1760; B, 24 Nov. C, 11 Dec. D, 12 Dec. and E, 17 Dee. P. 501. itl C ;Pub ty  Juhnsm, London à luly iè xxxII. sre placed according to their actual situations on the 14th June, 1806. The letters M D show the mæan distance oſ the comet oſ 1759, heing plucod at te æxtromity oſ the lesser axis of the ellipsis in which ĩt must be supposed to revolve. P. 514. Fig. a73. The periodical times oſ the diſſerent planets, represented by lines oſ diſerent lengthss P. 514. v Vig. a74. The compartive velocities oſ the dilferent planets, represented by lines which show the number oſ English miles described in a second, on the scale murked on the lowest line. P. 514. I Fig. a75. The places oſ the ascending nodes oſ all the planets, marked on une halſ of the ecliptic, upposed to be extended in a straight line; together with tho inclinations oſ their orbit. The line marked F. F. E. E, shoms the situation oſthe ſixed ecliptic. P. 514. . 5F PLATE XXXIII. Fig. 476b. A The appearance oſ Venus, ſrom Dr. Ilerschel: B, C, ſrom Mr. Schroeter. P 514. Fig. aT. A.. D, the appearance oſ Mars, ſrom Dr. Herscliel. The figures are ioverted, as they appear in the astronomical teluscope. P. 514. Fig. a78. A, B. Thè appearunce oſ Jupiter, with his belts, ſrom Dr. Herschel. P. 514. I Fig. 479. The appenrance oſ Saturn, with his ring, from Dr. Herschel. P. 514. : l Fig. 480. The appearance oſ the moon, in an inverted position. The ſigure is copied ſrom Mr. Nicholon's plate, the reſerences from Cassini und Ialande. Eq. is the place oſ the moon's equator. P. 514. Numes of the spots, uccording to Riccioli, and Hevelius. ; 1 Grimaldus or Palus Mureolis. 2 Galileus Monus Audus S Aristarchus Mons Porphyrites 4 Keplerus Inca puludosa 5 Gassendus Mons Caturactes 6 Schikardus Mons Troicus 7 Harpulus Insula sinus hyperborei B Heruclides Caput mulieris () Vuleanus i 9 Lansbergius Insula Malt 10 Reinoldus Mons Neptunus 11 Copernicus Mous Aetna 12 Helicon Insula erroris 13 Capuanus Regio Cussintis 14 Bullinldus Insula Creta 15 Eratosthenes Insula Vuloanin 16 ſimocharis Insula Corsica 17 Plato Locus niger major 18 Archimedes (a) Aratus 19 Insula sinus medii 20 Pitatus à1 Tyclo Mare mortuum Mons Sinui . 22 Eudorm Mons Carpathes 2 Aristoteles Mons Serrorum 24 Maunilius Insula Berbicus 25 Mencluus Byzantium 20 Hermes Mons Bodinus 27 Dionysius (d; Albategnius 20 Plinius Promontorium Acherusin 30 S. Theophilus Muns Moschi 31 Fracastorius Lacus Thospitis 32 Censorinus Promontorium acutum à3 Messala 34 I Promontorium Somnii 35 Proclus Mons Corax 56 Cleomedes Montes Riphaei 57 Suellius Mons Parnpumisus 38 Petavius l Petra Sogdinna 50 Lungrenus Insula major 40 Turuntius Sinus Phusianus A Mare Humorum B Mare Nubium C Muare Imhrium D Mare Nectaris E Mure Tranguilitatis F Blare Sereniatis G Mure Inccunditatis I Mare Crisium Fig. 181.. a83. The satellites of Jupiter, Saturn, and the Genrgian planet, at their proper distances, in proportion o the diameters of the planets, shown on the sume scale P. 514. Fig. 181. The figure oſ the tail oſthe comet oſ 1680, represented in the plune oſ its orbit, ſrom Newton. ADB is the earth's orbit, C and D are the ſirst und lust appearances of the tail, und EF is the line oſ the nodes. P. 514. Vig. a65. A, B, Two suecessive appearances oſ ibe comet of 1723, ſrom Lord Paisley. P. 514. XXIV. Fig. 402. Venus is at her greatest elongation or m distance ſrom the sun A, when situnted as at B, with respect 10 the earth at C; aud she is statiuuary at D, when she is moving with the same velocity us ſhæ curth, with ct to the direction oſ the eartl's motion, the line E D being then more oblique, with respect to a ſixed line, than either heſore or P. 597 Fig. a98. ABCD is the nppurent path oſ Venus ſor the yeur 1806, supposing the un E to revolve round the earth F. The place oſ the sun and plunet is markei ſor every ſour weeks. P. 507. Fig. 494. The apparent path of Satum in ſhe heavens ſor the yenr ĩEO6, re to its proper place with respect io the eclintic. The ſigures àlenote the places ut the begiuning oſ ench mouth. P. 52T. Fig. 105. The emall figures represent the phuses oſ the mnon in diſſerent parts oſ her orbit. The smallor detachæd ſignre⸗ show the appearance oſ the moon, as scœn ſrom the enrth; the lurger ones, those oſ the earth nt the same limes, ns seen ſrom the moon, which are nlways the reverse o the moon's uppearance. At A the mnon is neW; B is the ĩræt quarttr; C the ſull moon, and D the last quarter. A and C are sumetimes called he sy7;ãies, and ſi and D ihe quadratures. P. 508. Fig, 106, A, the moon pas:ing through the eartiVs glhnttow; which is distinguished into three parts, the perſeet shadow, the true shndow, and the penumbra. At B and C the moon is shown pasing through the section of the shadow. P. 500. Vig, 407. The puth oſ the moon's shadow passi over the eorth, in the sular clipse oſ 1764, the eart Leing supposed at the sume time jo revolve on its axis. The line A B is the prt in which the eelipse peared annular, CD heing the brendth of Ihe hole shadow or penumbru. P. u0. Fig. a08. The shadow of the moon falling on the earth. The true shaduw not extending here to the eorth, the cone ſormed by the continuution oſ its outlines marks the extent oſ the paris in which the eclipse appears nunulor. . 590. Fig. 07. The terminat on oſ the moows dise in a solar eclipsæ. From Dr. lHerschel. P. 599. Fig. 500. The apparent magnitudes oſ ihe plancis, that oſ the sin or moun being suppored cquæl  ꝶ circle a ſoot in dinmeter: where there are rWo ſęues, one oſ them shows the menn npparent mugnitude, and the other the greatest. V. 531. Fig. 5301. Fhe apparent nngnitude oſ the sun, ns reen ſrom the diffcrent planets: ſor Mercury, the muęmituile ĩs shown by that oſ the earth in ig. a7. I. hu5. PLATE ſi, so AB hein g the earl's axis, the circle ACB ĩs the meridian o ſihe place C, and C D repreuts the plane of ils horizon. P. 587. Fig. 508. The eſſect ol the obliquiy of the ecliptic in the equation oſ time is hown hy ũhe diierence oſ ungles ABC and D BE, ubtended at the pole I y equal portions oſ the oblique eircle A E. P. bus. Fig. 504. A Bbeing rallel to se toni's ai the 19 planes passing through it, at equal augolar distance, a the circle h perpeniicular 6 it, the hour Lines oſ an equatorial dial, and on the horizontul urſuce F those uſ a horizuntal dial. P. 558. Viy 505. A mothod oſ construetiug a dinl on any given plane. ABC is the elevation oſ uie pole, ur more -enerally, the angle which the surſuce makes with gnomon A B. The cireles are divided into cquul puris, and 1, ꝗ, 3, 4,L,  are ithe hour lines, B being the place oſ the gnomon. The reasun oſ this construetion will appear by comparing the cirele in the last ſigure with tſhe ellipsis which is ſormed on the Liorizontal surſace. P. 558. Vig. 506. A dial ſor a pointed gnomon, or obelise, dravn on a hot zontul surface. P. 588. Vig. 507. A nural quadrant, wũh is telescope; Ali ĩs the jlumb line, ſor adjusting the instrument, and C the counterpoisc ſor the telescope. . 598. Iig. 508. A portble transit instrument. A und B nre screns ſor adjusting the axis hy a vertionl and a horizontal motion; CD is a spirit level, which may occusionally he hung on the tel hy ihe pins E und F. G is a small gradunted arch, 1ò be viewæd through the microscope II, ſor making elevations oſ a ſew degrees. P. 519. Fig. 59. A trunsit circle, rosambling Mr. Wollaston's, with n horizonel circle, by means oſ which hoth altitudes and ammutls muy be mea-uredl. A is n microscope ſor viewing the pluml line, B uuother tor reaiding oſſ the divisions ol the horizunl cirele; C and D ãre spirũt lvelss V. bau. Fig. 510. A zenith sector, with its telescope, which has usually a reſecting prism, like that or the Newrenian tlscope, ſfor ts cyerlnss. P. à11 ig. 511. The imuriue octint, introducer hy ladley. The mode oſ taking the conimon or ſront ĩlhervatinm, iæ slin by the lincs drmen to the sun and noon: ũne back olscriation by the two sturss A ĩs a durk gli-s PLATES XX) Plite XNXVI. Fig. 517. Proieetion oſ the constellation: oſ the noriſern henis ꝑhere un ithe plne of Ue equutor. V. aui, à67. æ plav  the Avi Lm at udniæt ſn-s lav ita pla- æ irn the  ninu the ?ct ⸗ vurt. l, st- ltvu ui iv ' batn - nbu i lutv ià r nm xnxn Suelte ?ubEv ſ tahn nmIindon 1 ſulv iſæ im height of the compsund tiãe, and the angles BA C and ACB its distance ſrom the lunar and olar tides respectively. P. 585. Fig. 523. The two unequal tides represented by the clevation oſ the ellipsis above the smaller circle may he considered as composed oſ two equal tides cut of by the dotted circle, and the single tide between the two circles; as the tides B and C muke the unoqual tides at D. P. 587. Fig. 524. The ſirst and second curves represent two equal semidiurnal and one diurnal tide, which would make together two unequal tides: the third and ſourth the same tides six hours more advanced: and when these are combined, tho first and third destroy each other, but the second and ſourth tugether compose the fifth, or a large diurnal tide. P. 587. Fig. 525. A tho ancient system oſ the world, adopted by Ptolemy. B the arrangement supposed Ey some other astronomers. P. 500. Fig. 526. The Egyptiun system of the world. P. 590. Fig. 52T. The system oſ the Pythagoreans, and oſ Copernicus. P. 502. Fig. 528. The mode oſ representing the inequalities oſ the celestinl motions employed by Ptolemy, the small eirele being earried round the cireumſerence oſ the larger, while the luminary revolves in it, æ0 as to desrribe the dotted curve. P. 05. Vig. 500. The Trchone system oſ the world. Isu7. Vig am. lie repulsive ſoree oſ two mrtieles of nutier, stuned at iie distance A I or A is repreenicd Iy the onluates or perpendiculas I D, C E, dravn 15 the cuive DE, suppo:ing the ſorcæ tnbe mſæely ns ihe distunce; hut the law oſ the ſoreæ pe  be imure nearly reprœsented hy a curve like VFE. The line DVG rhous the magiitude oſ the enhesire ſurce, which uvercumes the repul-n at the distance A G, and is hnlanced by it when the partieles atrrive at the distunce A li or  ll. The dotied lines n ſi snt ſhe nnture oſ the chunges made in the lines l L IF ũ, and FH, by an elevaton oſ tem;erature. . 6510. i : Fig. 501. The general direction oſ the coliesive force nctiig m n purticle oſ a liquid at A beng representul hy AB or AC, thut oſ the repubive ſorce will be DA or EA, and in onler to maintãin the equilbrium, the forees BF and C ũ, making rether ll 4, must be supplied by the pressure or renction oſ the interual paris.. P. 620. Fig. 532. A. The travsverse section of a drop, suppo:cũ tu be oſ considerable length, and ſiat at the æides: the curvature oſ the outline being every where Inoptional 10 its distunce ſrom the horizontal line AB. H; a round drop, the concavity at the horzontal line being equal to the com exity Which would he ſound by cutting oſ the drop horiztntally; the sum or diſſerence oſ the curvatures heing every here proportional o ithe distance ſrom this line. V. 691. Fig. 553. The solid AB posessing halſ the attractive nower oſ the liquid CD, the surſace oſ te liquid will remain horiontal: ſor the attractions will be re presented by DA, DE, und DC; unil oſ these D A and DE muke DB, and D Ii und DC muke DF, which is in n vertical direction. Iſ the æoſid he more nttructive, the ſorces will be combined nearly us at G, and iſ less nttractive, as at l, P. 629. Fig. 53a, The ſorm oſ the surſace oſ a liqnid in contact with » plune and vertical side oſ a æolid ulich is wetter by it. The height oſ the nscent of water ĩs ohout one ſourth oſ that which ĩs here represented. P. 622. Fig. 5:35. Ihe form oſ the surface oſ a ſiquid elevated betueen two plates which meet at A, and are at à little distance ſfrom each oſher at l; ahout one third of un inch, rupposing the liquid o he water. P. 623. Fig. 516. The heiht at which water will stund in tubes oſ the ſorm and magnitude vhich ure here reprrted, P 625. E XI. city being ſirst communicated to the insulated plate A, th mocable plate B is brought near it, 5hile the win C touches the pin D s0 às in ſorm a communięation with the earth; the platæ it is then made 0 communicute with E, which is insulated, and tands near the plate F, which enables it to recve almost the while uſ thie electricity brought àt each alternation by li; uni whun the hu. F is removet ſrum the neighourhood oſ E, this plate hecomes stronghy elurged. o59. Fig. 568. A revolving doubler, on ihe principle aſ Mr. Beunets instrument. The fixl and insulateũ plate A ſirst receives the elecirieity;, and when the movenble plate B >tanũs opposite 1”it, it receives by n wire from the stund oſ the instrument C the opposiſelectricity; when it is hrought onpom. tn D, this plute is mude to communicate ith the stand by tha wire I, ana nequ/ n charge sinilar aud nearly õqual toſthat of A. When B come- agam 10 A, the wire V forming a communication hetween A, and D, nearly the whole charge o buth these plutes is brought int and I recelves a charge almost twice as groat as at rnt. . . i i i Fig. 564. Mr. Coulomi's electricul balance. The needle A is made oſ silk, covered with aling wax; it suppurts, at the end B, æ boll oſ the pith oſ elder unother similar ball being fiued at C; the ioree of attractiun or repulsion ĩs nscerta med by the torsion oſ the wire AD, which is mensured hby n graduated cirele E. P. 689. j Fig. 565. Mr. Henley's quadrant electrometer; ĩt is made oſ hox wood, suppu.d by metal; the hall is of cork, the gruduated arc oſ ivoryy P. G83. j Fig. 566. A, Mr. Bennes old leoſ electrometer; B, a piece oſ excited realing wax held over it, ſor ditinguishing the clectricity. Instcad oſ ih] pieces oſ rulũ leaſ C, we may subsſtute Mr. Cavallo's pith balls D, or the straws E, employed by Volta. P. 685. Fig. 567. Mr. Lane's discharging clectrometer. The distance oſ the bulls A,  is neasured by the turns of the screw on the seale C; and the part7 oſ a turn are ascertnined hy the graduated circle D. I. õus. VFi”. 568. A dischurger ſor a buttery. When the tĩon oſ the bulls A, I, hecomes greater than the weight oſ a wire vhich pusses through a perſoration in the hnlls, they sæprate, and the hall C, descending to I ſorms n cmunicalion, which completes the Ccircu t so that the ⸗ pusscs through any substance laced at E. P. 6⸗. , Fig. 560. The form oſ the curves which show the direction oſ the magnetic needle, in consequence oſ the attraction and repulsion oſ two poles, situated at A und B. They are ſuund hy drawing the lines ACD, BED, s0 that the sum or diſerence oſ the purts AC BE, shall be always equul, ACE B being a semicircle: and the direction D F may be ſound by making AF 1o BI as the cube oſf AD to that of BD. P. 6ũs. Fig. 570. The arrangement of iron ſilings in the neighbourhood oſ a magnet. P. Gun. Fig. 571. The purticle oſ iron A B, lying on a eard neurly over the magnet C, nssumes, when the cord is thaken, first the position D, then, ſalling to E and F, is leſt a little ſurther ſrom the magnet than at ſirst. P. G89. Fig. 573. An azimuth compass. The hox is turned round, until the shadow oſ the thread A B or AC ſulla on the line CD: the position of the neeile is then nscertnined by that oſ the card E, which is ſixed on it. The compass is kept always in  horizontal position, by meuns oſ a double suspension on the gimbals EG. Instend oſ this suspension, Mr. MCulloch makes the bottom oſ the box in the ſorm oſ a hollow cone, restng on a point, and londed with a weirht, which brings PLATES X Fig. 5823. A chart oſ the world, on Mereators projection, ſrom Arrowsmith; with the dip and variation of the compass, principally ſrom Churehman, ſor the Fig. -;rub tv ſ doleion ſomlen  ſulv iòæ dareph