OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. BIBLIOTHEQUE do la Facultd do Uidologio DE VSCLISE LIBRE LAUSANNE OF . NATURAL PHTLOSOPHY, BEING HEADS OF LECTURES ELIVERED IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURG BY JOHN PLAYFAIR, PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINEURGH, FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON, SECRETARY OF THE ROYAL BOCIETY OF EDINBEURGH, AND HONORARY MEMBER OF THE ROYAL MEDICAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH. VOL. I. THIRD EDITION. EDINBURGH: NTED FOR ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE AND COMPANY, EDINBURG AND LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME & BROWN, AND CADELL & DAVIES, LONDON. Tuesæ Outlines are offered to the Public, from a persuasion that it will be found of use to have the elementary truths of Natural Philosophy brought into a small compass, and, though not accompanied with demonstrations, yet arranged in the order of their dependence on one another. I have endeavoured to express them concisely, and vwith all the clearness and accuracy in my power, referring, at the same time, to the works in which they are more fully treated of, as often, at least, as these works were not 80 common as to be already in the hands of every hody. Demonstrations have heen occasionally added, when it appeared that an improvement might be made on those which are usually given. The Second Volume treats entirely of Astronomy; and the arrangement of the propositions in their natural or logical order, has been particularly attended to. The great variety of the subject, or rather, of the aspects under which the subject appears, renders this a matter of some difficulty; and, accordingly, there are very few, even of the best treatises of Astronomy, in which the arrangement is not obviously defective. The Systeme du Monde of LA PLACE, and the Traitè Elementaire of Bior, are almost the only exceptions to this rulee. To both of these I am under great obligations; to the first in particular,the most valuable and philosophical compend, I believe, which exists at present of any science. In Physical Astronomy I have been more full than any where else; and on the subject oſ Central Forces, have given all the investigations. The Third Volume is intended to contain the Principles of Opties, together with those of Electricity and Magnetism. This will complete a work which lays claim to no other merit, but the very humble one of expressing elementary truths in a distinct manner, and placing them in a right order. EDINBURGH CoLLEGE æ5th October 1814. NOTE. Seqt. 7. 1819. This Edition is printed from a copy prepared for the 'ress by the Author. Eprror VOLUME FIRST. N. . - Page Properties of Matter, A S. Of the Measures of Motion, First Law of Motion, Second Law of Motion, Motion equably accelerated or retarded, Motion of Projectiles, Motion, accelerated or retarded by a variable Force - H ? S ' ' ' õ CS. Of ihe Centre of Gravity, . Motion of the Centre of Gravity, The Mechanical Powers. æ The Lever, . The Balance, . . The Wheel and Axle, The Pulley, easa The Wedge, - Page 86 The Screv, - 89 The Funicular Machine, - 92 SECT. 8. Friction, - - 98 4~. Mechanical Agents, - - 107 DB5. Motion of Machines, - II6  6. Descent of heavy Bodies on plain and curved Surfaces, - 126 Centre of Oscillation, . 180 Heavy Bodies descending on a Cycloidal Surface, - 184 . Rotation of Bodies. Rotation about a Fixed Axis -I6 Rotation on a Moveable Axis -148 PPENDIX (to MECHANIOS). Construction of Arches. - 3 147 Strength of Timber, lE E 157 YDROSTATICS. æi .m SECT. I. Pressure of Fluidss 168 à. Solid Bodies floating on Fluidsss I76 3. Phenomena of Cspiillsy Tubes, 1184 YDRAULICS. SECT. I. Fluids, issuing through Apertures in the Bottom or Sides of Vesselss 194 2. Conduit Pipes, and open Canals, 199 28. Percussion and Resistance oſ Fluids, 206 4t. Undulation of Fluids, or the Formation of Ware ? . 21l Hydraulic Engines. Engines moved by the impulse of Water, Pq; Machines moved by the weight of Water, Machines moved by the re-action of Water, TICS. Heat, ; Equilibrium of Elastic Fluids, ICS. Air as accelerating or retarding Motion. Machines for raising Water, Steam-engine, Motion produced by Gun-powder, Bodies impelled by Currents in the Atmosphere, or by the Winds, Resistance of the Air to Projectiles, Air, as the vehicle of Sound. Vibration of Sonorous Bodies, Propagation of Vibrations through the Air, - Air as the vehicle of Heat and Moisture, - Wind, - Rain, OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. INTRODUCTION. SECT. I. I. Puizosornr is the knowledge of the general laws observed by the phenomena of nature, whether in the intellectual or material world. 2. In the material world, the action which takes place among bodies, either produces a permanent change in the internal constitution of those bodies, or it does not. In the former case, the phenomena belong to CHEMISTRY, in the latter to NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. The action of the same cause may, by a change of circumstances, pass from being an object of the one of these sciences to hecome an object of the other. The action of heat, when it expands or contracts the dimensions of bodies, belongs to Natural Philosophy; vhen the same power burns and consumes bodies, its action belongs to Chemistry. When it converts water into steam it may belong to either science. In all this ve exclude the consideration of the organic structure of bodies. 3. When from a comparison of a number of facts known from experiment or observation to be true, the existence of a more general fact is inferred, the inference is said to be made by INDUCTION. It is from induction that all certain and accurate knowledge of the laws of nature is derived. 4. When general principles or axioms have been established by induetion, we can often, by the applieation of mathematical reasoning, deduce conclusions from them, as clear and certain as the principles themselves. This great advantage which Natural Philosophy seems to possess almost exclusively, arises from the circumstance, that the action which it treats of, extends to large masses of matter, and to considerable distances, such as can be measured by lines and numbers. 5. The branch of knowledge which collects and classifies facts, is called Natural History. Natural History is here taken in its most general sense, such as it is understood by BAcoN; in common language its objects are confined to what are called the three kingdoms, the Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal. &6. We are said to eæplain a phenomenon, when ve shew it to be necessarily included in some ꝑhenomenon or fact already known, or supposed to be known; and we consider one phenomenon as the cause of another, vhen we econceive the existence of the latter to depend on some foree or power residing in the former. 7. A fact assumed in order to explain a certain set of appearances, and having no other evidence of its reality, but the explanation which it gives of those appearances, is called a HYPOTHESIS. 8. If the number of appearances explained is very great, or if the explanation is founded on facts known to be true from evidence independent of those appearances, the explanation is ealled a THEORY. A theory is often nothing else but a contrivance for comprehending a certain number of fucts under one expression. In the explanation of natural appearances, and in all induetive reasonings, Facts, though equally certain, may not be of the same value for the discovery of truth. Baco has classified facts, and explained their peculiar advantages as instruments of investigation, in the 2d book of the NovuM ORGANU. 9. When one system of events or appearances is similar to another, and when we infer that the causes in these to systems are also similar, we are said to reason from ANALOGY. Such reasonings will be more or less conclusive, accordimg as the similarity is more or less considerable. Explanations, therefore, or theories founded on analogy, may have all degrees of evidence, from the least to the greatest. Many theories are founded entirely on analogy. 10. When a theory has been discovered by induction, it may be made use of by reasoning in a reverse order, for discovering new facts, and predieting the result of new combinations. This will be best illustrated hy the examples that will occur in treating of Physical Astronomy. 1I. The evidence of a theory, increases with the number of facts which it explains, and the precision with whieh it explains them. It diminishes with the number of facts which it does not explain, and with the number of different suppositions that will afford explanations equally precise. In the analytical or induetive method of BacoN, the possible theories are all excluded but one or at most a small number, before the explanation is attempted. Novum Organum, Lib. 1I. cap. I6t. A theory may not deserve to be rejected, though it does not explain all the phenomena, if it explain a great number, and he not absolutely inconsistent vith any onee. A single fact, inconsistent with ⸗ theory, may be sufficient to overturn it. 12. In tracing the necessary connection of natural phenomena, this axiom is often of use: Nothing exists in any state that ĩs not determined by some REASON to be in that state rather than in any other. Hence, two things of which the conditions are determined by reasons that are precisely the same, are in all respects similar to one anotherr. Hence, al50, if there are two conditions, and no reason to determine a subject to be in one of them rather than another, ve are to conclude that it is in neither. This axiom has been called the principle of  4the SUFFICIENT REASON. It was used by ArcuIMEDES in his demonstration of some propositions in mechanics3 but it was first stated as a general principle of philosophic reasoning by LEIBNITZ. It may be used to great advantage for demonstrating the more simple propositions of geometry as vell as of mechanics. 18. Experiment is not only necessary in the investigation of truth, but ĩt ĩis useful for proving truths that have already been investigated. In this latter application of it, it serves three purposes: 1. It verifies the conclusion of our reasonings, and discovers whether any element has been left out, or any error committed in the course of the investigation. 11. It exemplifies the application of general principles to the explanation of particular facts. m. It impresses the truth both of the principles and the conclusion most strongly on the mind. Though an experiment can only prove a proposition in one particular case, yet from a combination of two or more experiments, such evidence oſ the general proposition may arise, as to fall little short of demonstration. I4. The study of Natural Philosophy is accomnied with great advantages. I. It extends mans power over nature, by explaining the principles of the various arts which he practises. 1I. It improves and elevates the mind, by unfolding to it the magnificence, the order, and the beauty manifested in the construction o the material vorld. uI. It offers the most striking proofs of the beneſicence, the wisdom, and the power of the CrEATORE. SECT. II. PROPERTIES OF MATTER. 15. Boor is a substance, extended in three dimensions, impenetrable, and moveable. Gravity or weight is often included in the deseription of body; it is left out here, because, though it appear to be universal, ve can conceive a substance vwithout gravity, which, nevertheless, should possess extension, impenetrability, and mobility. 16. By the Impenetrability of body is meant that no two particles of matter can at the same time occupy the same identical portion of space. a. If bodies could compenetrate, all matter might be united into any space, however small, or it might be all annihilated.—MuscHENBROEEX, Introd. ad Phil. Nat. vol. i. § 8l. b. The bodies that yield to pressure, and those that do not, serve equally to prove the impenetrability of matter.Boscovicu, Theoria, Phil. Nat. § 4l. 17. Body, heing extended, is divisible without limit, or, as it ĩs usually called, ad inſinitum, supposing that the instruments of division are mere mathematical lines or points. a. For it is easily proved, on this supposition, that the extension of lines ad infinitum, and their divisibility ad infinitum, are necessarily connected vith one another. 18. The actual division of body into parts, as the parts must be of a finite magnitude, must necessarily be limited; iĩt is, nevertheless, capable of being carried to such extent, that the parts shall be of ineredible minuteness. a. We have examples in the gilding of silver-wire, in the propagation of odours, in the colours produced by chemical solutions, &c.REAUMUR, Mém. Acad. des Sc. 1718, p. 204. BovLE de Mirà Subtilitate Efjluviorum. MUSCHENBROEE, ubi supra, §1ẽ. 19. All bodies are inclosed by one or more boundaries, and therefore possess figure; they have also the capacity of receiving an indefinite variety of figures. a. Bodies differ in their capacity for receiving and maintaining different figures. b. Some receive new figures with difficulty, but maintain them easily. Such are the bodies usually called solid. Others receive any figure easily, but cannot maintain it without the assistance of other bodies. Such are the bodies usually called ſfluid. e. Many bodies have figures, which, in their natural state, are peculiar to them. This is the case not only with plants and animals, but with certain mineral and chemical productions called Crystals, usually bounded by plain surfaces. 20. Motion, of which all bodies are susceptible, is the continued change of place. 2. It is a general law in the material world, that no body loses motion in any direction, without communicating an equal quantity to other bodies in that same direction; and conversely, that no body acquires motion in any direetion, without diminishing the motion of other bodies by an equal quantity in that same direction. What relates to the motion of bodies, will be considered more fully hereafter; it is mentioned here merely for the sake of order, as being part of the definition of Body. 22. The force with which the parts oſ hodies resist any endeavour to separate them is called cohesion. a. We may conceive a body to be made up of an assemblage of small indivisible particles or corpuscles adhering to one another, with forces that are greater as the distanre of the particles is lesss. These corpuscles are called the elements of body. b. Hardness, softness, tenacity, fluidity, ductility, are modifications of cohesion. c. Smooth surfaces may be made to cohere, by bringing them very close to one another; but, In general, cohesion cannot be produced between two bodies but by the intervention of fluidity. d. Cohesion is not a general property of body; it does not belong to elastic fluids, which are kept together by pressure or by gravity. e. Adhesion is sometimes distinguished from cohesion; the former being the force that connects the particles of liquids; the latter that which connects the particles of solidss They are no doubt modifications of the same force. 28. All bodies at the earth's surface, if leſt to hemselves, descend in straight lines towards that urſacee. This tendency or disposition to fall is alled weight. a. The weight of a given body may be employed to measure the veights of all other bodies. 24. The directions in which bodies fall in diffeent places of the earth, tend nearly to the centre f the earth. a. At points not very far ſrom one another on the surface, the directions in which hodies gravitate are nearly parallel, the distance of the earths centre being great in respect of the distance of the bodies from one another. If the distance is a nautical mile, that is, 6OV5 feet nearly, the angle made by the directions of gravity is one minute; i? 60 of those miles, it is a degree, &e. b. A plane at any place perpendicular to the line in vwhich bodies gravitate, is called a horizontal plane; and any plane passing through that line is called a vertical plane. 25. If we conceive the weight of bodies to he produeed by a force applied to each of their elementary particles, urging it downwards, this foree is called gravity. a. Gravity must be distinguished from Weight: the veight of a body is the produet of the gravity of a single particle by the number of particless Thus, i W be the weight of a body,  the gravity of a single particlee N the number of particles, WæNX g 26. In all bodies the foree of gravity is the same. a. This is proved by the fact, that all bodies, vhatever be their weight, fall at the same rate to the ground, vhen the resistance of the air is removed. 27. The weights of two hodies are to one another as the quantities of matter in those bodies. a. Let  and W be the weights oſ two bodies, M and M their quantities oſ matter, v v ũ The quantity of matter in a body is called its mass. 28. Small empty spaces are disseminated through all hodies in greater or less abundance, and are called pores. This property of bodies is also ealled porosity. a. In solids, the pores can be seen sometimes by the naked eye, and almost always by the microseope. b. In fſluids, the dissemination of vacuity through the mass is proved by experiments, though it is not perceived by the eye. MuscHENBROEE, § 9l. N 3. c. The ratio of the quantity of matter to the quantity of empty space contained within the superficies of any body is wholly unknown. It is probable, that even in the densest bodies, the quantity of solid matter is very small, compared vith the quantity of empty spacee NEWTONs Optics, Book 11. Part iĩi. Prop. S. d. From the porosity of bodies, it follows, that the particles of matter are not on all sides in contact vith one anotherr. They may perhaps only touch one another in a few points. 29. If in two bodies of which the bulks are B and B, and the weights W and W, the weights be proportional to the bulks, or æ 5, the space occupied by the pores of these bodies bears the same proportion to that which is filled by solid matter. Bodies oſf this kind are said to have the same density. 80. The weight of a body divided by its bulk, V is called the specific gravity of the body. a. The veight of a body, in strictness, cannot be divided by its bulk, the two quantities being dissimilar, and incapable of comparisonn. But if ve express the bulk of all bodies numerically, by referring them to the same unit, a cubic inelr for example; and the weight of all bodies, by referring them to a similar unit, the weight of a cubic inch of water, any number in the first series may be divided by the corresponding number in the second: the quotient will be the specific gravity of the body to which the numbers belong. Hence the specific gravity multiplied by the bulk, gives the weight; or iſ S is the specific gravity, BX Sæ. 14 OUTLINES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 81. A ſluid is a body so constituted, that its parts are all ready to yield to the action of the least pressure. 39. Elasticity is a power by which a body, when its figure is altered by the action of any force, resumes that figure as soon as the force has ceased to act. This power is found both in solid and fluid bodies. 88. Light is something which has the power of rendering objects visible to the eye. Whether light is a substance, or merely a species of movement impressed on a certain substance, will be considered hereafter. In respect of light, bodies are either luminous, opaque, or transparent: Luminous, when they shine, or give out light without having received it from other bodies; opaque, vhen they obstruct light; and transparent, when they transmit it. 84. All bodies are subject, by expansion and contraction, to change their magnitude or volume, according to certain laws, and within certain limits. When expanding, they produce in us (under certain conditions) the sensation of heat; and when contracting, the sensation of ecold. They are therefore said to become hot or to acquire heat in the former case, and to become cold or to lose heat in the latter. 85. Certain minerals have a power of attracting iron, and of communicating to pieces of that metal the power of attracting and repelling one anotherr. The power thus communicated is called magnetism. Bodies having magnetism have also a tendency, hen left free, to point toward a certain quarter of the heavens. This is called polarity. Magnetism is peculiar to iron, and to two other metals, nickel and cobaltt. Even in the bodies where it resides naturally, it is not always of the same intensity. 36. Some hodies acquire by frietion the pover of attracting and repelling certain other bodies. This pover is called electricity. 87. The chemical action of metallic substances on one another, produces a like tendency in bodies vhich communicate with those substances according to certain conditionss This power is ealled galvanism. a. The four properties or powers last mentioned agree in this peculiarity, that they are communicated from one body to another by mere apposition without any visible admixture, or transfusion perties of body. Whether a passage of some invisible substance from the one body to the other is not to be inferred in such instances, will hereafter be considered. b. As the action of bodies on one another generally involves motion, the properties or laws of motion constitute one of the main objects oſ natural philosophy. The doctrine which treats of those properties is, however, modified by the constitution of the bodies to which motion is communicated. 388. When hodies are free to obey the impulses communicated to them, the scienee which treats of their motion is called DYNAMICS. a. Dynamies is the most elementary branch oſ the doctrine of motion, and the most general in its principless. The term signifies literally the doctrine of power; power or force being known to us only as the cause oſf motion, and being measured by the motion it produces. b. In Dynamies, we abstract entirely from the figure of the body moved, and treat of it as if its matter were all concentrated in a single point. 39. When hodies, whether by external cireumstances, or by their conneetion with one another, are not left at liberty to obey the impulses given, the principles of dynamies must receive a certain modification before they can be applied to them. The seience of dynamies, thus modified, is called MECHANICS. a. According to this distinction, the motion of a body falling Areely to the ground belongs to Dynamies; the motion of the same body descending on an inclined plane, belongs to Mechanics, &e. . The doctrine of Machines belongs to mechanies; for in every machine, the connection of the parts prevents them from immediately obeying the impulses which they receive. 40. When the hodies to which motion is communicated are fluid, another modification of the principles of dynamics takes place, which constitutes the science of HYDRODYNAMICS. In each of the three sciences just named, there are cases where the forces balance one another, and produce, not motion, but rest. These cases in dynamics and mechanies constitute a particular branch, to which the name of Statics has been givenn. The similar cases in fluids form the branch of hydrodynamies, called Hydrostatics. Hydrodynamics is also subdivided, according as the fluids are incompressible, like water, or elastic, like zæ 41. AsTRoONOMY is the science which deseribes the phenomena of the heavenly bodies; and PHYSICAL ASTRONOMY is the part of that science which applies the principles of Dynamies to usplain those phenomena. 42. OPTICS is the scienee which treats of the properties of Light, and of the laws of Vision. DYNAMICS. SECT. I. OF THE MEASURES OF MOTION. 43. Waeæ a body changes its place continually, it is said to MOVE, or to be in MOTION. 44. A moving body cannot pass from one point of space to another without passing through every intermediate pojnt; that is, whatever be the path it deseribes, it must interseet all the planes that can pass any how in the interval between the two points. 45. The ideas of Space and Time are both necessarily involved in the idea of motion. 46. Time is conceived as a quantity consisting of parts which can be compared with one another. 47. Two events which are determined by circumstances precisely the same, are conceived to happen in equal portions of time. a. A stone vill fall to the ground from a given height in the same space of time to-day that it did yesterAay, or that it will do to-morrow, or at any future period. It is not necessary that the stone should be of the same weight, for, as has been already proved, the weight oſ the falling body does not affeet the time of ĩtsdescent (?6). It is on this proposition, generalized and applied to the vibrations of a pendulum or a halance, that the going of a elock or vatch ĩs taken for a measure of time. Thus it is on the principle of the sufficient reason that time is divided into equal portions. b. The imperfections of mechanism require, however, that our chronometers should be frequently checketl by a comparison with the motion of the heavenly bodies; but as the circumstances that may influence the duration of the events are not easily discovered in the case of those bodies, it has required the highest improvements in science to derive an exact measure of time from astronomical observation. 48. Time eonsidered as a quantity increasing or ment or comparison of its parts, is called Absolute Time: when subjected to measurement or reckoning of any kind, it is ealled Relative Time.The least portion of time that we ean measure is about one-fourth or onefifth of a second; yet, were ve to trace the progress of nature minutely, a hundred or even a thousandth part of a second would be found to be distinguished by great changes. 49. The velocity of a moving body, or the rate of its motion, is said to be uniform, when the lines it passes over (or, as it is usually expressed, the spaces it describes) in equal times, are all equal to one another. a. In measuring the velocities of bodies, it is convenient to take a certain portion of time ſor the unit, in terms of vhich all other portions of time are to be expressed. The unit here assumed is one seeond. 50. The space which a body moving with a uniform velocity passes over in any time, is had by multiplying the time into the velocity, that is, by multiplying the number of seconds the motion has continued into the space moved over in one second. a. Hence if S be the space passed over in the time T, vith the uniform velocity V, (ll of them being expressed numerically), S VXT. 51. In uniform motions, therefore, the velocity is equal to the space divided by the time, or Væ : 52. In uniform motions also, the time is equal to the space divided by the velocity, orTæ A In all these theorems T is expressed in seconds, and V in some known measure of length, the same in which S is also expressed. 58. The velocity of a body is sometimes estimated in a direction different from that in which iĩt actually moves. Thus, (fig. 1.) if while a body B moves along the line AC, a perpendicular BD be continually dravn to the line AE, which makes with AC a given angle, the velocity with which D moves along AE is called the velocity of B in the direction AE. Db54. The velocity of a body moving in a given direetion, is to ĩts velocity estimated in any other direction, as radius to the cosine of the angle vhich the two directions make with one another; or if V be the velocity of the body,  the angle which the path of the body makes with another Iine, V cos  is the velocity reduced to the direetion of that line. ] Iſ S be the space described by the body in its own path, the space described by the perpendicular in the other line vwill be S cos ⸗. Hence also if the velocity of the body in its own path is uniform, it will be uniform vhen reduced to any other direction. 55. The change which any variable quantity undergoes in an infinitely small portion of time, is called the Momentary Increment of that quantity. Thus if S is the space described by a moving hody in the time ?, and if V be its velocity, supposed variable, at the end of the time ?, iſ we suppose ? to be increased by an indefinitely small instant, the change of S and of V in that instant are called their Momentary increments. The increments are denoted by the same etters that express the variable quantities, with a point ovęr them. Thus S, V, T, are the momeniary increments of S, V and T. Though the variable quantitios may decrease as vell as increase, the momentary change is called an Increment in both cases, but ĩs accounted negative vhen the quantity diminishes. 56. Though the velocity of a body be variable, it may at any point be taken as uniform for an indefinitely small portion of time, and the inerement of the space will be, just as in the ease of uniform motion (47.), equal to the velocity multiplied into the indefinitely small portion of time, during which the motion is supposed uniform. Thus, if S be the increment of the space, ? the corresponding increment of the time, and V the velocity, S  Vi; hence =5 t I 58 t 2/ & These formulæ apply to motion of every kind, whether accelerated or retarded, and express generally the relation between the velocity, the increment of the space, and the increment of the time. 57. The quantity of motion in a moving hody is estimated by the produet of the mass, or quantity of matter, multiplied by the velocity. The quantities of motion in two hodies are the same, vhen their velocities are inversely as their masBS. If M and M be the masses of two bodies, V and V their velocities; i M: M':: V: V, the quantities of motion are equal, for M x VM xV. 58. When one body changes its placè relatively to another, it is said to have a relative motion with respeet to that other body. Two bodies if they move with equal velocities toward the same side, in the same or in parallel lines, will have no motion relatively to another. If two bodies move with equal velocities in the same straight line, but in opposite directions, their relative motion is the sum of their real motions; if in the same direction, it is the difference of their real motions. The same is to be said of their relative velocities. The use of the signs + andbrings the two parts of this and all similar propositions under one enunciation. 59. The path of one moving body relatively to another is determined, by supposimg the latter to stand still in any point of its path, and by inquiring in what line the other must move, and with what velocity, so that it may approach to the former (supposed at rest) or recede from it, at the same rate, and in the same direction, that it actually does when they are both in motion. SECT. II. FIRST LAW OF MOTION. A BODY must continue for ever in a state oſ or in a state of uniform and reetilineal moiſ it be not disturbed by the action of an ex1 cause. If the body ĩs at rest, it must remain at rest; for if there is no action of another body, there can be rothing to determine it to move in one direetion more than in another. If the body is in motion, it will continue to move in the same direction; for there is nothing to determine its defſlections to be in one line more than in another line. lilll Lastly, it cannot change its velocity; for if its velocity change, that change must be according to some function of the time; so that if C be the velocity which the body has at any instant, and ? the time counted from that instant, V the velocity at the end of the time , the relation between V, C, and ? must be expressed thus, V=C+ A im4 Bt+, &e. Nov, there is no condition involved, in the nature of the case, by which the coefficients A, B, &e. can be determined to be of any one magnitude rather than of any other; for by the supposition, there is no other body which acts on the given body, and which, by any relation to it, can afford an equation for de8 termining A or B, &e.; each of these coeſficients is therefore either indeterminate, or it is equal to nothing; but no one of them can be indeterminate, or can admit oſ inmumerable values, otherwise V itself would be indeterminate, and might have more values than one at the same instant, vhich is impossiblee. A and B, &e. must thereſore be each equal to 0, so that V=Cc6C6; in other words, the velocity remains uniform. ALEMBERT has given a different demonstration of this, Dynamique, chap. Iree See also another by EvuLER, Mechanica, tom. I. § 63. his proposition is the first law oſ motion, and, together with the proposition § 2I. constitutes what is termed the INERTTA or INACTIVITY of matter. The inertia has been considered by some philosophers as merely the expression of a law of human thought, by which we are determmed, vhen ve see a change, to infer the action of a causee This seems to be inaccurate. That a change never happens in the motion of any body, without an equal and opposite change in the motion of some other body, is as much a fact, independent of the mind that pereeives it, as impenetrability, eohesion, or any other phenomenon of the material world. If a body move in a curve, the continued action of an external force must be inferred: if that action were to cease at any point, the body would eontinue its motion in a straight line touching its curvilneal path in that point. . The cause of motion is denominated Foree, n force is always measured by the efſeet, that is, by the motion which it produces in a given time. a. Two forces are said to be represented by two lines, when the motions which they singly produce are in the directions of those lines, and proportional to them. 62. Let a body at A (fig. 2.) be acted on by two forces at the same instant, one of which aeting alone, would cause it to move uniformly over AB, in a given time; and the other acting alone, would cause it to move over AC, at right angles to AB, in the same time. The velocity of the body in the one of these direetions, will not be changed by the force impelling it in the other. For if the motion of A in the direction AB, is accelerated by the foree AC, it will be retarded by the action of the opposite force AC'; but it must also be accelerated by AC, for AC and AC are alike situated in respect of AB. Now, this is absurd; therefore, &e. The veloeity of a body in the direction of a line different from its own path, is measured as in § 58. 68. If the lines which each of two forces, acting singly, would have caused a hody to describe in the same time, be at right angles to one another, the line which it will deseribe in that time, when both the forces act on it at once, is the diagonal of the reetangle under the two first-mentioned lines. 64. If the linos which each of two forees acting singly would have caused a body to deseribe in the same time, make any angle whatsoever with one another, the line which the body will deseribe in that time, when both the forces act on it at the same instant, is the diagonal of the parallelogram mnder the two first-mentioned lines. a. This is the celebrated theorem known by the name of the coMPOSITION OF FORCES. The most remarkable demonstrations of it are by Da. BERNOULLI, Comment. Petrop. tom. .; DALEMBERT, Opuscules, tom. l. cinquidme memoire; LA PLACE, Mecanique celeste, tom. I. § I. PolssoN, Mecanique, liv. i. § 18. & 1I4. All these, though ingenious, are too ælaborate and difficult to be accounted elementary, and are, besides, very remote from the train of reasoning by which the truth was originally discovered. 65. If two ſorees be represented by the lines a and b, which contain an angle =2æ, the force compoundæd from them will be v +2abosæ?: for this is the diagonal which, in a parallelogram having the sides a and b, and the contained angle æ, subtends the supplement of ?. Also the sine of the angle which this diagonal makes with a, is æ b sin æ. vVr aabeosæ r & 66. If three forees which impel a body at the same time, be proportional and parallel to the three sides of a triangle, so that the angle contained by any two of them is the supplement of the angle eontained by the corresponding sides of the triangle, these forces will be in equilibrium. a. The converse of this is also true, viz. that f the three forces are in equilibrium, they are proportional to the sides of a triangle, &e. b. When three forces are in equilibrium, any two of them is greater than the third. c. If three forces are in equilibrium, they are all in the same plane. 67. If there be an equilibrium between three forces, AB, AC, AE, (fig. 8.) and if from any point F, in the direetion of one of them, perpendiculars, FG, FH, be drawn to the other two, these perpendiculars will be inversely as the forces AC, AB, on the directions of which they fall. For if FC, FB are drawn, the triangles FAC, FAB are equal, as they are on the same base AF, and have equal altitudes, the perpendiculars from B and C on the diagonal AE. Therefore FG x AC æ FH XAB, or FG: FH:: AB: AC. 68. If three forces are in equilibrium, and if perpendiculars be drawn to their directions, intersecting one another in three points, the sides of the triangle so formed will be proportional to the forees, to the directions of which they are perpendieula. lil 69. If any number of forces act on a body, proportional to the sides of a rectilineal figure, and also parallel to them, in sueh a manner that the angle which the direetion of each forco makes with that of the contiguous force, be the supplement of the angle which the corresponding sides of the figure make with one another, these forees will be in equilibrium. ] This proposition ĩs true, whether the sides of the reetilineal figure be all in one plane or not. If they inclose a space, that space may be extended either in two or in three dimensions. 70. If there be an equilibrium among any number of forces, which are in different planes, but applied to the same point; if, through that point, three straight lines or axes, be drawn at right angles to one another, (one of them in a plane perpendicular to that of the other two), and if every force be resolved into parts in the directions of the three axes, then shall the sums of the opposite forces, in the direction of each axis, be equal to one another. This theorem furnishes three independent equations. a. If F, , 7, ?æ, &e. be the forces; a, a, a, dV, &e. the angles which they make with one of the three axes; 8, , , 8, &e. the angles which they make with another of the axes, and v, 4, v, v, &c. the angle which they make with the third, cos a +F cos  +F cos ? +F cos il +, &e. æ 0 cos 8 +F cos  + F cos 8 + F ws  +, &e. æ0 cos v + F cos v + F cos  + F cos  +, &e. æ0 When all the forces are in one plane, there are only two axes, and the equations are therefore reduced to the two fſirst. Also as à is in this case the complement of a, cos 3 sin a, and so of the rest; therefore the equations are . F cos a +F cos a' + F cos d , &. æ 0 and F sin a +F sma +F sin al 4, &. æ0 SECT. III. SECOND LAW OF MOTION. 7l Taæ action and reaction of bodies on one other are equal; in other words, the changes in e quantities of motion of the bodies which aet, d of the bodies which are acted on, are equal, and opposite directions. This comprehends two cases, according as the bodies act merely in consequence of the motions impressed on them, as in impulse or collision; or in consequence of some unknown ageney, which communicates motion from the one to the other, though they be distant, as in the cases of gravity, magnetism, &c. Both kinds of action are subject to the same law: In the first, the quantity of motion guined by the one body, is just equal to that lost by the other in the same direction: In the second, the quantity oſ motion gained by the one in any direction, is just equal to that gained by the other in the opposite direction. This last proposition ĩs only known from experience: the first may be proved from the nature oſ Body, and depends on the theorem in the next article. As we have already derived ſrom the first law of motion, the proposition usually reckoned the Third, viz. that the motion communicated, is always in the direction of the force impressed, § 62.; the laws of motion, according to this arrangement, are reduced to two. 72. If two bodies meet with velocities which are inversely as their masses, and are directly opposed to one another, they will remain at rest. If the bodies are equal, and have equal velocities, the proposition is evident. If A be double of B, but have only half the velocity of B; then A may be divided into two equal parts to B, each of which will have half the velocity of B. One of these striking against B, would destroy half its velocity; and the other striking against it, would destroy the other half. The same is true whatever multiple the one body be of the other, and therefore also whatever ratio the one bear to the other.Vid. D ALEMBERT, Dynomique, § 46. p. 51. Hence bodies that have equal quantities of motion, have equal forces, or equal powers to produce motion. 78. The quantity of motion in a system of bodies estimated in any given direction, is not 75. I A overtake B, the velocity lost by A is B (a—b), : AB2t). A8 and the motion lost by it is 5 A ſa—b) A+B AB (eb) A+B the velocity gained by B is and the motion gained by it is , the same that vas Iost by A. When B meets A,  becomes negative, and so the velocities gaines?t or lost, are B (o +1) (a +1) A+B A +ò) A+B 76. If the two bodies hefore eollision move in lines making a given angle with one another, their path after eollision may be found, on the principle, that there is no change made in the total quantity of the motion of bodies by their action on one another, in whatever direction their motion be estimated. If AC (ſig. 4.) represent the velocity and direction of the motion of A, BC the velocity and direction of the motion of B, beſore collision; CG their joint path, and their velocity after collision: Let BD and GF be perpendicular to AC; then, because maĩins the same, and also in the direction BD, ve have the equations, A.AC +B. DCæVA +B) FC; and B. BDG + B) FG. Hence CG- may be found. 77. When the bodies between which the collision takes place are elastie, or sueh, that after suffering an alteration in their figure by collision, they resume that figure with a foree which causes them to separate from one another, the result is considerably different from any of the preceding A body is accounted perfectly elastie, when, in restoring its figure, as much motion is produced, as was destroyed in altering it. 78. If A and B are two perfectly elastic bodies, moving with the velocities a and b in the same direetion, so that A overtakes B, the velocity of A . AaBa +2Bb after the stroke is and that 2 AacAb+ BbD BOb—Ab 2Aa oB,2X*8V8B The investigation turns on this; that the body which overtakes the other must lose twice as much velocity as if it were hard; and the other gain twice as much. If the bodies move in opposite directions, one of the velocities, as b, must be made negative. If the bodies are equal, the velocity of A after the stroke is = b, and that o B is /a. The bodies therefore exchange velocities. When the velocity of either body, after collision, comes out negative, e are to understand its direction to be contrary to that which is accounted aſfirmative. 79. The difference of the velocities of two perfectly elastic bodies, is the same before and after collision; but the body which had the greatest velocity before collision, has the least after it. If A and B be the masses of the bodies, a and b their velocities before collisionn, à and & their velocities aſter it; ab & a. Hence, also, a d b+V. Hence, too, the relative motion of the bodies is not changed by their collision. 80. In perfeetly elastic bodies, the sum of the products made by multiplying each of the bodies into the square of its velocity, is the same after eollision For as the quantities of motion beſore and aftercollision are the same, (7,) Aa + Bbb  Ad + BV, or A ay m BU 2Ddb); and since (79) a + a = V + 63, therefore A (?? a't) B 21.bb, or Aa + BbV:  Ad + Bb-. See another demonstration, in MACLAURINS Account of NEWTONS Discoveries, Book u. chap. v. § I2. 81. If between two unequal elastic hodies A and C, a third B be interposed; and if the least A, be made to strike with any given velocity on B, the motion communicated to C will be the greatest possible, vhen B is a mean proportional between A and C. It is easily shewn, from § 78. that the velocity communicated to C is 4 AB a 4 A a 4 A o  u 58) BC GC) 4 350 This fraction is a maximum, vhen the denominator AC B A and C are given, vhen B2= AC, or when B is a mean proportional between A and C. is a minimum, that is, since A+B i : 4 A e T he velocity oſ C 1S  +2 AC æC 4 A o : = A & õ; , and the motion of C N li 4 AC a A VC If the number of the bodies in geometrical progression be increased without limit, the quantity of motion eommunicated to the last, from a given quantity of motion in the first, however small, may also be inereased without limit. Notwithstanding this, as all the bodies move backward aſter collision but the last, if they form an increasing series, the sum of all the motions in the direction of the ſirst mover continues =A a. Also the sum of the produets of each body, into the square of its velocity, aſter collision, remains as it was before, equal to A aè. 82. If an elastic body strike against an immoveable plane, it will be refleeted from it, so that its direetion before and after collision will make equal angles with the plane, but toward opposite sides. If the elastic body strike on the plane CD ſig 5.) in the direction AB, it will be reſlected in the direction BE, so that the angles ABC, EBD shall be equal. 88., If two elastic spherieal bodies A and B, (fig. 6.) moving in directions, and with velocities represented by the lines AA, BB', come into contact vhen at A and B, and if AB be the line which joins their centres at that moment: Then if the velocity of A be resolved into two, AC, A'C, the one perpendicular to AB, and the other parallel to it; and iĩf the velocity o B be resolved in like manner into BD, BD; after eollision A will retain the velocity represented by AC, and B that represented by BD, unchanged; but the velocities A'C, BD, will be changed by the eollision, into others which may be found by article 78, and if these be a' and V; then the path of A after the stroke will be the diagonal of a rectangle under AE (AC) and a, and the path of B, the diagonal of a rectangle under BF BD) and V. Thus the paths of the bodies after collision are determined. 84. If the bodies are imperfeetly elastie, that is, if, in restoring their figures, they do not generate velocities equal to those which were destroyed in altering them, their motions after collision are determined, by supposing that the motion lost or gained is not double, but has a given ratio to that which would be gained or lost if the bodies were perfeetly hard, as at § 75, Vhen the bodies are imperſectly elastic, the sum of the products of the bodies into the squares of their velocities does not continue the same after collision that it was before itt. The quantity oſ motion, however, estimated in a given direction, remains the same in every case. here is another law which extends to the collision of all bodies, whether elastie, unelastie, or imperfectly elasticc. It is, that i each body be multiplied into the square of the change that has taken place in its velocity by the collision, the sum of these products is a minimum; that is, using the preceding notation A (a)? +B V)? ĩs the least possible, or is less in the case which actually takes place in nature, than if the difference between and a', b and V, were other than they aree This law was discovered by MauvrERTUIS. It is not demonstrated from principle, but is collected ſrom the preceding propositions by induction. SECT. IV. OF MOTION EQUABLY ACCELERATED OR RETARDED. 85. Waæ⸗ the motion of a body varies either in direction or velocity, as this cannot arise from any thing in the body itself, it must be aseribed to the action of an external cause or foree. The simplest case is, vhen the direction remãins the same, and vhen the velocity only varies. 86. When the velocity of a body changes, the cause of that change is called an accelerating or retarding force, and is measured by the change of the velocity produced in an indefinitely small portion of time, or by the inerement of the velocity divided by the inerement of the time. If F be the accelerating force,  the momentary increment of the velocity, 7 that of the time, F rã Hence also ? =F i, and i m æ . has been disputed, whether this expression oſf the ſorce be a necessary truth, or one known only from experience. DALEMBERT, Elemens de Phil. Melanges, tom. 4. p. 197. It seems, however, to be in ſaet a deſinition, rather than a theoremm. We have no distinet idea attached to the word FoRrCE, vhich we can compare with that conveyed by the formula ., in order to see whether there is a i necessary agreement between them or not. But as the quantity : is of great importance, and ſrequent recurrence in mechanical investigations, it is convenient to have a term to denote it. Though any term might be employed for this purpose; yet as the thing called PorcE, is conceived to be always greater, the greater the change of velocity vhich it produces in a given time, ] or to increase and diminish just as 7 does, ve may, vithout diverting the word Force from its usual signiſication, employ it to denote the quantity A or the momentary increment of the velocity divided by the correspondent increment of the time. ForcE, in dynamics, has, in reality, no other signification than this; the one expression may be everywhere substituted for the other, and thus an entire treatise of dynamics might be written, in which the term Force would not once occur. Retarding Forces are here included under the head of Accelerating Forces, as the same force may accelerate or retard, according as the velocity of the moving body is in one direction or in the opposite. 87. If a body be continually urged by the same ecelerating foree, in the same direction, its moon will be uniformly accelerated, or its velocity ill increase proportionally to the time. The momentary increment of the velocity will be alvays the same, from the definition of accelerating force; and as, by the first law of motion, none of the velocity once acquired ean ever be lost, it therefore increases continually at the same rate. This is applicable particularly to the ease of bodies falling by their gravity to the earth. The descent of these bodies, their velocity being found to increase uniformly, affords a direct and experimental proof of the first law of motion. The propositions that follow are all immediately applied to falling bodies; but they are equally applicable to all reetilineal motions produced by the constant action of the same force. . 88. If the velocity which a heavy hody falling om rest, acquires in the first second of its motion be called g, if after any time ſ, its velocity be v, v=ucgt; and ifs be the space through which it has descended, 25 æ uv?, or v=æV2s. a. Since v=4gt, and therefore v' /gè ?, 25 2s 5 and g FEl b. Hence if t, and if & be the space fallen through in one second, 28; or the velocity is equal to twice the space fallen through in one second. The space through which a body falls in the first second of time is sixteen feet and one inch nearly, and therefore =823 nearly. 89. If the velocity acquired by a body falling from rest, were at the end of any time to become uniform, the body, in an equal time, would move over twice the distance which it has actually fallen through. 90. If a body be projected direetly upwards with any velocity c, its motion will be uniformly retarded, or it will lose in every second a velocity equal to g, the velocity generated by gravity in a second. After the time ?, the velocity of the body is ct g; and the time at which the body reaches its greatest height where u 0, is Z 91. The greatest height to which a heavy body can ascend, when projected directly upwards with : 2 the velocity c, is , the same height from which it must have fallen to acquire the velocity c; and in all points, both of its ascent and descent, the reIation between the time and the height h is expressed by the equation h =ct=24 t For the space through which the body would have ascended, with the velocity c in the time ?, is ct; from which the retardation produced by the action of gravity in the same time, that is ; , (87. -) must be taken avay. i : : l1 ,/—77D; a. This ation gives i e Lc2 2h. The equation gi FEVGES; reason vhy two different values of ? correspond to the same value of h is, that the body is at the same height at two different times, one in its ascent, and another in its descent. b. The sum of the two values of ? is e or twice the g time of the total ascent. The difference between them is : v 2gh 92. If two bodies A and B, of which A is e about a ſixed centre, A will deseend, and will 2 A+DB to the difference of the weights divided by their n. aceelerated by a foree proportional to If the natural foree of gravity be expressed by , the velocity which it generates in a second; then the A—B acceleration oſ the bodies will be a48 }8 We may therefore diminish the intensity of gravitation at pleasure, or produce an accelerating force less than the force of gravity in any assigned ratio. It is on this principle that Mr ArwooDs machine for reducing the theory of accelerated motion to the test of experience, is contrived. The acceleration of falling bodies vas discovered by GALILEO, Dialogo ii1. de Motu locali, Opere, tom. S. p- 98. edit. Padova, 1744. Suæcer. V. MOTION OF PROJECTILES. 93. I F æ heavy body be projected in the direction of a straight line, not perpendieular to the horizon, it will describe a parabola situate in the vertical plane passing through that straight line, and having its axis perpendicular to the horizon. a. For it advances in the line of projection at a uniform rate, and descends below it with a velocity uniformly accelerated. b. The straight line in the direction of which the body is projected, touches the parabola in the point of proc. Gravity is here supposed to have ĩts intensity and its direction the same at all points, within the range of the same projectile We also abstract ſrom the resistance oſ the air. : d. This proposition was digcovered by GaLILEO, and demonstrated, Dialogo iv. de Motu Prqjectorum. 94. If from the point of projection there be taken upwards, in a vertical line, a part equal to al (c being the velocity with which the body is 5 projected,) the directrix of the parabola desceribed by the projectile is a horizontal line drawn through that point, in the plane of the projection; and the velocity of the projectile in every point of its path, will be the same that it would have acquired by falling freely from the height of the direetrix. a. All the parabolas described by bodies projected from the same point, and with the same velocities, though vith different elevations, have the same directrix; and have their foci in the circumference of the same circle. D95. If a body he projected with the velocity c, and in a direction that makes an angle E with the horizon, the distance at which it will strike the horizontal plane, (or hat is ealled its horizontal range), will be equal to twice the perpendicular height to which it would be carried by its initial velocity, multiplied into the sine of double the angle E; or i 2E. a. Hence the greatest horizontal range is, vhen the direction of the projectile makes an angle of 45° vwith the horizon: Also with respect to every other range, there are two angles which will give the same range, the one as much less than 45 as the other is greater. 96. The greatest altitude above the point of projeetion, to which a projectile can ascend, is equal to the height corresponding to its initial velocity, multiplied into the square of the sine of the elevation, that is, to sin E2. Also the time oſ its ſlight from the moment of projection till it strike the horizontal plane passing through the point of projection, is 5 x sin E. The greatest height to which the projectile ascends is therefore as the square of the velocity, multiplied into the square of the sine of the elevation; and the time of the ſlight is simply as the velocity, multiplied into the sine of the elevation. 97. A projectile thrown with a given velocity, from a point in a plane, will go to the greatest distance on that plane, vhen its direction bisects the angle which the plane makes with the vertical 98. The points of greatest distance at which a projectile, thrown with a given initial velocity, will strike the different planes in the last proposition, are all in a parabola given in position. This parabola has its axis perpendicular to the horizon, and touches all the parabolas described by the projectile, hen thrown in the same vertical plane, and vith the same velocity, but at different elevætions. SECT. VI. OF MOTION ACCELERATED OR RETARDED BY æ VARIABLE FORCE. 9. Tuæ changes of motion, whether in velocity or direction, are always made gradually, and never, as it is expressed, per saltum. Though they may not, like those treated of in the last section, be exactly proportional to the time, they are always proportional to a function of the foree and the time jointly, which function vanishes vhen either the time or the foree is equal to nothing. This follows from the fundamental equation of Dyna; D . mics, F æ 7 or =Fi. a. The above is called the LAw or coxTINuITY, Wwhich, in vhat respects free motions, is never violated. This conclusion agrees perſectly with all the instances in which accelerated or retarded motion can be traced by the senses, and therefore we might conclude, even from analogy, that it holds in those cases where the progress oſ acceleration escapes observation. When a ball, from being at rest, issues almost in an instant from the mouth oſ a cannon, with the velocity of 1800 feet in a second, it is not to be imagined, that it has acquired the whole of that velocity, or any part of it, suddenly, and without the lapse of time. Could we divide time into small enough portions, and did we perfectly understand the Law of the Force produced by the inflammation of gunpowder, ve should be able to determine the point of time, and the place in the interior of the gun, at which the hall had any assignable velocity from O to 1800 per second; when, for instance, it had a velocity of one foot per second; of two, of 100, of 1200, &e. The same holds of the direction of motion; a body ſfrom moving in one direction, does not come to move in another, without describing a portion of a curve, and taking in its motion every possible direction from the one to the other. The notion of the continuity of motion seems first to have occurred to GaLILEO. LEIBNITZ introduced it as a leading principle in his philosophy, and he proved the necessity of it by a metaphysical, but conclusive argument. If a body receive an increase of its motion without the lapse of time, then the same body, at the same indivisible instant, is in stanoce, ĩt ĩs at the beginning of the motion that the saltus is made, the body is at the same instant both .t rest and in motion. 100. Let AB (fig. 7.) be a straight line, along which a body is aceelerated by forces direeted from A to B; let the perpendicular AD be equal to the velocity which a body, aceelerated by the force at A, would acquire in one second; and let DEF be a curve so related to AB, that at any point whatever C, the ordinate CE may be to AD as the accelerating force at C to the aceelerating force at A; then, if the body begin to descend from rest at A, the square of its velocity at any point C, is double of the curvilineal area ACED. For, by the construetion, CE is proportional to the force at C, or ĩs D being the velocity which the moving body has acquired at C, and ? the time oſ the descent from A to C. Now C c is the momentary increment of AC the space, and is therefore =vi; therefore, CE x C c m v ò, and 2 CE x C cæ 2vò. But CE x Cc is the momentary increment of the area ACED, and 2 vã is the momentary increment of ẽ; therefore the square of the velocity of the moving body, and twice the area oſ the curve ACED, increase at the same rate, and they also begin to exist At the same time; therefore they are always equal. NEWIZONS Prin. Lib. 1. Prop. 89. a. If the body begin to move from A with a certain velocity, then the difference between the square of its velocity at C and at A is equal to twice the area ACED. b. In like manner, if the hody be projected upward vwith a given velocity, the difference between the square of the initial velocity, and the square of its velocity at any point C, will be double of the area BCEF:; and if the motion of the body be destroyed when it has ascended to a certain point A, the square of the initial velocity will be double of the area BADF. IOI. If a body be accelerated or retarded by auny number of forces acting in suecession, and each continuing its action while the body moves over a certain distance; the sum that is made up by multiplying each of these forces into the distance over which it acts, and adding those produets together, will be proportional to the difference of the squares of the velocities of the body at the beginning and end of the action of those forces. 102. Hence if the body is accelerated from rest, the sum collected, as in the last proposition, will be as the square of the velocity acquired; and if it be retarded or resisted till it come to rest, the sum will be as the square of the initial velocity. Thus if F, F, F, , &e. are the forces that act in succession, s, 5, 8', ', the distances or spaces over which they act; v the velocity at the beginning of the action, 7 at the end oſ it, Fs +F 58 +F s +  æ+v 7 vt And if u'æ0, then Fs + 5 +V  +F/ & æ92 038. If the foree which accelerates or retards in last proposition, he uniform, the distunce to ch the body will go before it acquire or lose a m velocity, will be as the square of that velo. On this is founded that estimation of the force oſ moving bodies, which is known by the name of the vis viva, and which makes that force proportionãl to the square of the velocity. The truth iĩs, that the effect of a hody in motion may be measurod either by the distance it goes to, or by the time that elapses before a resistunee of uniſorm intensity reduce it to rest. If the effect be measured in the first of these ways, it will be found to be as the square of the velocity; if in the second, as the velocity simply. Both these measures may he considered as correet, and are not inconsistent vhen rightly understood. The former makes the effect F5, the latter F t, retaining the significations already given to these letterss The same term, however, ought not to be indiseriminately applied to two things s0 essentially different. Tt is most conformable tę the use made of the word Foree, in the fundamental investigations of Dynamies, to take the quantity F i for the measure of it, and therefore to suppos it proportional to the velocity simply. This is the only way in which the language of the science can be rendered perfectly consistent and free from ambiguity. But as the distance to which a body goes before a given resistance destroys its motion, is often an object of inquiry, it may be proper to consider that distance as a measure of a certain power residing in the moving body. It has been proposed to distinguish this power by the term Impetus. This part of Dynamics would lead to the consideration of Central Forces; but as this is a subject of some difficulty, and is most interesting vhen connected with astronomy, ve shall defer treating of it till ve enter on the explanation of the Planetary Motions. MECHANICS. SECT. I. ſ OF THE CENTRE OF GRAVITY. 101 Ir a body fixed to a plane be preserved in equilibrio by a force having a given direetion, and attached also to a given point in the plane, it will be kept in equilibrio by the same force, when attached to any other point whatever in the line of its first direction. Let the force be attached by a thread to a given point in the plane; while the tension of the thread and its direction continue, the equilibrium must continue. Suppose, then, that any other point in the thread is fixed down to the plane, it is evident, that the tension of the remaining part ill not be changed by that circumstance; and therefore the equilibrium must remain. CARNOT has given a different proof of this proposition. Principes de TEquilibre, &e. § Tl. 105. If two heavy bodies be fixed to a plane moveable about a given point, the bodies will be in equilibrio it that point divide the distance between them in the inverse ratio of their weights or quantities of matter. A demonstration of this proposition may be derived from the composition of motion, as is done by NEZTON, Principia Mathematica, Cor. 1. to the Laws of Motion; and by VARIGNON, Nouvelle Mecanique; see also HAMILTON, Philosophical Essays, p. 145. A demonstration on a different principle was given by ARCHIMEDES; it has been improved by MACLAURIN in his Account of Newton's Discoveries, and by VINcE in the Philosophical Transactions. See also WooDs Mechanics, Art. 8. 106. The efſſect of any heavy body, to produce in any system of bodies, an angular motion about a given centre, is proportional to the produet of the mass of the body into the perpendieular drawn from the centre to a vertical line passing through the body. a. The axis of motion oſ any body is a straight line, which remains fixed while the body is free to revolve round it. 107. The produet of any heavy body into its distance, from a vertical plane passing through the axis of motion, is ealled the momentum of the body relatively to that axis; and in general, iĩf, through the axis of motion, a plane he made to pass parallel to the direction of any force, the product of that force into its distance from the same plane, is called the momentum of the force. 108. Any system of bodies being given, a point may be found, such, that if any plane pass through it, the sum of the momenta of the bodies on one side of the plane, relatively to the point found, shall be equal to the sum of the momenta of the bodies on the other side of the plane, relatively to the same point. a. The point thus formed is called the centre of gravity of the system. b. Every system of bodies, therefore, and every individual body, (as a body may be regarded as a system of particles or infinitely small bodies), has a centre oſ gravity; and that centre remains the same while the bodies retain their position relatively to one another, however the whole system may change its place relatively to the horizon. 109, In any body, or system of bodies, if the centre of gravity be sustained, the whole will remain at rest. In other words, the body or system of bodies has no tendeney to angular motion round its centre of gravitv. 110. The distance of the centre of gravity of any svstem of bodies from a given plane, is equal to the sum of the produets of all the masses into their distances from the plane, divided by the sum of the masses. a. As a single hody may be regarded as a system of particles, this proposition applies to such bodies, and is thereſore universal. I? the bodies be A, B, C, D, &e. and their perpendicular distance from a given plane a, b, f, d, &e. æ the distance of the centre of gravity from the same Aa +Bb +Cc Dd Plane,  m  C D. 1Il. The effect of any number of hodies to produce motion about a given point, is the same as if those bodies were united in their common centre of gravity. 112. When a heavy hody is at liberty to move ahout a fixed point, it cannot come to rest till its eentre of gravity is either the highest or the lowest possible. A body cannot rest on any base, unless a perpendicular to the horizon from ĩts centre of gravity fall within the baseThe centre of gravity of plain figures, and oſ solids, may be found by the foregoing propositionss. A few of the simplest and most elementary of these problems may serve as examples. 118. To find the centre of gravity of any number bodies placed in the same straight line at given tances from one another. The centre of gravity is found by Art. IIO. If the bodies are A, B, C, D, and their distances from a given point in the straight line in which they are supposed to be placed, a, b, c, d, the distance of their centre of gravity from the same point, Aa +Bb+Cc Dd ]FBFVCH D If the bodies are on different sides of the point to which their distances are referred, the distances on the one side being accounted affirmative, those on the opposite must be accoũnted negutive. is 114. Any number of bodies being given in posin, to find their centre of gravity. a. The bodies must be referred to three planes given in position, cutting one another at right angles, one of them horizontal, and, of course, the other two vertical. Let the bodies be A, B, C, and D, their distances from the given horizontal plane a, b, c, d; their distances from one oſ the vertical planes a, V, c, d; and from the other à, b, c', d'; then if we take Aa 4Bb+Cc+Dd x D4 FBFCFFD the centre of gravity of the system is in a horizontal plane at the distance æ from the given horizontal plane. Aaa +BV C +DVæ Take also, a 8 centre of gravity is in a plane parallel to the first of the two vertical planes, and distant from it by the line æ'. , and the Lastly, take in the intersection of these planes, a point distant from the second vertical plane by a quantiAa+BV C +Dd' lE EE: llli This point will be the centre of gravity of the given bodies, as is evident from § I10. b. The problem in this article may also be resolved by means bf this geometrical proposition: If from the centro of gravity of any number of bodies given in position, lines be drawn to their common centre of gravity, the sum of the produets, formed by multiplying each of these lines into the weight of the body from which it is drawn, is a minimum, or is less than if the lines were drawn to any other point. This may easily be deduced from the 8d Cor. to the 5th Prop. of the 2d Book of the Loci Plani, AroLLoNIusS. See S1IMsoNs edition, ꝑ. 180. 115. To find the centre of gravity of a triangular ne, all the points of which are supposed to gravie equally. From two of the angles oſ the triangle, draw lines bisecting the opposite sides. Their intersection is the centre of gravity. Each of these lines is divided by the point of intersection, in the ratio of 2 to l. 116. To find the centre of gravity of a given pyramid. Drav a straight line from the vertex to the eentre of gravity of the base, and divide it in the ratio of three to one, the greatest segment being next the vertex.he point 50 found is the centre oſ gravity of the Pyramid. This eonstruction applies to a pyramid of auy number of sides, and therefore also to a Cone. 117. To find the contro of gravity of any plane meehanically. Suspend it by a given point in or near its perimeter, and vhen it is at rest, draw across it a vertical line passing through that point. Suspend ĩt in like manner by another point, and drav a vertical Iine as beforee. The mtęeetion of these lnes is the centre of gravity of the plae. If the body is of three dimensions, the same process may be folloved; but three suspensions will be necessary. This construetion is referred to by PArPUS ALEXANnnINUS, Collect. Math. Lib. viii. Prop. j. Of the Motion of the Centre of Gravity. In the preceding propositions, the centres of gravity of bodies or systems, in which the parts preserve the same relative position, have only been considered. It is evident, however, that, though the parts do not preserve the same relative position, the centre of gravity may be found for any given state of the system. The properties common to all the centres so found, are oſ great importance in me117. If any number of bodies move uniformly in straight lines, their common centre of gravity will either move uniformly in a straight line, or remain at rest. NEWTONI, Principia, Lib. 1. Lemma 28. 118. The mutual action of bodies does not change the state of-their centre of gravity, either as remaining at rest, or as moving uniformly in a straight line. 119. The quantity of motion in any system of hodies estimated in a given direction, remains constantly the same, whatever may be the mutual aetion of these bodies on one another. OUTLINES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. a. Both this and the preceding proposition are consequences of the equality that takes place between the action and re-action of bodies. The quantity of motion in any system is the same as if all the parts of it were united in the centre of gravity of the whole. . Connected with this last, is a property of the centre of gravity, which has been found of use in the pure mathematiess If a plane figure be generated by the revolution of a given line, or a solid by the revolution of a given plane figure; the area in the first case, or the solidity in the second, is equal to the produet of the generating quantity into the length of the line, described by its centre of gravity. The application of this theorem to the quadrature of curves, or the cubature of solids, constitutes what has been called the Centrobaric Methodc The invention of the method is ascribed to GuLDINUS, but the theorem above was known to PArPUs, and no doubt the application of it also. 120. If there be a system of bodies acting any how on one another, and if at any point of time we compute the motions which these bodies would have in the sueceeding instant, were they all free from their mutual action; and if we also compute the motions, which, in consequence of their mutual action, they really have in that instant, the motions which must be compounded with the first of these, in order to produce the second, are such as, if they acted on the system alone, would produee no motion at all, or would be in equilibrio with one another. a. The principle here laid down was discovered by D ALEMBERT, Dynamique, purtie 2de, chap. Ir. It is a result of the equality of action and re-action, or rather, it is that very equality expressed with perfect generality and precisionn. It was supposed before, that the motions combined with the first of those above described, in order to produce the second, must, vhen added together, be equal to nothing; whereas it is not the motions simply, but their momenta, vhich, vhen added together, must be equal to nothing. b. This principle is of great importance for deducing the laws of constrained from those of free motion, and affords the only general method of determining the manner wherein motion distributes itself through all the parts of a system to which it is any how communicated. It may very properly be called the Puſlciple of the Distribution of Motion. A simple instance of its application is afforded by the following problem. 121. Let two bodies conneeted by a straight rod, without weight, be moveable about an axis passing through their centre of gravity; and let a motion be communicated to one of them, which, were it detached and single, would give it a velocity c; required, the angular velocity with which the bodies vill begin to revolve? SECT. II. OF THE MECHANICAL TOWERS. 129. A MECHANICAL power, is an instrument by which the effeet of a given force is inereaseq, while the force itself remains the same. The simple mechanical powers into which more complex machines are resolved, are these: I. The Lever; 2. The Wheel and Axle; 3. The Pulley; A4. The Wedge; 5. The Screw: 6. The Funicular Machine. Of the Lever. 128. DEF.A lever is an inflexible rod, moveable about a centre r fulerum, and having forces applied to two or more points in it. a. The simplest state of the lever is, when there are only two forces; and of this there are two cases: in the first, the fulerum is between the points where the forces are applied, and the forces are directed the same way; in the second, the points to which the forces are applied, are on the same side of the fulerum, and the forces are directed opposite ways. b. In trenting of the lever, it is usual to distinguish the forces by the names of the Power and the Weight, or the Power and the Resistance,terms that have a reſerence to the intention with which the machine is used, not to any real difference in the action oſ the ſorcos. We shall begin with abstracting entirely from the veight of the lever itself. 124. If two forces be applied to a Iever having equal and opposite momenta, that is, tending to produce motion in opposite directions, and being inversely as the perpendiculars dravn to their direetion from the ſulerum, they will be in equilibrium with one anothcr. When the forces are parallel, this proposition coincides with the property of the centre of gravity, § 105. When they are oblique, the case ĩs reduced to the preceding by the resolution of forces. 125. If any number of forces be applied to a Iever, there will be an equilibrium if the sums of the opposite momenta he equal to one another. This proposition also cointides with a property oſ the centre of gravity, (5 108 and 109.) 126. When any number of forees are perpendieularly applied to æa lever, the ſulerum is loaded OUTLINES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. with the sum of the forees, if they are all in the same direction, and with their differenee, if they are in opposite directions. 127. When there is an equilibrium in the lever, if each foree be multiplied into the velocity which the point of its application would have, reduced to the direction of that force, if motion were to take place, the sum of all the produets so formed is equal to nothing. a. Forces that act in opposite directions are here ac4 counted positive and negativee This is always to be understood when the sums of forces or of momenta are said to be equal to nothing. . This property of the lever is common to all the mechanical powers, and, indeed, to all machines vwhatsoever. It is known by the name of the principle of Virtual Velocities, and consists in this, that if the equilibrium of a machine be disturbed, by a quantity indefinitely small, and if the velocity of each force be multiplied into its quantity, the sum of these products, reckoning the forces which are in opposite directions, positive and negative with respect to one another, will be equal to nothing. This principle was suggested by BERNOUILLI, and is of great use in mechanical investigationss. It admits of a general, though indirect, demonstration. The velocities compared, being not actual, but such as would take place iſ a certain event, the subver2 sion of the equilibrium, were to happen, are properly denominated virtual. c. The different cases of the lever, whether it be straight or crooked, and the forces perpendicular or oblique, are all comprehended in the preceding propositions. The case of oblique forces admits oſ a very concise expression, in terms of the angles. 128. If two oblique forces be applied to the extremities oſ a straight lever, there will be an equilibrium between them, if they be inversely as the lengths of the arms by which they act, multiplied into the sines of the angles which their directions make with the lever. It is evident that this proposition is general, and comprehends the case of perpendicular forces. 129. If a beam of any kind be kept in equilibrium by three forces applied to different points in it, these forces must either be parallel, or must converge to the same point. a. If at the point to which the three lines converge, ve take parts in those lines proportional to the forces, they will form the sides and the diagonal oſ a parallelogram; and if at the point in which this diagonal intersects the beam, we suppose a fulerum to nary lever, and the veight sustained by the fulerum vill be to either of the other two forces, as the diagonal of the parallelogram to the side which corresponds to that force: also the two extreme forces vill be to one another inversely as the sines of the angles which their directions make with the above diagonal. 180. If we would allow for the weight of the lever itself, ve must suppose its weight to be united in its centre of gravity, and to act there as a third foree, added to the power or the resistance, according to the side of the fulerum on which it ĩis placed. 13. When a beam carrying a weight, is supported in a horizontal position by two props, the weights which the props sustain are inversely proportional to their distances from the centre of gravity of the weight. 182. If a veight W, be sustained on a horizontal plane by three props, (not in a straight line), the pressure on each will be the same as if a single weight were laid on it, so that the sum of all the three weights were equal to W, and their common centre of gravity the same with the centre of gravity of that body. . If the props be A, B, C, (fig. 8), and i W be placed with its centre of gravity at D, and f ADG, BDF, CDE, be drawn, the pressure . DG on A is æE x W, DF BF DE on C is8 w. CEon B is xW, hen D coincides with the centre of gravity of the triangle ABC, the pressure on each of the props is the same. IF W be supported by more than three props, the problem appears to be indeterminate, or to admit of innumerable solutions. Nevertheless, iſ the centre oſ gravity of W, as iĩt rests on the plane, be the same vith the centre of gravity of the ſigure made by joining the tops of the props by straight lines, the pressures on the props are all equal to one another. The lever is the simplest of the mechanical povers, and appears to be the first that was attempted to be explained. ArisTOTLE hos treated of it in his Mechanical Questions, and has even endeavoured to reduce some other oſ the mechanical powers to the leverr. The first accurate explanation, however, vas given by ArcHIMEDES, Lib. I. de Equiponderantibus, Prop. 6. The lever is used in mechanics in various forms and combinations. The compound lever is, where one lever is made to turn another; and then an equilibrium takes place, vhen the weight is to the power as the produet of all the arms, taken alternately, beginning vith that to which the power is applied, to the product of all the other arms. The common apparatus for raising a draw-bridge, is a combination of a lever of the first kind, with a lever of the second; the two levers are parallel, and remain in equilibrio in all situations. In the construction of the animal body, this mechanical power is much employed. The bone is the lever, the muscle is the power, or rather the medium through which the power acts, and the joint is the fulerum. The insertion of the muscle, or the point to which the power is applied, is usually nearer the joint or fulerum than the weight to be raised iss. A different strueture might have produced more strength, but would have diminished the activity oſ the animal, and the velocity of its motion. Of the Balance. 3. The balance is a lever with equal arms, for comparing weights with one another, and, vell constructed, must have the following rties: I. It should rest in a horizontal posiwhen loaded with equal weights. 2. It should great sensibility, that is, the addition of a weight in either scale should disturb the brium, and make the heam incline sensibly the horizontal position. . It should have t stability, that is, vhen disturbed, it should kly return to a state of rest. hat the first requisite may be obtained, the beam must have equal arms; and that this equality may be more easily ascertained, the beam should be straight, or the point on which the beam turns, and the points to which the weights are attached, should be in the same straight linee. The centre of suspension must also be higher than the centre oſ gravity. Were these centres to coincide, the beam, when the weights were equal, would rest in any position, and the addition of the smallest weight would overset the balance, and place the beam in a vertical situation, from which it would have no tendency to returnn The sensibility, in this case, would be the greatest possible; but the other two requisites, of level and stability, would be entirely lost. The case would be even vorse, if the centre of gravity were higher than the centre of suspension, as the balance, vhen deranged, would make a revolution of no less than a semicirclee When the centre of suspension is higher than the centre of gravity, if the weights be equal, the beam vill be horizontal; if they be unequal, iĩt vill take an oblique position, and will raise the centre of gravity of the whole, making the momentum on the side of the lighter weight, by that means, equal to the momentum on the side of the heavier, so that an equilibrium again takes place. 'he second requisite, is the sensibility of the balance, or the smallness of the weight by which a given angle of inclination is producedc Ifa be the length of the arm of the balance, and b the distance between the centre oſ suspension and the centre of gravity, P the load in either scale, and W the weight of the beam, the sensibility of the balance . ſ1 . : is as 5 r FW it is therefore greater, the greater the length of the arm, the less the distance between the two centres, and the less the weight with which the balanco is loaded. astly, The stability, or the foree with which the state of equilibrium is recovered, is proportional to Q P W), the denominator of the preceding ſraction. he diminution of ĩ, therefore, while it increases the sensibility, lessens the stability of the balance, but the lengthening of a vill inerease the former of these quantities, without diminishing the latter. The above formulas are of great practical utility, because, by means of them, one balance may be made having exactly the same sensibility and stability with another: it is only required, that the ratio of the lengths of the arms should be the same with that which is compounded of the ratios oſf the distances oſ the centres of gravity and suspension, and of the weights of the beams. balance made by RamsnEN ſor the Royal Society, is capable of weighing ten pounds, and turns with the ten millionth part of the weight, or litſle more than the two hundredth oſf a grainn. Youxęs Lectures, vol. I. p. 125. Descriptions oſf balances are always deſective, where hey do not give the values oſ a, b, and W, the quantities on which the merit of the halance depends, and by the knowledge of vhich similar. instruments might be constructed. In some of the nicest balances,  is made variable by means oſ a small moveable veight. 134. When a balance is false, or its arms unequal, if any thing be weighed, first in the one scale, and then in the opposite, the true weight is a mean proportional between the weights thus found, or is equal to the square root of their produet. Consult LA HIRE, Traitt de Mechanique, prop. 88. MusCHENEIOEE, § 289, &e. EuLER, Comment. Petrop. tom. 5. P. l. &c. MAGELLAN, Journal de Phys. tom. xvi. I781), p. 49. Ofſ the Wheel and Axle, 185. The vheel and axle, consists of a wheel having a eylindrie axis passing through its centre, and moveable in two grooves. The power is applied to the eireumſference of the wheel, and the weight to the cireumferenee of the axle An equilibrium in this instrument takes place, when the radius of the wheel, multiplied into the power, is equal to the radius of the axle multiplied into the weight; or when the power and weight are inversely as the radii of the cireles to which they are applied, is supposed here, that the power and the weight both act at right angles to the radius. The wheel and axle is nothing else but a lever, so contrived as to have a continued motion about its fulerum. The principle of the virtual velocities is here obviously applicable If the power act not at the circumference o the wheel, but at the extremity of a handspike inserted in the wheel, the distance of that extremity from the centre of the axis, is to be accounted the radius of the wheel. The Capstan, the Windlass, and other contrivances of a similar nature, are nothing else than the wheel and axle adapted to particular circumstances. The mechanical contrivance called a Crank, is a species of vheel and axlee If the force which aets upon a crank urges it directly down and up, alternately, the effect is to that which would be produced if the force acted at right angles to the arm oſ the crank all round, as twice the diameter of a circle to its circumſerence, or as seven to eleven nearly. The combinations of wheels, so useful in mechanies, are generally reducible to the wheel and axle, though the wheel which turns the other is not always upon the same axis with itt. The motion, in such cases, is communicated from the one wheel to the other, either by belts or straps passing over the circumſferences of both, or by teeth cut in those circumferences, and working in one another. m9 186. When one wheel moves another in either of these ways, the velocities of their eircumferences are equal; and therefore their angular velocities, or the number of revolutions whieh they make in the same time, are inversely as their radii. In combinations o wheels communicating motion to one another, it is usual to call a smaller wheel acted on by a larger one, a pinion; and its teeth the leaves of the pinion. Sometimes the smaller vheel is a eylinder, in which the top and bottom are formed by circular plates or boards, connected by staves inserted at equal distances along their circumferences, serving as teeth; this is called a lanternn. It is usual also to employ wheels and pinions, as in figure ꝗ, where A is a large vheel, driving a pinion b on the same axle with the great vheel B; B acts on the pinion c, which is on the same axle with the large wheel C; and C drives the pinion d, &o. 187. When motion is communicated through a number of wheels and pinions, the angular velocity of the first wheel, is to the angular velocity of the last pinion, as the produet made by multiplying together the number of the teeth in every pinion, to the produet made by multiplying together the number of the teeth in every wheel; and that same ratio, compounded with the ratio of the radius of the last pinion, to the radius of the first vheel, will give the ratio of the power to the resistanee when an equilibrium takes place. The truth of the first part of this proposition is evident from § 186.; and the truth of the latter part follows from the principle of the virtual velocities. 188. When wheels act by teeth working in one another, notwithstanding that the length and position of the levers by which they act, are continually changing, the force of the one upon the other will remain constant, if the line which is drawn perpendicular to the surſaces of both teeth at the point of contact, pass continually through the same point of the line whieh joins the centres of the wheels. It is here necessary to distinguish between what is callerd the totul, and the primitive radius oſ a wheel. The total radius extends from the centre to the extremities of the teeth; and the primitive extends only to the point where the teeth would touch, if they were to act merely by contact. If the distance between the centres o the wheels be divided by the point O, (ſig. 10.), in the ratio of the number of teeth vhich the wheels are required to have, AO and BO Will be the primitive radĩ of the wheels, and O is the point through which the perpendieulars in the above proposition must be supposed to pass. 139. There are many different curves,, according to which the teeth of wheels might be formed, s0 as to answer the condition in the last proposition; but that which seems most convenient, and whieh has been most generally adopted, is the picycloid. Vid. EuLæR, Nov. Com. Petrop. v. p. 299. and xI. p. 207. One of the eurves there proposed, is the evolute of the circle The same i mentioned, Encyc. Brit. If the circumference of one circle be made to oll along the circumference of another, the curve described by any given point in the first of these circumferences, is an epicycloid. The circle which rolls is called the generating circle, and that on vhich iĩt rolls is called the base of the epicycloid As the former may be supposed to roll either on the outside or the inside of the latter, there are two kinds of epicycloids, distinguished by the names of Exterior and Interior. 140. Let it be required, having given the magnitude of a wheel and pinion, and the numbers of teeth in each, to determine the figure of those teeth. Let CB (fig. 11.) be the primitive radius of the wheel, and BD the base of the tooth; bisect BD in E, draw CE, and produce it indeſinitely; and with a generating circle, of which the radius is half the primitive radius of the pinion, describe an arch of an epicycloid on the primitive cireumVoI. ference of the wheel as a base, beginning at the point B, and intersecting CE in F. Then BF is the figure of one face of the tooth, and in the same manner may the other FL be determined When one tooth is formed, it may serve as a model for the rest. The teeth of the pinion are to be determined in the same manner; the radius of the generating cirele being made equal to half the primitive radius of the wheel See CAMUS on the Teeth of Wheels, Article 548, p. 58. et seq. of the English translation. Toothed wheels are ſfrequently employed for changing the direction of motion: the directions oſ their axes are then inclined to one another, and the parts of their rims where the teeth are placed, are cut into frustums of oones, each of which has its vertex in the intersection of the axes of the two wheels. Wheels of this kind are called bevelled, or croun whoels. 141. The figures of the teeth of bevelled wheæls, are determined by an epicycloidal surface, generated by a straight line, on the surface of a cone, while the cone rolls on the conical part of the wheel, its vertex being in the point where the axes of the wheels intersect. The line on the surface oſ the revolving cone passes through its vertex. onsult Capus on ſhe Teeth of Wheels, Article 557. &c. The curve generated by a point on the surface of a revolving cone, is there called a Spherical Epicycloid, as being on the surface of a sphere. Dr BREWSTER, in the Appendiæ to Ferguson's Mechanics, vol. II. p. 28°. treats of the construetion of bevelled wheels. ſToothed wheels are employed in mechanies, not only for i inereasing or diminishing velocity, so as to adapt a given pover to the purpose of producing a certain effeot, as in a common mill, where the slow motion of the water-vheel is made to produce the rapid motion of the millstone, but they are also employed for the purpo? of producing angular motions, that shall ahtain, with great precision, given ratios to one another. This happens in clockvor, an it Js ter of mporiane; io determine vith accuracy the number of wheels, and the number of teeth in gach Suppore it js reguired to make one wheel turn exactly 240 times, while another turns once: The smaller wheel, which is to turn the ſaꝶtest; canmot have fever than 6 leaves or teeth: The other, therefore, ought to have 6 times 240, or 1440, which is more than can conveniently be given to one vheel. Suppose, then, that three vheels ABC, and three pinions b c d, as in figure , are to be employed: Then the angular velocity of A is to the angular velocity of b, as b xc xd vo AxB xC, these letters denoting the number of teeth in their respective wheels, therefore AxBxXC: bxe xd:: 240: 1. Let the number of teeth in the pinions be 7, 5, and 1l, then AxB XC: Tx5xI:: 240: 1; and A xX B x C=Tx 5 x II x 240, or resolving 240 into its simple factors, AxBXC/u7x5xII x8 x2 x2x2 x2x5. These factors combined into three different groups in any order, vill give three products that may be substituted for A, B, and C. We may take, for instance, 5 x 11, 7 x 8 x 2, and 2 x 2 x 2 x 5, which vill give 55, 42 and 40, for the numbers of the teeth that are to work in the pinions, here the numbers are , 5 and TI. The uangular velocity of A vill thus be to the angular velocity of d in the ratio required. 142. The number of teeth in a wheel, and in a iion which work together, should be prime to e another, that their coincidences may not recur the same order after every revolution. a. The numbers expressing the ratio of the angular velocity of the wheel to that of the pinion, may sometimes be fractional, and may consist of so many places, vhen the fractions are taken away, that, to make the motions exactly in their ratio, would require more wheels, and à greater number of teeth, than can conveniently be allowedl. It is then of consequence to find two numbers that will express the ratio, not exactly, but more nearly, than can be done by smaller numbers. The method of finding such numbers, is explained in the Elements of Algebra. See EuLER, Elem. d Algẽtre, tom. n. Additions, § 19.; also Woons Algebra, § 87l. OF the Pulley. 148. The pulley is a wheel moveable on an axis with a groove cut in its cireumferenee, round which a cord passes. The axis of the pulley is either fixed or moveablee When fixed, the pulley gives no mechanieal advantage, but serves merely to change the direction of the power applied to the cord which passes over it. When the axis of the pulley is moveable, one end of the cord is made fast to a fixed point; the power is applied to the other, and the weight hangs by the block in which the axis of the pulley is fixedc By a single pulley of this construetion, a force is enabled to balance another twice as great. Various combinations of pulleys give various degrees of advantage; but in every case there is an equilibrium, when the spaces that would be passed over by the povwer and the weight in the same time, are in the inverse ratio of their quantities. It is obvious, that the pulley is reducible to the lever of the second kind, or, still more directly, to the case, § 128. of a body supported by two props. The combination of pulleys that has the most simplicity, is that in which a number of pulleys hang above one another in an oblique Iine; eaci doubling the power of that which is under it, so that as the number of pulleys increases in ãrithmetical progression, the advãntage increases in geometrical progression. From being so extremely portable, and so applicable to cordage, the pulley is of àll the mechanical powers the most useful at sea. OF the Wedge 144. The wedge is a triangular prism; maũe of wood or of metal. It is usual to make the prism isosceles, and the angle eontained between the equal sides more acute than the others When instead of being isosceles, the prism is rectangular, and has one of the plãnes containing the right angle; placed horizontally, the wedge coincides with the inclined plane, which is sometimes considered as a mechanieal power distinet from the rest. a. There has been a considerable difference in the rules given by mechanical writers for determining the power of the wedge. This has arisen, from not attending sufficiently to the direction of the resistance, and to another cireumstance, vhether both the resisting bodies are moveable, or one of them only. The best vay of considering the subject, is to resolve all the ſorces that act upon the wedge ſnto parts parallel to tvo axes, at right angles to one another, and one of them parallel to the back of the wedge, or the side to which the power is applied. In the case oſ equilibrium, the opposite forces, in the direction of these axes, must be equal to one another. In this way the following theorems are easily investigated. 145. When three forces are applied perpendicularly to the three faces of a triangular prism or wedge, they will be in equilibrio, if their directions interseet in the same point, and if they are to one another as the lengths of the sides to which they are applied. 146. If the resistance to the motion of an ĩisosceles wedge be perpendicular to the back of the wedge, there will be an equilibrium, when the power applied to the back of the wedge is to the sum of the resistances, as the thickness of the back to twice the height of the wedge; and therefore if the hodies are equal, the power will be to the resistance oſ either of them, as half the base of the wedge to the height of it. This proposition is most easily demonstrated on the principle of the virtual velocities, ( 127. b.) If one of the resisting bodies only is moveable, the power vill be to the resistance as the hase of the edge to its height. The more acute the wedge, the greater it| power, or the smaller the force required to overeome a given resistance 147. When the wedge becomes an inclined plane, with its base horizontal, if the direction of the power be parallel to the plane, there will be an equilibrium when the power is to the resistance, as the height of the plane to its length, or as the sine of its inclination to the radius. 148. Universally there will be an equilibrium on an inclined plane, when the power is to the resistance, as the sine of the inclination of the plane to the cosine of the angle which the direetion of the power makes with the plane. BossuT, Art. 263. Comment. Petrop. tom. II. ꝑ. 282. A vedge may have the form of a pyramid, as vell as of a prism. In the case of a pyramidal wedge, the forces that act must be resolved according to three axes, by which three equations will be obtained. 149. In a pyramidal wedge, where the triangular faces are inclined, at the same angle i, to the base, to produce an equilibrium, the power must be to the sum of the resistances, as the cosine oſ i to the radius. Piercing instruments are all reducible to wedges oſ this kind, Nails, Bayonets, Stakes, Piles, &e. The resistance in some oſf these increases with the surface to which it is appliedc Though a wedge be of a conical form, it is comprehended under the preceding theorem. The common wedge is generally employed for cleaving, and otherwise overcoming the force of cohesion in hodies: it may sometimes be used with advantage for raising great weights to a small height. All cutting instruments may be referred to it, Knives, Chisels, Scissors, Files, the Teeth of Animals, &c. A Saw is a series of wedges, on which the motion impressed is oblique to the resistancee A Wimble is a wedge to which the circular motion is given. The power applied to the wedge, vhen great resistance is to be overcome, is usually percussion; and almost the only instance in which the wedge is used for the purpose of equilibrium, is in the construction of arches, which. are built of truncated wedges. As the consideration of this equilibrium would lead to too long a digression in this place, it will be treatæd of in an Appendix. Oſthe Screw. 150. The screw is a spiral groove or thread, nding round a cylinder, so as to cut all the lines wn on its surface parallel to the axis, at the same angle. The spiral may be either on the convex or concave surſace oſ the cylinder, and the serew is called accordingly, either the exterior or the interior screw. The screw is properly referred to the species of vedge called the Inclined Plane, and its principle, like that of the wedge, is easily reduced to the composition of forces. 151. If the power be applied parallel to the base of the serew, and perpendicular to the radius of the cylinder; and if the weight press perpendicularly on the axis, an equilibrium is produced when the power is to the resistance, as the distance between two threads of the serew to the eircumference described by the point to which the power is applied. MusCHENBROEE, § 482. Bossur, § 28&. SGRAVESANDE, §j 281. a. The screw is of great use for compressing bodies. A kind of percussion is sometimes added to it, as in the apparatus for coining The great attrition or friction which takes place in the serew, is useful by retaining it in the state to which it has been once brought, and continuing the effect after the power is removed. The screv is also applied, with much advantage, to raise great weights to a small height, and support them in that situation. b. The use oſ the serew to rãise water, in the manner r invented by ARCHIMEDES, is a very remarkable application of it. This screw is usually formed by a spiral tube winding round a ceylinder, and it may be applied to raise any body that ean pass within the tube as well as a fluid. If a serew thus formed be placed obliquely, so ãa tò màke, With the vertical, an angle equal to that vhich the spiral makes vwith the lines parallel to the axis, there will be in each turn of the spiral a part parallel to the horizon, where, if a body were placed, it would be at rest. If, then, the serew be turned, the body will ascend, because the part of the serew behind it becomes more inclined than the part before it, so that the body is urged forward, and consequẽntly ascends. If the screw used in this manner, be turned vith great rapidity, the body may acquire a centrifugal force so great as to overcome ĩts gravity; in which case it will descend. n the subject of ArcHIMEDES'S Screv, see BERNOU1LL1 Hydrodynamica, Sect. ix. § 260 Also EvLEE, Nov. Com. Petrop. v. p. 259, &o. HENNERT, sU7 la Vis  ARCHIMEDE. The screw is also employed in the division oſ mathematical instruments, and in reading off from them. The contrivance known by the name of the Micrometer Screw, is used for measuring angles with great exactness. In RauspENS Dividing Instrument, the screw is applied for the same purpose. Of the Funicular Machine. 152. If a body fixed to two or more ropes, is sustained by powers which act by means of those ropes, this assemblage is called the Funicular or Rope Machine. See VARIGNON, vol. I. ꝑ. 98, &e.; also Bossur, Mechonique, art. 120. 158. If a body is sustained by two forces acting at the ends of two ropes, these forces will be in the inverse ratio of the sines of the angles which their directions make with the direction of the weight; or directly as the secants of the angles which their directions make with the horizon. Hence the sum of the powers is to the weight, as the sum of the sines of the angles which the powers make vith the direction of the weight, to the sine of the angle which the powers make with one another. 154. If the body is sustained by more than two cords, the powers, by the resolution of forces, may always be reduced to two. 155. If any number of points be given either in the same or in different planes, and if from their common eentre of gravity, lines be draWn to every one of the given points; the forces which draw in a direction of these lines, and are proportional to them, will be in equilibrio. HUGENII, Opero voria, tom. I. p. 288. a. It follows from the above propositions, that by means of a rope, a small power may be made to raise a very great weight to a small height; and also, that if a rope is stretched horizontally between two points, its own weight will prevent it from becoming perfectly straight, whatever force be employed to stretch itt. The curve which a flexible chain or cord forms, when suspended by its two extremities, and either hanging freely, or having any degree of tension applied to it, is called the Catenaria. SECT. III. OF FRICTION. 156. BESIDES the resistance which the mechanical powers, and the machines compounded of them, are intended to overcome, an impediment to their motion is always observed when the moving parts are in eontaet with one another. This impediment to motion is called Friction. The subject of friotion is treated by MuscHEN2RORE, § 510,-588. Bossur, § 248,283. ProvY, Arch, Hydraulique, Sect. . BREWSTEE, in his to FERGUSON'S Mechanics, vol. 1I. ꝑ. 34. GrEGorYS Mechnios, vol. n. § 24, &e. 157. When 2a heavy hody is at rest on a horiuontal plane, it is not in equilibrio, or ready to ohey: the least impulse, in a direotion parallel to the plane. A foree must be applied to bring it into that state, with respeot to any given direction; and this foree is the measure of the frietion. 158. Friotion destroys, but never generates motion, and in this is unlike gravity, or any of the forces hitherto considered, which, if they retard motion in one direction, always accelerate it in the opposite. The foree of frietion, therefore, violates the law of continuity, and cannot be accurately expressed by any geometrical line, or any algebraic formula. n. The retardation which frietion opposes io motion, is nearly uniform, or the same for æll velocities. Couvrous, in a series of experiments made with great ꝗcoumo;, and on a large seile, ſound that bodięs sliding on æ plane, on hich they were mopedby a oonstant forcœ of traęlion, vere Juiſqmy accelerated, which cœuld not hæve heen, if the impeding as well as the impelling force had not been constant. Journol de Phys. tom xxviI. ꝑ. 204, &c. CouLoM”s experiments received the prize of the Academy of Sciences in 1781, and are published in the tenth volume of the Mèmoires presents. An abstract of them is given in the Journal de Phys. above quoted, and also in PRoNYS Arch Hyd. Sect. v. § 1089, &e. Motions retarded by frietion are therefore subject to the laws explained, Articles 90 and 91; only that the retarding ean never be converted into an accelerating force, so that the formulas of those articles cannot be applied in their full exteni. 159. The force of frietion is the greater, the eater the roughness or asperity of the surfaces oving on one another; it is also the greater, the eater the power by which these surfaces are essed together; but it is very little afected by eir extent. a. That the quantity of frietion does not depend on the extent of the surfaces that rub on one another, vas affirmed by AoNTONS, and proved by a variety of experiments. Mèm. Aead. de Scionces, 1699, p. 208 The fact, however, has been sinoe questioned, particularly by LAMBERT, Mèm. de Berlin, 17712; but the experiments of CouLoMB, though they have pointed out certain exceptions, as those of some other writers have done, have shewn, that it holds in general, and that in praotical mechanios x the other, or by bending and abrading the eminces which oppose the motion. MusCHENBROEE, § 512. EULER, Mém. de Berlin, 1748, p. 122. CouLoMB, Mém. Presentbs, tom. x. p. 164, &c. a. The difference between the friction of rubbing and rolling bodies, seems to arise from this, that the asperities do not require to be bent down or abraded in the latter case; the eminences being lifted out of the cavities. b. When the rising up of the one hody over the other is completely prevented, the frietion becomes extremely intense, as appears in what may be accounted an extreme case, the drawing of vire, tubes, &c. where the extension of the metal is the effect of the friction acting all around. c. In bodies sliding on one another, the surfaces may be held together by the attraction of cohesion, so that the friction is not always diminished in proportion as the polish of the surfaces is increased. Proſessor LESLIE is of opinion, that the phenomena of frietion are not fully explained by these causes, and that they arise chieſly from a tremulous or vibratory motion in the parts of bodies. Inquiry into the Propagution of Heat, p. 299 to 802. 162. The distance to which a given hody will moved by percussion, in opposition to frietion, as the square of the velocity communieated to his follows from § 99. DYNAMIOS; frietion being a force by which motion is uniformly retarded. Some paradoxical appearances are explained on this principle When a carpenter would drive the handle of an axe into the head, he strikes against the handle after it is slightly inserted into the head, holding it loosely in his hand, without any firm support, and the head perhaps downvard; at eaeh hlow the handle is driven farther than if the blow had been given to the head itself. The reason is, that the handle is the lighter body, so that the veloeity which a blow communicates to it is greater than that which the same hlow would communicatæ to the headc. The frietion is of consequence more effectuãally overcome. hus, too, a nail is driven by a blow oſ no great force, into a piece of wood where the mere frietion is sufficient to retain it against a great force applied to draW it out. The same thing is exemplified in the method sometimes practised, of raising a stone by means of a tackle fastened to it by an iron plug, driven into a circular hole cut in the stonee. A fev blows of a small hammer are sufficient to fix the plug, so that it will serve not only to suspend the stone, though of several hundred weight, but to draw it out of the earth, in vhich it ies perhaps half-buried When the stone is raised, a few blows of the hammer given obliquely to the plug, are sufficient to disengage it. The stones on which this experiment has been made have always possessed great toughness and indurationn. The vhole is explained hy the great power of peroussion to overcome ſriction, compared with mere pressure or weight. 168. When motion begins, the intensity of frietion diminishes; it does not, however, change afterwarũs as the veloeity changes, but continues, as already said, to retard with a uniform foree. EuLEER makes the friction to be reduced to one-half, vhen the body is actually put in motion. Sur le Frottement des Corps Solides, Mém. Acad. de Berlin, 1748, p. 122, &o. § 18 The reduetion appears in some cases to be much greater than thiss. CouLoMB found the frietion of wood sliding on wood to become less when the body began to move, than it had been the instant before, in the ratio nearly of Qto —. Ity intensity afterwards did not change. PrONY, Areh. Hydraulique, 1V8, No Q. 1l64. Frietion may be measured by finding the force necessary to bring a body resting on a horizontal plane into such a state that it is ready to move on the application of the least force (3 158.): it may also he measured by placing the body on a plane of variable inclination, and increasing that inelination till the hody begin to slidee As the radius to the tangent of that inclination, so the veight of the hody to its frietion on the horizontal plane. If the veight be W, and the inclination of the plane, vhen the body begins to slide, i, the frietion W Xx tan i. 5. Time is often required for frietion to come s bearing, or to attain its maximum, and in respeet, different substances differ much from mother. I. CouLoMB found, that in wood sliding on wood, without grease, the friction at first increased, but in a minute or two came to a limit, which it did not aſterwards exceed. Oak, for example, sliding on oak, though the pressure was varied from 74 Ib. to 2474Ib., had a frietion, aſter a minute, always nearly 44 in the hundredc. On diminishing the surface as much as possible, the friction was reduced no lower than 414 per cent. 1I. He found also, that vhen metal slides on metal, the frietion is proportional to the pressure; in iron on iron, 283 in the hundred; in iron on brass 26, &c.; and this was the same vhether the bodies were just beginning to move from rest, or had acquired any velocity whatever; different from the case just mentioned, of wood rubbing on wood. 111. When heterogeneous bodies were made to slide on one another, as wood on metal, the friction increased slowly with the time, and did not come to its maximum in less than four or five days. Iron against oak, after 10, gave the force of frietion =4 per cent.; at the end of four days it amounted nearly to one-fifth. In heterogeneous substances, too, the friction increases sensibly with the velocity, and follows nearly an arithmetical, while the velocity follows a geometrical progression. d. v. When the surfaces are smeared with unctuous substances, the frietion is diminished; but time is necessary for the attainment of the maximum. In a set of experiments, oak rubbing on oak, the surfaces greased with tallow, and the weights being 1650, and 8280 pounds; in the first, at the end of six days, the friction seemed to become stationary, and was 873 per cent.; in the second, the maximum arrived at the end of five days, and the friction was 4. e. In another set, with brass on iron, and fresh tallow between them, the friction was four days in coming to its maximum, and it was then between 10 and I per centt. At the first moment it was ꝗ per cent., so that here the inerease was inconsiderable. These are some of the principal results of CouLoMBS experiments, the most accurate and extensive that have been made on this matter: they shew a great difference in the laws oſ frietion, that obtain among different substances. Consult PRoNY and CouLoMs, ubi supra. 166. Friction is diminished by the unetuous substances mentioned above. Those that are thinnest and least tenacious are the best; plumbago also, or Black Lead, as it is called, reduced to powder, and rubbed on the surfaces of wood, metal, stone, &e. serves greatly to diminish frietion. 167. The effect of friction may be diminished, by drawing a body in a line inelined at a certain angle to the plane on which it restss Thus, if the weight of a body be to its frietion, ona horizontal plane, as n to 1, it will be dravn with the greatest ease in the direction which makes with that plane an angle, having for its tangent 3 DAN. BERNOUILLI, Nov. Com. Petrop. tom. 18. p. 244. 168. Frietion is diminished, when it is converted, by means of wheels or rollers, from the frietion of sliding into that of rolling bodies. Whhen each end of the axis of a wheel is made to turn, not in a groove, but on the circumſerences of two vheels, every one moveable on its own axis, these last are called Friction Wheels, as serving very much to lessen the effect of friction. 169. The momentum of frietion is diminished by frietion wheels, in the ratio of the radius of the axis of any one of the wheels (they are supposed equal) to the perpendicular height of the axis that rests upon them, above the line joining their centres. EULER treats of the advantage of friction wheels, Mém. Acad. Berlin, 748, p. 144. The theorem he has investigated is not so simple as the preceding, but may be reduced to it. In the Phil. Trans. vol. LIII p. 165. Mr X. Frr2cERaLD has described the construetion of frietion wheels, by which he reduced the power of frietion from 425 Ib. to two and threefourths. Rollers put under a heavy body, diminish the friction in the greatest degree possible, if they are spheres or cylinders, without any axis on which they are constrained to move. The conversion of friction from sliding to rolling is then complete. The wheels of carriages are contrivances of the same kind: but in them the conversion above referred to is imperfect: for though the friction at the circumference of the vheel is that of rolling, at the axis, it is that of rubbing; yet as, in this last, the distance from the centre of motion is small, the momentum of the friction is small in the same proportion. 170. In wheel carriages, it is more advantageous that the wheel should turn on a fixed axle, than that the axle should turn with the wheel, because inm the latter ease, when the direction of the motion changes, one of the wheels must go backward, and must oppose the motion of the other, so that the frietion of rubbing is substituted for that of rolling. 171. The plane on which a carriage moves, and the line of draught, being both horizontal, the advantage for surmounting an immoveable obstacle, of a given height, is as the square root of the radius of the wheel. Let the whole weight to be moved be W, the radius of the wheel r; 5 the force which, drawing horizontally, will raise the carriage over an immoveable obstacle of the height ; then 2 ũ or Vr: Jæh:: :. 172. When a machine is so loaded, that it would be in equilibrio if there were no friction, iĩt vill not he ready to move till a part be added to the power, having its momentum equal to the momentum of the frietion. The friction must be considered as a given force, opposed to the power, and having a momentum proportional to its distance from the centre or axis of motion. 178. Let a lever turn on an axle of which the radius is 7; let a be the length of the arm to which if the power P were applied, it would sustain the weight W, supposing there were no frietion; and let  be the addition to be made, in order to overcome the frictton, the ratio of the pressure to the frietion being that of n to I; then is, r - +W). a. The friction will cause the equilibrium to remain vhile the power varies from Pp to P +ꝓ. If a, P and W are given, ꝓ can only be lessened by diminishing 7, or increasing n, that is, by diminishing the radius of the axle, or polishing its surface. For the application of a like correetion to the other mechanical powers, see PRONY, Arch. Hyd. Sect. v. Bossur, Mech. § 261, to 288. VAN SWINDEN, Positiones Phys. § 8128325. 174. The stiffmess of ropes, or their resistance to bending, has a great analogy to frietion. In different ropes, the forces requisite to bend them, are in the direet ratio of their diameters and their tensions jointly, and in the inverse ratio of the radii of the cylinders round which they are bent. Van SWINDEN, Pos. Plys. 339. CouLoMB, whose experiments ought to have great weight, holds the stifſness to follow the ratio of the section of the rope, that ĩs, of the square, not of the simple pover of its diameter. The decision of the question requires new experiments. 175. The friction of a rope wound round a cylinder, increases in geometrieal progression, while the number of turns increases in arithmetical progression. If the turns be represented by the numbers, O, 1, 2, 8, 4, &e.; the resistance made by the rope may be represented by the numbers 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, &e. Hence the great use of this kind of resistancè to stop motion quickly, and to make fast one end of a rope vhen a great force or strain is to be applied to the other. 176. Though frietion destroys motion, and generates none, it is of essential usè in mechanics. It is the cause of stability in the strueture of machines; and is necessary to the exertion of the force of animals. A nail, a screw, or a bolt, could give no firmness to the parts of a machine, or of any other structure, vithout frictionn. Animals could not walk, or exert their force any how, without the support which it affordss Nothing would have any stability but in the lowest possible situation, and an arch which could sustain the greatest load vhen properly distributed, might be thrown down by the weight of a single ounce, if not placed with mathematical exactness at the very point which it ought to ocupy. SECT. IV. OF MECHANICAL AGENTS. im A FUNDAMENTAL distinetion among mechanieal agents, or. the powers which put bodies in motion, consists in this, that in some the intensity of their action, or the acceleration they produce in a given time, is the same whether the body acted on be at rest or in motion; in others, it is greatest when the body acted on is at rest, and becomes less as its velocity increases. Gravity is the only force which is certainly known to act with equal intensity on bodies in motion and at rest. Magnetism has probably the same property. Every other power acts more forcibly on a body at rest than on one that has already acquired motion in the direction in which it actss. This happens with respect to the elasticity of springs, the impulse of fluids, and the strength of animals, the only powers, except gravity, vhich are employed to put machines in motionn. The knovledge of the laws, according to vhich the action of these powers diminishes, as the motion they communicate increases, is of great importance in mechanics. 178. The absolute elasticity of a spring is nearly proportional to its distance from its state of quiescence, or that at which its elasticity does not act; but the power of the same spring to impel a body, must depend not only on its absolute force, but also on the rate at which ĩit overtakes the body. a. An arrov, for example, is impelled by the string of a bow, not simply with a force proportional to the distance of the string from the position in which it was at rest, (to which the absolute elasticity of the bow is probably proportional) but by a force which is less, the nearer the velocity of the string and of the arrow approach to an equality. This subject, however, has not been sufficiently examined. l b. A spring is sometimes made to act with uniform force by lengthening the lever to which it is applied in the same proportion as its tension becomes less, or as its distance from its state of quiescence diminishess. This is done in the case of a watch-spring. The velocity acquired by the body impelled, is here s0 small that it may be neglected. 179. When a moving body, whether solid or ſluid, acts upon another, the motion communicated is less, the less the difference of their velocities. The determination of the law observed by this action, in the case of fluids, belongs to Hydrodynamies, and vill be explained under that headlc. There remains, therefore, to be considered here only the law of animal force. 180. The strength of men, and of all animals, most powerful when directed against a resistce that is at rest: when the resistance is overme, and vhen the animal is in motion, its force diminished; lastly, with a certain velocity, the imal ean do no work, and can only keep up the otion of its own hody. A ſormula having the three properties just mentioned, vill afford an approximation to the law of animal forcee Let P be the weight which the animal exerting itself to the utmost, or at a dead pull, ĩs just able to overcome;  any other weight with vhich it is actually loaded; and v the velocity with vhich it moves vhen so loaded; c the velocity at which the power of drawing or carrying a load entirely ceases; then WDP I ) is an equation that has all the three conditions mentioned above. Not only, however, has the formula P I ) these c eonditions, but the square of it has the same, or, indeed, any function of it which vanishes when l1 5 vanishes, that is, hen v =c. We are leſt, then, at liberty to choose any of these funetions, and vould assume the formula above as the simplest, if another condition did not seem necessary to be included. It is eertain, that in all cases, vhen v approaches to e, or hen the speed hecomes great, a small variation in the weight is accompanied vith a great variation in the velocity. The simplest formula that corresponds to this condition, - ſ] - is, hen 1 is raised to the square. cC I 181. Thereſore, till experienee has led to a more urate result, ve may suppose the strength of imals to follow the law expressed by the formuv=ruVb This equation, supposing W and v variable, is an equation to a parabola, the construetion of which vill serve to represent this law more clearly to the imagination. A formula for expressing the law of animal action, vas first proposed by EvrER, in a Bissertation on the Force of Oarss. Mèm. Acad. de Berlin, 4. 2 That which he employed vas WDP U l different from both those vèo have mentioned, but a function of the first, such as to become 0, when v=c. EuLER, however, changed this to another, M&m. Acad, de Rerlin, 52, and Nov. Com. Pe1 trop. viii. p. 44, the same that is given in the last article He appears to have done 85 merely on account of the analogy thus preserved between the action of animals and of fluids M. ScHULZE, of the Academy of Berlin, has since proved by direct experiments, that this formula is nearer the truth than the otherr. Mẽm. de TAcad. de Berlin, 1788, p 8383, &e. 182. The effect of animal force, then, or the quantity of work done in a given time, will he 2 proportional to Wu, or to Pv (I 3 , and will =5 ma w=4. iat is, hen the animal moves with the one-third of the speed with which it is able only to move itselſ, and is loaded with four-ninths of the greatest load it ĩs able to put in motion. be a max;imum vhen v The quantities P and c ęan only be determined by experience, and as they must diſfer for different individuals, an average estimation oſ them is all that can be ohtainedc Even that average is but imperfeetly known; EULER supposes, that for the work of men, P may he tęken  60 Ib. and o ſ feet per second, or a little more than four miles an hour. A man, according to this estimate, vhen working to the greatest advantage, should carry a load of 27 Ib., and valk at the rate of two feet in a second, or a mile and one-third an hour.  horse, according to DESAGULIERS, drawing a weight out of a vell, over a pulley, can raise 200 Ib. for eight hours together, at the rate of two miles and a half an hour. Supposing the horse, in this case, to work to the greatest advantage, 200 x 9 4 per hour. P æ = 450, and c =2.5 x 8 m.5 miles I. ScuuLZzE made experiments purposely to determine the values of P and c, in the above formula, vhen applied to the working of men. He found by trials made on the strength of twenty men, that, taking a mean, P is to be estimated at 100 or 1I0 pounds avoirdupois, and c at 5.4 feet per second. For the labour of a. man, ve may therefore suppose 2 wæ101 ) Thus, if 54 w 30, =54 ſ57) 2 and in fact the common rate of a man's working may be nearly estimated at this amount. If, however, the formula is correct, he does not work to the greatest advantage; for then W would be : of P, or nearly 45 Ib., and v would be : of c, or 1.8 feet per second. M. SCHULZFE ScuuLZE considers the quantity P, in the case of a horse, as seven times greater than in the case of a man, and the velocity, at the common rate of working, as twice as great; so that the work done by a horse is fourteen times that done by a man. Mẽm. de T Acad. de Rerlin, ibid. This exceeds DESAGULIEE'S estimate. Course of Eæp. Phil. Sect. 4. Notes, § 6. Vhen a horse's ork is estimated by the load he draws in a cart or vaggon, a great reduction must be made, in order to compare the force he exerts with that which is necessary for raising a veight, by drawing it over a pulleyy Though accurate experiments on the friction of wheel-carriages are wanting, we probably shall not err much in supposing the frietion, on a road, and with a carriage of the ordinary construction, to amount to a twelſth part of the load. If, then, a horse draws a ton in a cart, which a strong horse vill continue to do for several hours together, ve must suppose his action the same as if he raised up the twelfth part of a ton, (2240 Ib.), or 186 Ib. perpendicularly against the force oſ gravity. To raise a weight of 186 Ib. thereſore, at the rate of two miles, or tvo miles and a half an hour, (that is 2.9, or .G feet per second), may be taken as the average vork of a strong draught horse in good condition. different manner of estimating animal foree has been folloed by CouLoMB, Mèm. de ſInst. Nat. tom. iI. p: 880, &e.  I. H 1838. It 188. It appears to be a certain faet, that when a man carries only his on weight, the quantity of his action, that is, the height he is able to ascend in a given time, multiplied into his weight, is greater than when he carries any additional load; and CouL.oMB thought it probable, that this diminution of action, is in proportion to the additional load carriedl Now it appeared from his experiments, that when a man carried a load equal to his own weight, his action was reduced nearly onehal?; and, therefore, supposing the reduetion always proportional to the load, if w be the weight of the man's body, I an additional load, which he is made to carry, H the height to which he ascends in a given time, when walking freely, and  the height to which he ascends in the same time with the load I them his action in the latter case, or (w1) h, is redueed to vH (I ) and therevH (I fore also h =  7 . w+ Suppose that a man is loaded with one-fourth of his l wH (I : ũ+3) , l )-n 699 L =H (.699). own weight; then hæ The value of H is deduced from the ascent of the Peak of Teneriſfe. BorD a, accompanied by eight men, on foot, ascended in the first day, or in (n 45m), to the height oſ 2028 metres, or 9593 feet. This was at the rte of 1225 feet in an hour. Had each of the men carried a load equal to the fourth part of his weight, they would only have ascended at the rate of 857 feet an hour. When I =0, or I=2u, the height h=o. With a load equal to twiee a mans weight, he could not ascend. 184. The strength of à man being supposed to low the lawv now laid down, its greatest effeet raising a weight, will be when the weight of e man is to that of his load as I to1I+3, nearly as 4 to S. H ) Hul4⸗b) Because h æ , Lhæ 26 wVl w+I now In, or the weight multiplied into the height to which it is raised, is the measure of the effect, or of the work done, which, therefore, will be a maximum when the last formula is so, that is when I/u I  8). H v If in the equation h , We suppose T. and I to be variable, the other quantities being constant, the locus oſ the equation is a hyperbola, vhich may be easily constructed. "he theorems just given only differ from CouLoMPS, by being somevhat simpler, and free from all reference to any particular measure of length or of weight. n the subject of Animal Force, however, many more experiments are wanting: to determine, for instance, the friction of wheel carriages; the difference between the exertions required to walk on a horizontal plane, and on one of a given declivity; the quantity of work done in a given time by the same animal, carrying different loads; the difference between the effective exertion of a man's strength when he moves along with his load, and when he stands, as in turning a wheel, or sits, as in rowing a boat, &c. &c. SECT. V. MOTION OF MACHINES. 85. MAcEINES either work with a variable a uniform velocity. If the moving power is of ind that, when the motion begins, diminishes the intensity of its action, the machine, after ittle time, will acquire a uniform velocity. If, however, the moving power be one that acts always with the same force, and if the resistance is also uniform, the machine will be continually accelerated. But as a motion continually accelerated is incompatible with many of the purposes of machinery, it is either contrived, that, by an inereased resistance, the motion shall become uniform, or that the moving power shall at intervals cease altogether, or become a retarding foreeso that the velocity of the machine, though continually changing, may be confined within certain limits. M. DALEMBERTS principle (5 120.) is very useful for determining the action of machines vorking vith a variable velocity. One of the simplest examples of this is contained in the investigation of the following theorem. 186. Let A and B be two given weights, applied to the ends of the arms of a lever, of which the lengths are a and b, and let A x a be greater than B X b, so that A may preponderate; the space over whieh B will be raised in one second, ( g being the velocity whieh a heavy body acquires in the first AaDBbIb, A ? + B V⸗ xæ5 second of its deseent), ĩs Call æ the velocity of B, then u will be the velocity of A. If the bodies were ſree to fall by their own gravity, the velocity of each would be g; thereſore ar b the velocity lost by A is 3 ; and the velocity gained by B is +; now the momenta of these must be equal by § 120, that is, A a ( =Bb (+); and hence æ, or the velocity of B, jĩs found, and the half of it is the space over which B is raised in one second. ence the time in which B will be raised over a given space h, being equal to as many seconds as h contains the above expression, is Aa?' +B 2h aBbg is evident, that if A is given, as also B and b, and if the length of the arm a be alone supposed variable, the time thus computed must admit of a minimum, as it vould be infinite if a were so short, that A a = Bb; and it would also be infinite, if a vere infinitely long. There must be a value of a, therefore, that will give the time of ascent the least, or the angular velocity of the lever the greatest; and it will be found by the preceding formula. 7. The same things, therefore, being suppos in the last proposition, the angular velocity of - n- vill be the greatest possible, when Bb + bVB -AB AB A If the bodies A and B are equal, aDb+b/2=u +V2). EuLER, de Machinarum usu maæime lucroso, Com. Petrop. 788) p. 67. Prop. 2 Also BLAEE, Phil Trans. I751, p. 1., &e. We have abstracted here from the inertia and weight of the lever, that the investigation might he the more elementary EuLER has extended his inquiry to the wheel and axle, and other machines impelled by gravity. 188. A state of uniform motion is sometimes produced in machines where gravity is the moving power, by means of a resistance, so constituted, as to inerease with the velocity: when the velocity has reached a certain quantity, the retarding force becomes equal to the accelerating, and the velocity of the machine. remains uniform. This is exemplified in the motion of a jack; the resistance that the fly makes, increases vith its velocity, and after a certain time, prevents all ſarther acceleration. A more refined artifice for producing a uniform motion in a machine impelled by gravity, is employed in the pendulum elock. In that machine, a pendulum, by forcing the end of a lever at each vibration, against a tooth of a vheel, put in motion by a weight, prevents the acceleration of that weight, and at the same time receives an impulse just suſficient to continue its motionn. The exact adjustment of these forces, is one of the nicest prohlems in practical Mechanics. In a watch, where the moving power is the elasticity of a spring, the uniformity of the motion is, on similar principles, produced by the vibrations of a balance. 189. When the momentum of the power applied to a machine, is greater than the momentum of the resistance, the machine is put in motion, and if the power be one whieh acts more foreibly on bodies at rest than on bodies in motion, its action ĩs of course lessened, and the acceleration of the machine in the second instant is less than in the firs. Thus the effect of the accelerating foree continues to diminish till sueh time as it becomes equal to the effeet of the resistance, or till the velocity generated every instant by the one foree, be just equal to the velocity destroyed every instant by the other. The acceleration then ceases, and the motion of the machine becomes uniform. The process by which a machine is thus brought to its permunent state of working, is most rapid in the beginming, and becomes slower as it advances. Indeed, if the laws of physical action admitted of mathematical exactness, or rather, i our senses enabled us to trace their progress with perfect accuracy, it would be found that a state of uniform motion is never fully acquired by any machine, and that it cannot be acquired in less than an infinite time. The curve oſ vhich the abscissæ represent the time, and the ordinates the velocity of the machine, can never pass into a straight line; but it may have, for an assymptote, a straight line parallel to its axis, to which it may soon approach so near that they can no longer he distinguished. On the motion of machines, see EVLER, de Machinis in genere, Nov. Com. Petrop. tom. ni. 1750, 1751), p. 2b64., &e. Also Principia Theoriæa Machinarum, by the same author, Nov. Com, Petrop. tom. viII. >760, 1761), p. 80, &ę. 190. When a machine attains its state of unim motion, the momentum of the power is equal that of the resistance, and is the same that uld be in equilibrio with the resistance, if there we no motion at all. If it is by a strcam of vater that the machine is driven, the stream is, by the supposition, at first much more than able to overcome the resistance, and the machine accelerates till the relative veloci3 ty of the water and the wheel is so small, that the force of the water is no greater than is suſficient to halance the resistance The case is nearly the same whatever he the moving power, provided its action diminish with the velocity it communicates. 191. In all machines, the work done is to be estimated not merely from the quantity of resistance overcome, but from the quantity overcome in a given time, or which is the same, from the quantity of the resistance multiplied into the velocity communicated. The resistance is supposed here to be expressed by veight, and the effeet by that weight multiplied into the velocity with which it is raised. As this is also the expression for the momentum of the resistance, and as that momentum is equal, when the motion is uniform, to the momentum of the pover, this last, or the product of the moving force into its velocity, is also the measure of the effect. 192. In all machines, that work with a uniform motion, there is a certain velocity, and a certain load, which yield the greatest ęffect, and are therefore more advantageous than any other. If the machine is loaded heavily, though the resistance overcome may be great, it may be overcome 30 slovly, that the total effect shall be hut small And, again, if the machine is loaded very lightly, it will give great velocity to the load, though, from the smallness of its quantity, the effeet will still be inconsiderable Between these two loads there must be some intermediate one, that will make the effect the greatest possible. If the moving power observe the same law that has been already aseribed to animal force, viz. 2 W=PF  }), hich will be aſterwards shewn to be the law that regulates the force of fluids in motion), the effect will be expressed v 2 by W u5, or by Pob), vwhich is a maxiC mum vhen Wæ y , and vhen væ 5 The resistance should be : of that which the gover, vhen fully exerted, is just able to balance, or of the resistance that is sufficient to reduce the machine to rest; and the velocity of the part oſ the machine to vhich the power is applied, should be one-third of the greatest velocity of the power. 98. If, therefore, the moving power in any hine follow the law expressed by the equation P I : and if the load or resistance ch is just able to keep the machine at rest, or to prevent its motion altogether, be found by experiment; then if the load be reduced to : of this quantity, the effeet of the machine will be the greatest possible. 194. The moving power and the resistance being both given, other things remaining as above, i? a machine be so constructed that the velocity of the point to which the power is applied, be to the velocity of the point to which the resistance is applied as 9R to 4 P, the machine will work to the greatest possible advantage. The velocities of the points just mentioned are capable of being adjusted to any given ratio, on principles that have already been explained. Under the name of the Load, we suppose the frietion oſ the parts of the machine to be comprehendd, vhich must therefore be determined by experiment. 195. Care should be taken to give to every machine the greatest possible regularity in its motion. The contrivance known by the name of a Fly, is one of the best adapted for this purpose When the impelling power is subject to alternate intention and remission, the inertia of a heavy wheel, by preserving the velocity it has acquired, tends to lessen the irregularity resulting from these causes. The effect of a ſly, to remove irregularity in the motion of a machine, its weight and diameter being given, is proportional to ĩts velocity. 196. In wheel carriages, the equability oſ the motion is even of greater importance than in hydraulic engines; the sudden checks to motion having a more pernicious effect on an animal body than on an inert mass. The improvement of roads, and the diminution of friction, are, in such cases, of the greatest use; but that which corresponds most to the advantage derived from a fly, is the eſfect from supporting the weight by springs, or from giving elasticity to the parts by vwhich the cattle are yoked to the carriage. The sudden action of the resistance, and the jerks which are the consequences of it, are thus preventedc. The greater the velocity the carriages move with, the more advantage is derived from this application of elastic force. SECT. VI. OF THE DESCENT OF HEAVY BODIES ON PLANE AND CURVE SURFACES. 197. Tuæ ſoree which accelerates the motion of a heavy body on an inclined plane, is to the force of gravity, as the sine of the inclination of the plane to the radius, or as the height of the plane to its length. If = force accelerating the body on an nclined plane, of which the nclnation is i, and if —/ force of gravity, f/g sin i. Hence the motion of a body on an inclined plane, is a motion uniformly aceelerated. SGRrAVES ANDE, § 882.; MuscHENBROEE, §j 608.; GaLiLEO, Dial. III. Opere, tom. i. p. 106, &e. 198. If two bodies begin to descend from rest, and from the same point, the one on an inclined plane, and the other falling freely to the ground, their velocities at all equal heights above the surface will be equal. Hence the velocity acquired by a body in falling from rest through a given height, is the same, whe2 ther it fall freely, or deseend on a plane any how inclined. I99. The space through which a body will descend on an inelined plane, ĩs to the space through which it would fall freely in the same time, as the sine of the inclination of the plane to the radius. 1] The diameter o? a cirele perpendicular to the horizon, and any chord terminating at either extremity of that diameter, are fallen through in the same tme. The velocities which bodies acquire by descending along chords of the same cirele, are as the lengths of those chords. 200. If a body descend over a series of inclined planes, at each of the angular points, where it passes from one plane to another, it loses a part of the velocity it had acquired, proportional to the versed sine of the inclination of the planes. If v be the velocity it has acquired when it comes to any angle 9, v X vers. 9 is the velocity lost. 201. Any angle being given, it may be divided mto angles, so small, that the sum of the versed sines of these angles shall be less than any given magnitude. Hence the number oſ planes may be so increased, and their inclination to one another so diminished, that though the change oſ direction between the first and the last be ever so great, the loss of velocity in the descending body shall be less than any given quantity. Therefore, if the body descend in a curve, it will suſfer no loss of velocity. D ALEMBERT, Traitb de Dynamique, § 41. DThis is true of the motion of a pendulum, that is, of a body suspended from a fixed point, and swinging freely forwards and backwards about that point. 202. When a pendulum vibrates in a eirele, the foree which accelerates it as it approaches the lowest point, is nearly proportional to its distance from that point. u. Hence the small vibrations of the same pendulum are nearly isochronous, or of the same duration. 203. If a pendulum vibrate in a cirele, and if be the velocity acquired by a heavy body descending freely, in one second, the square root of g is to the square root of the length of the pendulum, as the number which expresses the ratio of the cireumference of a cirele to its diameter, is to the time of the least vibration of the pendulum, expressed in seconds. Let I be the length of a pendulum, æ the number that denotes the circumſerence of a cirele, of which the diameter is 1, and ? the time oſ one vibration of the pendulum in seconds; = As the weight oſf the body does not enter nto the expression of the time, the vibrations of a pendulum are the same whatever be its weight. i Hence the times of the vibrations of pendulums are as the square roots of their lengths. If t21, I æ length of the seconds pendulum, and g T l E therefore /, xV, or I m f it be required, having V, to find g n x I. By help of this last formula, & is found more exactly than can be done by direct experiment. In London, Lat. 51° 8l' 8, by Captain KaTer'S experiments, the length of the secondss pendulum æ 9. I86 inchess. Hence &  82.198 feet. SiMPSON'S Fluxions, § 460.; SANDERSONS Fluæions, p. 07.; and CAVALLO, vol. I. p. 190. The values both of 2 and I are somewhat different in different latitudes, as will be explained in Physical Astronomy. In this proposition, the arch over which the penduIum vibrates, is supposed to be very small; if the arch ĩs considerable, let its versed sine (to the radius I) be v, and ? the time of an entire vibration, t 3.8  3.3.55 i +; 23 ãà à  5 ãaa6s æV S1MPSON, ibid.; FRANCOEUE, § 196. me edit. Centre of Oscillation. 204. When a pendulum consists of two or more bodies, or of one body, from the figure and extent of which we are not permitted to abstract, it is called a Compound Pendulum. The axis of this pendulum is a line which passes through the point of suspension, and is vertical when the penduIum is at rest; and its centre of oscillation is a point in this axis, or in the axis produced, in which, if a weight were placed, it would form a simple pendulum, vibrating with the same angular velocity as the compound. It vibrates, therefore, in the same time; or is isochronous with the compound pendulum itself. 205. The distance of the centre of oscillation of a compound pendulum, from its centre of suspengion, is equal to the sum of the produets of each body into the square of its distance from the centre of suspension, divided by the sum of the produets of each body into the simple power of its distance from that centre. If the bodies be A, B:;C, D, &e. and their distances from the centre of suspension q, b, c, d, &e. and æ the distance of the centre of oscillation from the same point, then Aæ?? +B -C -D ? a=XaFB5CcD ĩſ This value of æ is deduced from DALEMBERTS principle, § 120. æ is also the length of the simple pendulum, isochronous with the compound, or vibrating in the same time. If any of the bodies are above the point of suspension, their distances from that point are accounted negative. 206. If a eylinder, of which the altitude is a, and the radius r, be suspended from its vertex, the distance oſf the centre of oscillation from the ver. 2c re tex us x 1 3 + 2a If the radius rO0, s0 that the cylinder coincides vwith a straight rod of inconsiderable thickness, the distance oſ the centre oſ oscillation is . 207. If a cone of which the altitude is a, and the radius of the base 7, be suspended from the vertex, the distance of the centre of oscillation from the vertex is 5 Worrn Elementu Math. - n. § 459, 460. 208. If a sphere, of which the radius is 7, be suspended by a fine thread, so that the distance of its centre from the point of suspension is a, the distance of the centre of oscillation from the same int is a lii 5a HvęENII orol. Oscil. Prop. 22. 209. If in the axis of a pendulum, different points of suspension be taken, the distances of the centres of oscillation from the centre of gravity, will be reciprocally as the distances of the points of suspension from the same. This proposition holds of solids as well as oſ plane figures. 210. The eentre of oscillation of a compound pendulum, may be found by comparing its vibrations with those of a simple pendulum of a known length, the lengths of two pendulums being inversely as the squares of the number of vibrations which they perform in the same time. Thus, if I be the length of a simple pendulum vibra. a : ting seconds; æ the distance of the centre of oscillation of a compound pendulum from its centre of suspension, and n the number of vibrations vhich iĩt 3000 x? n makes in a minute, ? Because ? is nearly 89. 1886 inches, x= I40998.9 inches, nearly. In making this exn periment, n may be measured by a watch. See HuTTONS Math. Dict. article, Centre of Oscillation. 2ll. The centres of suspension and oscillation are convertible, that is, i the centre of oscillation in any hody or system of bodies be made the point of suspension, the former point of suspension will then become the centre of oscillation. The first author who treated of the pendulum and the centre of oscillation, vas HuYõENS, in his Horologium Oscillatorium, Opera Vaoria, tom. I. . 5l. &e. See also SGrAVES ANDE, § 404, and 424. MusSCHENBROEE, § 640. Bossur, Mecanique, § 401, 405. 134 OUTLINES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. Heavy Bodies descending on a Cycloidul Surfuace. gię. If a cirele DHE (fig. 12.) roll along a line AB, until the point V im its circumference, which touched the line AB in A, come to touch it again in B, the curve AVB, generated by the point V, is called a Cycloid. The line AB is called the Base; DV, which bisects AB at right angles, the Axis of the Cycloid; and the circle DHE, the Generating Cirele. If AC and BC be two semicycloids, or semicycloidal cheeks, each equal to the half of AVB, touching AB in A and B, and touching one another in C; and iſ there be fixed at C a pendulum P, hanging by a thread PTC, equal in length to the semicycloid, P in its vibrations will describe the cycloid AVB. 218. A pendulum being thus made to vibrate in a cycloid, is at every moment of its descent accelerated by a foree proportional to the arch of the cycloid, between it and the lowest point. Hence the vibrations of this pendulum, hether great or small, are all of the same duration. 214. If I be the length of a pendulum vibrating in a cycloid, the time of a vibration, whether the vibration be great or small, will be i : 2l5. The line in which a heavy body descends in the least time from one given point to another, not in the same horizontal plane, nor in the same vertical line with it, is an arch of a eycloid, having for its base a horizontal line drawn through the uppermost of the given points. Hence the cycloid is called the line of swiftest desCont. The problem of finding the line of swiſtest-descent was first proposed by JouN BERNOUILLI, Acta Eruditorum, 1697. Though the solution of it requires the assistance of the higher geometry, elementary demonstrations have been given by several authors, particularly by MacLAURIN, Fluions, vol. n. § 574, &c.; and by Fuisius, Cosmographia, Introd.  22, and 23. SECT. VII. ROTATION OF BODIES. ſotation about a Fived Axis. 216. LE? A, B, C, D, &. ſig. 18.) he a syætem oſ bodies in one plane, so connected as to he immoveable in respeet of one another, hut moveable about an axis at right angles to the plane, and passing through a given point 8; Iet a, b, e, d, be their distances respeetively from 8; and let a foree act on onc of the hodies A, sueh that i? A were unconneeted with the system, it would receive the velocity u, in a direetion at right angles to the radius a; let v be the velocity which it actually acquires when ĩit makes a part of the system; A œ& u VAH BV  C/D? That is, if each body be multiplied into the square of its distance from the axis of rotation, the sum of all these produets, is to the produet of A, into the square of its distance from the same axis, as the velocity which A would have had if it had m free to move by itself, to the velocity which 1as as a part of the system. This is proved, by considering that A (u v) is the B) ã Cco Ddv motion lost by A, and/ ) a a motions gained by B, C, and D; and that these last must, by ALæMBERTS principle (5 120.), be in equilibrio with the former; whence the equation , the Aa u0y= 8b C} D& g from which the value of v is obtained. From the demonstration, it is evident, that the momentum of the system relatively to S, is found by multiplying each body into the square of its distance from S, and the sum into the velocity at A. The angular velocity i is found by dividing both sides by a; this gives 3li A a u a - B- r CJD & The quantity is the value of the angle described round S in one second, expressed in parts of the radius. If it is required in degrees and minutes, the above value must be multiplied by 57°.29578, the number of degrees in an arch equal to the radius. These propositions hold not only of a system of bodies in one plane, but of a system in different planes, if we suppose perpendiculars drawn from them to the axis of rotation. 217. If 9, d , be the angles which the radii dravn from S to B, C, D, (ſig. 14.) make with the radius dravn through A, and if in this latter radius a point P be taken, distant from S by the quantity Ad+BV? Ct Dæ A a+ B b cos  Cc cos Dd cos the point P is such, that if an obstacle were applied there sufficient to resist the rotation of the system, no motion would be communicated to the axis at 8; or, which is the same, though the axis at S were not fixed, the system would have no tendeney to revolve about the point P. The point P is called the Centre of Percussion. This proposition is investigated by assuming P, drawing PO parallel to BS, and BO perpendicular to it. The momentum of B relatively to P is the same as if it were placed at O, and is therefore B x ſ & æ cos 9). The sum of the momenta computed in this way is equal to O, and thence the value of æ, or SP. 218. Any system of bodies being given, a point may be found in which if all the bodies were collected, a force applied at any distance from the axis, would communicate to the bodies thus collected the same angular velocity that it would have communicated to the system in its first condition. The point thus found is called the Centre of Gyrotion. Its distance from the axis of rotation is VEGES LEXæ :iſ A+B CHD i ArvwooD on Rectilinear und Rotatory Motion, ꝑ. 21l, 2l12. As every body may be considered as a system oſ physical points, it is evident that the preceding propositions are of general applicationn. We shall give examples in the cases of the cylinder and the sphere. 219. Let ADBE (ſig. 15.) be a eylinder moveable about an axis passing through C its centre; let the radius of the eylinder be given =7, and also its weight /W; and let another given weight F hang by a cord BF, wound round the eylinder. Required, the force accelerating the point B, and the velocity which B will acquire in the first second of its motion. The sum made by multiplying each particle of the cylinder, into the square of its distance from the axis, supposing the thickness of the cylinder, in the direction of that axis, to be m, is found by fluxions, or the quadrature of curves, to be ; æ m rt, and therefore (by § 92.) the velocity acquired in the ſirst second by the circumference of the eylinder is 2F æ ⸗ 222F. I Fæ+7u73  F7nm on ſinee mr? = the solidity of the eylinder), 2F. »7F +W heavy body in the first second of its descent. g being the velocity acquired by a As 2F +W to 2F, so the force of gravity to the force accelerating the cylinder at its surface. 220. The quantity A &+ B V?, &e. in § 2l6, which is the sum of all the produets made by multiplying each particle into the square of its distance from the axis of motion, is called the momentum of the inertiu of the revolving body. It is computed for any given body, either by the method of fluxions, or the quadrature of eurves. 221. Let the circle ADB (fig. 15.) represent a sphere moveable about an axis that passes through the centre C, and is perpendieular to the tion by the weight F hanging from B. The radius of the sphere 7, its weight W, and that of the body F being given, it is required to find the velocity which the point B acquires in one second, or the force by which it is accelerated. The momentum of inertia computed for the sphere, is 2 nr5, and therefore the accelerating force at O . B isDL 8V 28AXA '-⸗ Fr +  ar F 4 5 ær is the solidity of the sphere,  W he substituted F . g F +4W ſor it, the above expression becomes Therefore T + æ W is to F, as the force of gravity to the accelerating force at BB, the equator of the sphere. 299. If the motion, instead of being produced by a body hanging from the sphere, and partaking of ĩts velocity, were communicated by the impulse of a body F, moving with a given velocity e, in the direction of the tangent at B, and striking against the radius produced, the velocity communicated 1I5F. c would be ã The solution of the two last problems might be derived from the supposition, that the whole mass was collected in the centre of gyration The question would then be reduced to the simplest case of § 20l. where the system consists only of two bodies. The preceding solution is, however, more direct. 228. If in the two preceding cases,  and F be both supposed to be sustained by the axis when the whole is at rest; the part of the weight of F of which the axis is relieved when the motion begins, is to the whole weight of F, as the Force by which it is accelerated to the force of gravity. Thus, in the instance of the sphere, the pressure on the axis is diminished by the quantity x F. F  W If W=8300Ib., F 101b..V 1 = ,  = b.; 3 =ꝶ 0 that F r æ the diminution of pressure is 2 Ib., and therefore the whole pressure, vhen the motion takes place, is 808 Ib. If it were required to find direetly the part of F pressing on the axis, it will eome out w v æF x F, which, in the last example, would amount to 8 Ib. Arwoon on Rectilinear and Rotatory Motion, § 6. p. 188., &c. Frisu1 Mechanicu, Opera, tom. II. p 188, &. ViNcE on the Principles of Progressive and Rotatory Motionn. Phil. Trans. 1780, p. 546., &e. Rotation on a Moveable Axis. 224. When the impulse communicated to a body is in a line passing through its centre of gravity, all the points of the body move forward with the same velocity, and in lines parallel to the direction of the impulse communicated. But when the direction of the impulse communicated does not pass through the centre of gravity, the body acquires a rotation on an axis, and also a progressive motion, by which its centre of gravity is carried forward in the same straight line, and with the same velocity, as if the direction of the impulse had passed through the centre of gravity. The progressive and rotatory motion are independent of one another, each being the same as if the other had no existence. This is a consequence of the general law, That the quantity of motion estimated in a given direction is not affected by the action of the bodies on one another. The revolution of a body on its axis arises from an action of this kind, and can neither increase nor diminish the progressive motion oſ the whole mass. The progressive motion, if the moving foree and the body moved are given, is determined by the principles of Dynamics; and the rotatory motion is computed, as if it were about a fixed axis, by the propositions just laid down. When one impulse only is communicated to the body, the axis on which it begins to revolve is a line drawn through its contre of gravity, and perpendicular to the plane that passes through that centre, and the direction of the impulse. See Frisius de Rotatione ciroum Adem Motum, theor. v. C0pera, tom. 1I. p. 157. 225. When a body revolves on an axis, and ⸗ force is impressed, tending to make it revolve on another, it will revolve on neither, but on a Iine in the same plane with them, dividing the angle which they contain, so that the sines of the parts are in the inverse ratic of the angular velocities with which the body would have revolved about the said axes, separately. This proposition was discovered by Frisi, and is demonstrated in his works, ubi supra, p. 184. See also the Cosmographia of the same author, vol. II. P *.. 226. If a force be impressed on any body, by which it is made to revolve on an axis, the quantity of its momentum, estimated by collecting into one sum all the produets of the particles into their velocities, and their distances from the axis of motion, is equal to the momentum of the foree impressed, estimated in the same manner. Hence, though, in consequence of the rotation of a body on its axis, a change may take place in its sfigure, or in its internal structure, the total quantity of its momentum vill continue the same. 227. A body may begin to revolve on any line as an axis, which passes through ĩits centre of gravity, but it will not continue to revolve permanently about that axis, unless the opposite centrifugal forces exactly balance one another. A homogeneous sphere may revolve permanently on any diameter, because the opposite parts of the solid, being in every direction equal and similar, the opposite centrifugal forces must be equal; so that no ſorce tends to change the position of the axis A homogeneous cylinder may revolve permanently about the line which is its geometric axis. It may also revolve permanently about any line that bisects that axis at right angles; but it can revolve permonently about no other line, as the centrifugal forces cannot be equal. The same is true with respeet to all solids of revolution. 228. In every body, however irregular, there are three axes of permanent rotation, at right angles to one another, on any one of which, when the body revolves, the opposite eentrifugal forces exactly balance one another. These are ealled the Principal Axes of Rotation. This singular theorem was first proposed hy SEGNER in 1755, and first demonstrated by ALEER? EULEE, in a Mémoire crowned at Paris in 1760. LEON. EuLEER has also given a demonstration of it in his treatise do Motu- Corporum rigidorum, prob. 21. See also Frisius, de Rotatione Corporum quorumcunque, theorema vu. ubi suprã, p. 194. These three axes have also this remarkable property, that the momentum of inertia with respect to any of them, is either a maximum or a minimum, that is, is either greater or less than if the body revolved about any other axiss. LEON. EULER, ubi supri. The momentum of inertia has already been defined, to be the sum of the products made by multiplying every particle into the square of its distance from the axis of rotation, (220.) APPENDIX. CONSTRUCTION OF ARCHES. 2209. Ir ABCD, DCEF, EFGH, &. (Fig. 16. be a series of truncated wedges, resting on two immoveable supports, and having the planes of the faces that press against one another perpendicular to a vertical plane, represented here by the plane of the paper, they will be in equilibrio, if their weights be proportional to the differences of the tangents of the angles which these planes make vwith a vertical plane given in position. Thus if the veights be as the differences oſ the tangents which AB, DC, EF, &e. make with the vertieal MN, the whole vill remain in equilibrio. This follows from the properties of the wedge already enumeratedl. ProNY, Architecture Hydraul. tom. I. § 856. Truncated wedges disposed in this manner, form what are called Arches in architecture; and the most advantageous construction of them requires, that the parts should be so adjusted as to be in equilibrio, or to balance one another by their weight only. An arch, o vhich the parts balance one another in this manner, is called an Arch of Equilibration. Some other deſinitions are necessary for understanding the construetion of these arches. The truncated vedges of which the arch is composed, and which are usually of stone, are called the Voussoirs; each course of these vedges forming one voussoir. The central voussoir is called the ey-stone. The surfaces which separate the voussoirs from one another, are called the Joints. The interior curve of the arch is called the Intrados; the exterior, or that which limits all the voussoirs, vhen they are in equilibrium, is called the Eætrados The Abutments, are the masses of masonry, at each end, that support the arch. The beginning of the arch is called the Spring of the arch; the middle, the Crown; the parts between the spring and the crown, the Haunches. The part of the abutment from which the arch springs, is termed the Impost. he theorem above is sufficient for the construcetion of arches, inasmuch as, vhen the curve of the intrados is given, it determines the weight of every individual voussoir. The application of it, in particular cases, admits, however, of being greatly simplifiedl. This happens remarkably when the arch is æ circle, and when the joints, (hich are usually made perpendicular to the curve of the intrados), intersect in the same point. 0. In a circular areh, the weights oſ the vousshould be as the differences of the tangents e arches, reckoned from the erown. This is nothing more than the general proposition above, applied to a particular case. In Fig. 17. if B be the crown of a cireular arch, the weight of the voussoir LENM should be to that of the voussoir MNPO, as the tangent of BN minus the tangent of BE, to the tangent of BP minus the tangent of BN; or if, from a given point D, DH be drawn perpendicular to AC, and if the joints KL, &e. be produced, to cut it in E, F, and G, the weights of the voussoirs must be as the segments DE, EF, FG, in order to produce an equilibrium. As the stones themselves cannot always be made in the proportion thus required, the wedges, of which they make parts, are supposed to be extended upward, by courses of masonry. The whole mass included between the planes of the joints produced, as far as that masonry extends, is understood to make up the weight of the voussoir. It is the business of the theory to calculate this weight; and to construct the curve which bounds the voussoirs, hen s0 produced. 231. In an arch, of which the intrados is a cle given in position, the depth of the key-stone ing given, it is required to deseribe the curve of e extrados. Let AGE (fig. 18.) be one-half of the arch, C the centre, AB the height or depth of the key-stone. From the centre E, with a distance equal to CB, intersect CA in D; through D, drav DH perpendicular to AC; and through G, any point in the intrados, drav GC, interseeting DH in F. Let FL be perpendicular to CE; join LB, and produce CG, till CK be equal to LB; K is a point in the extrados; and in the same way may innumerable other points be found. The line CKis always greater than CF, but approaches to it as the arch AG increases, so that DH is an asymptote to the extrados. The equation to the extrados is easily deduced from this constructionn. Drav KO perpendicular to CE. Let CO2, OK =4, CA =u, CD=9, the equation to the curve is &+ ny 5 v — Y©qzThe extrados, in the case of a circular arch, is, thereſore; a curve of the ſourth order, very much resembling the Conchoid of NicoEDES. It has an asymptote DH, and also a point of contrary flexure, 30 that ĩt coincides very nearly with the curve in which a road is usually carried over a bridge. , and Instead of , it may be convenient to have its value in terms of u, and the depth of key-stone d; viz. All this holds, whatever portion of a semicircle the arch be supposed to consist of. 2329. In an dlliptic arch, or one of which the intrados ĩs a semi-eſlipsis, i? 2 a be the span of the arch, or the longer axis of the ellipsis, and b the height of the arch, or the semi-conjugate axis of the ellipsis; then, if from any point in the curve, a perpendicular  be let fall on the longer axis, the weight of the key-stone is to the weight of the voussoir which has its middle at the point from which the perpendicular ĩs let ſall, as aẽ to æ v a? I? 2 a V x. Hence, if W is the veight oſf the key-stone, and V that of the voussoir, ab V xW. ææ7 , . This is the same with the theorem given by Bossu⸗, *echerches sur TEquilibre des Voutes, § 14.), though the expression is somewhat changed, with a view to facilitate the numerical calculation. 238. If the weights of the voussoirs are all equal, the arch of equilibration ĩis a catenarian curve, the same that a chain or eord of uniform thickness would assume if hanging freely, the horizontal distance of the points oſ suspension, being equal to the span of the arch, and the depth of the lowest point of the chain being equal to the greatest height of the arch. It can be easily shewn, that if the figure of the chain were reversed, the joints being such, that the force which was a pull in the first situation becomes a thrust in the second, the chain would support itself, and remain in equilibrio. li The equation to the catenaria, if  be the abscissa, taken from the vertex along the axis or vertical line, and 5 the corresponding ordinate, is y=A + hyp. log. Atær 2aeræ The constant quantity A is the horizontal tension expressed by the length oſ a chain of the same section and the same speciſic gravity with that oſ which the catenaria itsel? is formed. I S be half the Iength of the catenaria, S æx x+ a. Chain Bridges have been proposed, in which the road is to be carried along the catenarian curve suspended between two Pierss As in such bridges the curvature must always be small, and as the arch must consist of a small part of the curve near the vertex, an approximation more than suſſiciently exact for practice may be obtained in very simple terms. This approximation gives 8ivũ +V 1- ): m p-  32&. 2x hese two formulas are suſficient for the construetion of a chain bridge, hen 5 half the span, and æ the depression of the middle below the points oſ suspension, are given. For the properties of the catenaria, see J. BERNOUILLI Lectiones Cale. Integ. Lect. 36. Operum, tom IiI. p. 49I. DaviD GRrEGORY, Phil. Trans. 1697. CorES, Harmonia Mensurarum, p. 108., and Notes, p. I15. The catenaria is remarkable ſor this mechanical property, That a chain hanging in that curve, has its centre of gravity lower than if it were disposed in any other line, its length continuing the same, and also the points from which it is suspended. An arch, therefore, constructed in this form, has its centre of gravity the highest possible. 234. The pressure of an arch on the piers or abutments which support it, may be estimated by considering the parts of the arch which rest immediately on the abutments to a certain height, as parts of the abutments themselves; and the remainder of the arch as a wedge, tending to separate the abutments from one another. Thus (fig. 19.) the parts ALMS, BONT, which would remain in their places, though there were no pressure from above, may be regarded as parts of the piers; and LMDNO, the remainder of the arch, as a vedge tending to overthrow the piers by its pressure on the planes ML and ON. On these suppositions, the thickness of the piers may be determined, so that their weight shall enable them to resist this pressuree If from a point H, in the vertical EC produced, perpendiculars HK, HX, be dravn to the planes ML and ON, and if HU be taken to represent the weight of the arcn MLOND, the parallelogram IV being described, HI and HV vill represent the two forces which compound the forcee UH, and each of them will represent the force with which the arch presses on its supports ML and ON. Let RK æ HI, and let RK be resolved into the two forces Q. XP, the one horizontal, and the other vertical; KQ tends to overset the pier, supposed moveable about the point F, and KP adds to its stability. If FC be bisected in W, ve may suppose the weight of the pier at W, to act by the lever FW, and the force KP by the lever FC, both tending to keep the pier in its place, while the force KQ acts by the lever KC or FY to overthrov it. Farther, though the pier is properly only FGAG, yet it is usual to have it loaded with masonry to the height X, and even higher, so that its weight may be taken as proportional to the rectangle FK. This will give an equation between the forces, vhen their analytical expressions have been obtained. ngle UHI =3, and VHI =28, the area MLOND 2 = qa?, EC ær; make HU æ them IH æ —ZZXKBRBR. 2r cos⸗ R ence Q àr cos 8 x sin 8 73in ꝗ a tnd L P 2/Let CK bh, and C 2, 2r cos B* then the rectangle FK h æ, and the line that represents the veight of the pier will be hæ Therefore, h æ x a  = a? n r 2 Ir s )  75næ⸗e x h and hence, vx/| v +a V : at Qns à sin2⸗ + 4m5s”]s his determination o the thickness of the pier, proceeds on a hypothesis usually employed for determining the resistance of walls, &e.; but which, nevertheless, is not quite conformable to the ſact. The hypothesis is, that the pier AF, if the weight of the arch were too great to be sustained, would fall, by turning round the point F as a fulorum. Now this is not what would happen; the part of the abutment behind SM would be thrust out in the horizontal direction, till the arch had room to fall; it is therefore against the masonry immediately behind the part AM, and chiefly in a horizontal direction, that the force is exerted. he resistance made by a wall, is, in this view oſ it, analogous to the frietion of a body resting on a rugged surface, and has, no doubt, a given ratio to the weight of the wall, and may perhaps be regarded as equal to itt. Thus the mass of building immediately behind SM, should be of force sufficient to resist the thrust KQ; or, the section of that : a* part of the pier should be greater than ſ We give this, however, only as a limit, to hich it may be right to pay attention in the construction of such works. The true principles on which the resistance of walls is to be estimated, are not sufficiently understood; and, in the mean time, a skilful and cautious engineer, can do nothing better than compute the resistance on different hypotheses, and take care that the actual strength be greater than any thing that theory points out as necessary. 235. As the wedges made by extending the voussoirs, according to the preceding theorems, would be of an inconvenient length near the spring of the arch, it will hbe best to substitute for them such a resistanee as does not press till it is pressed upon. Thus, if on the pier immediately behind the arch, there be raised a body of masonry formed of horizontal courses of large stones, the voussoirs being continued no ſarther than to come in contact with the ends of those courses, the purpose oſ equilibrium will be answered, supposing the work of sufficient strength, because any of the voussoirs pressing against the horizontal courses, will have its own defect of weight immediately supplied by their reactionn. Each voussoir will then receive, with mathematical exactness, the precise degree of pressure required for the equilibrium, and can neither have more nor less than that quantity. The upper part of the arch is here supposed to be loaded in the manner that strict theory requires; to whieh there does not appear to be any practical ohjeetionn. If the pier be an intermediate one between two arches, the opposite pressure on the horizontal abutting courses will render their eſſect more certain. On the subject of Arches, see HuPTONs Principles of Bridges. Bossur, Recherches sur TEquilibre des Voutes, Mém. de VAcad. des Sciences, 1774 and I766; also Mecanique of the same author, edit. 1802, p. 888., &. PrONY, Architecture Hydraulique, tom. I. § 858., &c. ArwooD's Treatise on the Construction and Properties of Arches, published in 180I. This last work is particularly commendable, for the great accuracy of the investigation, the minuteness with which the subject is considered, and the various experiments brought in support of the theory See also article Bridge, in the Edinburgh Encyclopœdia. STRENGTH OF TIMBER. 236. If a beam of wood, of vhich the section is any given figure, having its area = a?, have one end firmly fixed in a wall; if 5 be the strength of each fibre estimated laterally; d the distance of the centre of gravity of the seetion, from the edge where the fracture terminates, and round which the beam, when ĩt ĩs broken, turns as on a hinge; let I be the length of the beam, measured from the wall from which it projeets, to the end at which a weight W is hung, just sufficient to break 5 } d ꝶ The weights, therefore, required to break different beams, are as the strength of the individual ſibres, multiplied OUTLINES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. multiplied intd the area of the sections,, and into the distance of the centre of gravity of the sections from the points round which the beams turn in breaking, the whole being divided by the lengths of the beams. We are indebted to GAaLiLEO for this theorem. He was the first vho attempted to reduce the strength of the materials used in the mechanical arts, to the measures of geometry and arithmeticc. Dialogo Secondo, Opere, tom. nI. ꝑ. 68., &e. See also ibid. p. 218., a Commentary on vhat GALILEO has written on this subject, begun by Viviani, and completed by Gurno GRANDE. It is obvious, that the hypothesis of the beam breaking short over, and turning as on a hinge, is not the preeise fact; and therefore the conclusion deduced from this hypothesis cannot be expected to be more than an approximation. It does not appear, however, that more refined views, or more complicated speculations, have led to results agreeing better with experiment than the simple hypothesis of GALILEO. 287. In a beam, of which the seetion is a reetangle, having the breadth b, and the depth f, V = sb ] r73 The strength, therefore, all other things remaining the same, is as the breadth multiplied into the square of the depth. This proposition has been brought to the test of experiment by BurFON, in a great number of trials, made with great accuracy, and on a large scale. The beams he subjected to trial were of oak, from seven to twenty-eight feet in length, and from four inches square to eight inches. It appears from them, that the quantity called æ in the above formulas, or the strength of the ligneous fibre, is nearly proportional to the specific gravity, or to the weight of a given bulk, for example, a cubic foot of the timber. The weights required to break the beams were found to be very nearly as the quantities b c?, the length remaining the same. The real strengths, however, fell a little short of the computed, and the more, the longer the beam. In beams of different lengths, the variation of strength did not follow the inverse ratio of the lengths near so exactly as it did that of the other quantities included in the formula. Histoire Naoturelle par M. DE BUFFON: Supplement, tom. In. p. 255., &e. 12mo edit. 2388. In a beam, of which the seetion is a trigle, having the base b, and the depth or perpensbp 8 t when the vertex of the triangle is uppermost, cular ꝓ, when the base is uppermost, V/ ussbp the edge of the prism, Wæ The strength of a prismatic beam is therefore twice as great hen a face is uppermost, as when the opposite edge is uppermost. n like manner, in a cylindric beam, of which the radius is r, 7 l n a cylindric tube, the radius of the external surface being r, and of the internal 7, æs7 (??rr2  —— The strength o the tube is therefore to the strength of the same quantity of matter, formed into a solid eylinder of the same length, as r to J/.  tube may, therefore, be much stronger than the same quantity of matter in a solid form. This is known to be agreeable to experiencee But it is also said, that a tube of metal has been found to support a greater transverse strain than a solid eylinder, of the same diameter; or that a solid cylinder, vhen bored in the direction oſ the axis, and a considerable part taken avay, was stronger than beſore. V æ Chis must undoubtedly arise ſfrom a change taking place in the position of the fulerum or hinge round which the fracture is madee In the case of a eylinder, and, indeed, of all solids, the fulerum is not the mere outward vedge, but a point in the interior; on the one side of which the fibres are elongated, and on the other crushed together. The point, then, which serves as the fulerum, will be found within the solid, at a greater or less distance, as the parts resist lengthening more than crushing. The consequence of this is, that when the centre of gravity and the fulerum are brought nearer to one another, the strengthi of the beam or bar is diminished. When the heart of a solid mass is cut out, as is supposed of the cylinder, the fulerum, or the axis of the fracture, is perhaps kept nearer to the surface than when the whole is a solid mass. This, at least, seems to be the most probable account that can, at present, be given of à phenomenon not a little paradoxical, and not yet sufficiently examined. 289. In similar beams, or solids, of the same substance, the strength increases as the square of the lengths; but the weight increases as the eube. There is of course a limit, which, if a beam of a given shape, and of given materials, were to reach, it could only bear its ovn weight, and would be incapable of farther increase. EMERSONS Mechanics, scholium at the end of seetion vi p. 11l. 240. When a beam, instead of projeeting from a wall, is supported at both ends, it must break in the middle, and the termination of the fracture will be on the upper side; and hence, when a rectangular beam is supported at both ends, ĩt ĩs able to carry twice as great a load as when it is supported only at one end. Wnen the section of the beam ĩs such, that ſiie centre of gravity does not coincide with the centre of magnitude, as the termination of the ſracture, by being brought from the under to the upper side, must change its distance from the centre of gravity of the section, a change of strength vill take place al530 on that account. 201. When a heam is upported a at both ends, the weight which ĩt is able to bear at any point, is inversely as the rectangle under the segments into which it is divided by that point. A bam, therefore, supported at both ends, and of the same section throughout, is weakest in the middle: A beim supported at both ends, and of a given breadth, vill be every where of the same strength, if its longitudinal and vertical section be an ellipse, having the hbeam itself for its greater axis. 242. From a given cylinder, to cut out the strongest rectangular heam possible. Let the cirele ACB (fig. 20.) be the base of the eylinder; at the extremity A, of the diameter AB, draw the tangent AH equal to the chord of 99, drav HK to the centre , and let it cut the circumference in C. If CE be drawn parallel to AB, and CD at right angles to it, the rectangle DE, under these lines, is the section of the strongest rectangular beam that can be cut out of the given eylinder. For it is easily shewn, that CD? x CE, to which the strength of the beam is proportional § 287.) is greater in the rectangle thus determined, than n any other that can be inscribed in the circle. As from the construction CL? æ 2 LK?, iſ the radius LKE , ſ be called r, LK pr4 7B , and CL 1 VE CE æ and co=2-,ſt. CD is, therefore, to CE, nearly as7 to b. In practice, as the tree from which the rectangular beam is to be cut, can hardly ever be truly eylindrie, the first thing to be done is, to inseribe, by trial, the greatest cirele possible, in the section of the tree. The rectangle may then be found by the construction above. 248. If it is required to find the strongest retangular beam under a given perimeter or cireumferenee, divide the given circumference into six equal parts, and take two of these for the depth of the beam, and one for its breadth. These propositions are understood to be applicable, not only to beams of wood, but to bars of iron, or any other metal. Q44. If a beam, having one end firmly fixed in a wall, project from it with a certain inclination to the horizontal plane, the weight which it ill support at its extremity, is greater than that which it would support if horizontal, in the ratio of the square of the radius to the square of the cosine of the inclination. the sine of the angle which the direction of that in makes with the direction of the longitudifibres of the wood. According to this, the strength of the beam to resist a force applied to it endwise is infinitee. This is no doubt false; but the force in the case of a longitudinal pull or thrust is so great, that no practical error vill arise from itt. The cause of the error in this extreme case is, that the beam does not, nor cannot, obey the law of continuity, which would require, that when, by varying its inclination, it becomes quite upright, its longitudinal section should be infinitely extended. From this theorem, it is evident, that great advantage is obtained by making the strain on all timber as oblique or as nearly longitudinal as possible This is the great principle in the construetion of roofs and centres of bridgess. The principle of the 4rch should also be combined with it, so that pressure downwards may be so applied as to produce a pull or thrust upward. See the article by Professor RoBISON On the Strength of Timber, in the Encyclopædia Britannico. In the preceding theorems, no account is made of the weight of the beams, a circumstance that is often necessary to be consideredl This may always be done by supposing the weight of the beam to be an addition to its load, collected in its centre of gravity. On this the following theorem is founded. 246. If a rectangular beam, fixed in a wall, projeet horizontally to the length I; if the depth of its section be ac, and the weight of a cubie foot of the timber be ; then if l N 7 the beam vill be just able to support its own weight. To apply this theorem, the value of 5 must be found from experiment. In the case of a rectangular beam, ve have sab. beam supported at both ends, § 240.; and therefore 5s Lt In BUFPONS experiments, a and b W x supposing the were equal; and in one where o was six inches, and I equal seven feet,  was 19250 Ib. Therefore ;  19850 } T 19950 x 56 = 1078000. In 4343 this same experiment, the weight of the beam was 128 Ib., and therefore a cubie foot weighed 73.2 =p, so that s/ v H = 85.8 feet nearly. The ſollowing Table contains the mean results of DBurroꝶs experimentss. They were made on oak beams, cut from trees newly felled, and full of sap. The weight of the timber varied ſrom 78 to 5 French pounds to the cubic foot; its strength varied in the same proportion TABLE. Length Breadth or Thickness. oſ the Beams. ] 4 inches.  5 inches. ] f inches. ]7 inches. Feet. Ib. n 5312 | 22850 10 11250  19475 9100 161 14 nas  18295 8225 4950] 885 77FPON, Hist. Naturelle, Supplement, tom. 11I. ꝓ. 260. Igme cdit, Paris IT19 For a comparison of the strength of different kinds of wood, &e. See EMERson's Mechanics, section vii. scholium at the end. MuscuENBROEE, § 1127, on the Strength of Timher, and § 1129, &e. on the Strength of Metals. See also CouLoMB. Application des Regles de Maximis et Minimis d quelques Problémes relatiſs à Architecture, Mémoires Presentbs, vol. vi. T8), p 348., &e. HYDROSTATICS. SECT. I. PRESSURE OF FLUIDS. 47. A rrvm is a body so constituted, that ĩts parts are ready to yield to the action of any pressure, however small, in any direction. NEWTON, Principia, lib. II. sectio 5. in initio. AxcHIMEDES de Insidentibus Humido. Hydrodynamics is the science which applies the principles of Dynamics to determine the conditions of motion and rest in fluid bodies, and is divided into four parts, according as fluids are incompressible or elastic, and according as their equilibrium or their motion is considered. When ſluids are incompressible, like water, the science which explains the laws of their equilibrium is called Hydrostatics, and that which explains the laws of their motion is called Hydraulics. When they are compressible and elastic, like air, the science vhich treats of the laws of their equilibrium is called Aẽrostatics, and that which treats oſ their motion is Pneumatics. The fluids here treated of, are supposed to gravitate in lines, which are either parallel, or directed to one centre, or to several centres. 248. The surface of every fluid when at rest, ĩs rizontal, or perpendicular to the direetion of vity. If the directions of gravity are all parallel, the surface of the fluid is a plane: If they conyerge to a point, the surface of the fluid is a portion of a spherical surface, having that point for a centre. Bossur, Hydrod. tom. 1. § 19. CavaLLo, vol. . chap. ĩ. prop. 2. Levelling is the art of draving a line at the surface of the earth, to out the directions of gravity every vhere at right angles. This line is nearly an arch of a circle, and if L be the length of any such arch in English miles, and D the depression, in feet, of one extremity of it, below a tangent dravn to it at the other extremi2L: ut If a communication, by means of a tube or pipe, either straight or crooked, be made between the wator ter in one vessel, and that in another, the surſaces of hoth will come to be at the same level before the water is at rest; or if there is not water sufficient to bring both to a level, the whole vill be aceumulated in the lowest. If water is permitted to flow freely from one vessel to another, it will never be at rest till it is the lowest possible. 249. The fluid contained in any vessel, being at rest, and subjected to the sole action of gravity, any particle of it is pressed in all directions, (vertically, horizontally, and obliquely,] by the samæ foroe, viu. the weight of the column of water perpendicularly ineumbent on it Bossur, Hydrodumamique, vol. 1. § 28. 2250. If the fluid contained in any vessel be at rest, and subjected to the action of gravity only, the pressure on an indefinitely small area, at any point of the bottom or sides, is perpendicular to the plane of that area, and equal to the weight of a vertical eolumn of the flnid, standing on it as a pase, and reaching to the surface. Hence the pressure on any part in the bottom or sides of a vessel, depends entirely on the depth of the fluid at that point, and not at all on the extent of the fluid in a horizontal direction. 251. The same being supposed, as in the last proposition, the whole pressure sustained by any portion whatever of the bottom or sides of the vessel, is equal to the weight of a column of the fluid having for its base the surface prossed on (extended into a plane if necessary), and for its altitude the mean dopth of the incumbent ſluid. Coræ's Hydrostatical Lectures, Lect. 11. Bossur, Hydrodyn. vol. 1 § 260. The mean depth of any portion of the surſace of the bottom or sides of the vessel, is the same with the distance of the centre of gravity of that portion below the surface of the fluid. The strength of the walls necessary to resist the pressure of a fluid of any given depth, is determined by this proposition. If the figure of a vessel contãining a fluid be such as is represented, fig. 2. the pressure on every point of the hottom is the same as if it were entirely ſilled vith the fluid to the height PEG. Hence the pressure of a fluid on the hottom oſf a vessel may be very great, while the weight of the fluid is very small; because the water in the narrow tube HE vill press on the bottom CD with a force greater than its own weight in the proportion that the area of the bottom is greater than the horizontal section of the tube. This proposition is called the Hydrostutic Paradox. The pressure in the narrow tube may be produced, not merely by the addition of a little water, but by the application of any kind of force, such as the working of a piston, &e. If the bottom or lid be made moveable, the pressure on either may be brought to bear on one point of an external body, and may then produce an enormous compression, as is very successfully done in the engine known by the name of BRAMAS Pross. This property of fluids may therefore be said to furnish a SEVENTE MECHANICAL POVEE. 252. A body immersed into a fluid is pressed upwards by a foree equal to the weight of the fluid it displaces, and the direction of that force passes through the centre of gravity oſ the part immersed. The proposition holds, whether a body sink in a fluid or float on its surface. When a body floats, the weight of the water displaced is equal to the weight of the body258. The difference between the absolute weight of a body, and its weight when entirely immersed in a ſluid, is the same with the weight of a quantity of the fluid equal in bulk to the body. If W be the weight oſ a body in vacuo, (hich we may suppose to be nearly the same with its woight in air), and i W be its weight in water, VW is the weight of a quantity of water equal in bulk to the body. It follows from § 80., that the weight of any body divided by the weight oſ an equal bulk of water, measures the specific gravity of the body. The specific gravity of a body weighed as above, is w vV—W Hence the specific gravities of bodies are found by weighing them, first in air, and then in water. The instrument with which this experiment is made is called the Hydrostatic Balance. 254. Let it be required, by the hydrostatic haice to determine the specific gravity of a body light as not to sink in water. Weigh the body first in air, and then by a slender thread attach to it a heavier body, that the two together may sink; the heavier body being previously weighed, first in air, and then in water. Let the compound body thus formed be weighed in water; then from the weight lost by it, subtract the weight lost by the heavier body, vhen weighed singly; the remainder is the weight lost by the lighter body, by which if its weight be divided, its specific gravity will be found. CavarLLo, vol. IL. p. 61. The solution there ĩs a little different, but leads to the same result. See the example, ĩbid. When the body is heavier than water, this correction is subtractive; when lighter, it is additive. The manner of finding the specific gravity of air vill be aſterwards explained. 258. It B be the bulk of any body in cubie hes English,  its weight in grains, and its specific gravity, that of water being I; WV 052.5768 This theorem is founded on an experiment of Sir G. SHUCKBOROUGH'S (Phil. Trans. 1798), by which the weight of a cubic inch oſ distilled water, of the temperature 66°, was found to be 252.422 grains, which, reduced to the temperature 60, is 252.576. CAvaLLO, vol. II. p. 98. The logarithm of 252.576 is 2.4028021. If W is expressed in Ib. Troy, it must be multiplied by 5760; if in Ib. avoirdupois, by 7002. If B is required in cubic feet, its value thus found must be divided by 1728. SECT. II. SOLID BODIES FLOATING ON FLUIDS. 259.  S5oLI ſloating on a ſluid specifically heavier than itself, will be in equilibrio when it has sunk so far, that the weight of the fluid displaced is equal to the weight of the whole solid, and when the eentres oſ gravity of the whole solid, and of the part immersed, are in the same vertical Iine. ] ArcHIMEDES, de Humido Insidentibus, lib. . Bossur Hydrodyn. tom. I. chap. I2. Hence every solid of revolution, and in general every solid having an axis to which the opposite sides are similarly related, if it be speciſically lighter than a fluid, and if it be placed in the fluid with its axis vertical, may sink to a position in which it will remain in equilibrio. There are always two opposite positions of equilibrium in such bodies; but there is only one of them in which the body can float permanently. 260. A prism, of which the triangle ABC ſfig. 22.), is a transverse section, being supposed mogeneous, and its specific gravity being Iless an that of a fluid in which it is immersed, but ving a given ratio to it, required the different sitions in which it will be in equilibrium. Let the prism float with the angle ABC downward, and let DE be the common section of the plane of the triangle with the surface of the fluid, or what is called the water line. The area of the triangle BDE is given, being to that of the triangle ABC, as the specific gravity of the prism to the specifie gravity of the fluid; therefore the line DE touches a given hyperbola, deseribed with the asymptotes AB, BC, and is bisected in the point H where it touches that curvee Bisect AC in F, drav BF, BH; take BG 3J BF, and BK æj BH, G is the centre of gravity of the triangle ABC, and X that of the triangle DBE, and therefore, because of the equilibrium, GK is a vertical line, as also FH, vhich is parallel to it. Therefore FH is perpendicular to DE, and consequently to the hyperbola vhich DE touches in HHThe position of FH, since the point F is given, may therefore be found; and as many perpendiculars as can be drawn from that point to the hyperbola, SO many positions are there in which the prism may float with the angle ABC downward. The different positions of FH are determined, by the roots of a biquadratic equation. From any point H' in the hyperbola, drav HL. perpendicular to BC, and let FE be also perpendicular to BC; let BE æ a, EF æ/b, BL=2, LH æ25, and the giVou. ven area of the triangle BDE æ 26&; then FH? = (2)* + V)* and  mQ z ct, vhere m is the cotangent, and n the sine of the angle B. Therefore taking the Fluxion of FH?, substituting for æ its value from the preceding equation, and supposing the whole = 0, ve have 2q) @2 myy + by4z2 =O0. By the combination of this equation with the former, we may obtain either an algebraic solution, by a biquadratic equation, or a geometrical construction by the intersection of two hyperbolas. See the solution of other problems of this kind, ArcHIMEDES de Humido Insidentibus, lib. . BossuT, Hydrod. tom. I. chap. xii. § 166., &e. 26I. When the equilibrium of a floating body is disturbed, or when the centres of gravity of the whole and of the part immersed, are not in the same vertical line, if a vertical plane be made to pass through both those centres, the body ill revolve on an axis passing through its centre of gravity, and perpendicular to that plane. This follows from what has been proved concerning the rotation of bodies,  24. Bossur, Hydrod. tom. 1. § 179. Arwoon, Phil. Trans. 796. 262. A body may be so constituted, that in every position the centres of gravity of the whole, anũ of the part immersed, are in the same vertical line, and in such a body the equilibrium eannot be disturbed by any foree which only tends to make it revolve on an axis. A homogeneous sphere is a body of this kind, and so als is a cylinder floating with its axis horizontal. These have no tendency to maintain one position more than another, and their equilibrium is called the equilibrium of indifference. 263. Some ſloating bodies, when their equilibrium is disturbed, return to their position after a ſow oscillations backwards and forwards. Others, when their equilibrium is ever so little disturbed, do not resume their former position, but revolve on their centres of gravity, till they come into another position, when they are again in equilibrio. The equilibrium in the first case is said to be stable, in the latter case to he unstable In this last case, the bodies are said to overset. 264. When a ſloating hody is made to revolve from the position of equilibrium, if the line of support (that is, the vertical through the centre of gravity of the immersed part) move so as to he on the same side of the line of pressure (or the vertical through the centre of gravity of the whole) with the depressed part, the equilibrium is stable, and the body will resume its former position. 265. The same things being supposed, if the line of support is on the same side of the line of pressure with the elevated part, the equilibrium is unstable, and the body will overset. Bossur, Hydrod. tom. I. 266. If a body float on the surſace of a fluid, the foree tending to make it revolve about its centre of gravity is equal to the weight of the hody, acting by a lever, the length of which is the horizontal distance between the line of pressure and the line of support. Arwoon, Phil. Trans. 796, ꝑ. 61. When this distance is nothing, or when the two centres are in the same vertical line, the force tending to make the body revolve, is equal to O, as already stated, § 262. When the body is any how inclined from the state of equilibrium, and vhen the line of support is on the same side of the centre of gravity with the depressed part, the lever by which the weight acts is accounted affirmative, and the force tends to establish the equilibrium. When the line of support is on the same side of the line of pressure with the elevated part, the force is accounted negative, and tends to overset the body. 267. If in a ſoating body, of which the transverse section is the same from one end to the other, W be the weight,  the length of the water line, c the area of the section of the immersed part, d the distance between the centre of gravity of the whole and the eentre of gravity of the immersed part, and i an indefinitely small inclination from the position of equilibrium; the momentum of the force tending to restore the equilibrium is  a) W ini If æ > d, the ſorce tends to restore the body to its state of equilibrium. j Ir æ =d, there is no force tending either to restore or destroy the equilibrium. 3 If o æ d, the force becomes negative, and tends to overset the body. When W remains the same, the stability is Proportional to aè in i Gæ a) sin ĩ. When the centre of gravity of the body is lower than the centre of gravity of the immersed part, d is negative, and the quantity a d is aſirmative, aj vhatever be the magnitude of æQ I? in the axis of the solid, or in the line passing through the two centres, there be taken a point distant from the centre of the immersed part, by a8 = ma this point is called the metucentre, because the centre of gravity must be lower than it, in order that the body may float with stability. BY the centre of gravity of the immersed part, is always understood its centre of gravity, supposing it homogeneous. It is in fact the centre of gravity of the water displaced, and were perhaps better distinguished by the name of the centre of buoyancy. 268. When a ſloating body revolves about a gin axis, the positions of equilibrium through 1ich it passes, are alternately those of stability d instability. For between a state in which a body has a tendency to remain, and another in which it has also a tendeney to remain, as these tendencies are opposite clination of its axis, or the angle whieh it makes with the vertical, and as this is the same law that regulates the vibrations of a pendulum in a small arch of a circle, a pendulum may be found, the vibrations of which are isochronous with the small vibrations of a floating body. Arvoob, Phil. Trans. ubi supra, p. 123. BoucuES, Manœuvre des Vaisseauxæ, lib. 1. § ũi. chap. 7. On the subject of this section, see also EvLERS Theory of the Construction and Properties of Vessels, nated by H. WarsoN, chap. 4, 5, & 6., &. GRrEGORYS Mechanięs, vol. I. SECT. III PHENOMENA OF CAPILLARY TUBES. 21l. In a capillary tube of glass, that is, a tube of which the hore is less than one-tenth of an inch, be immersed in water, the water will rise vithin the tube to a greater height than it stands at on the outside; and tſis height is nearly ] in the inverse ratio of the diameter of the tube. u. The amount oſ this ascent is very differently stated by different authorss The latest and most accurate experiments are those of Dr BREWSTER, made with a tube in which the diameter of the bore was. 0561 of an inch; the ascent was. 587, and the product of the two, .0827 of a square inch, a quantity that is constant, or the same for all capillary tubes. Different fluids ascend to different heights; water ascends the highest of al. See Edinburgh Encyclopædia, art. Capillary Attraction. b. It follows also from the above, that the weights of the columns of water sustained in capillary tubes, are as the diameters of those tubes. c. Though the rise of water above its natural level is most manifest in small tubes, it appears, in a degree, in all vessels whatsoever, by a ring of water formed round the sides, with a concavity upwards. d. The height to which water rises in a capillary tube, is not affected by the thickness of the glass. m. Capillary suspension takes place, though the tube be not immersed in water, providing a drop of water adhere to the lower end. 278. The surface of the water in a capillary tube is concave upwards; and if by taking the tube out of the water, and inclining it, the fluid be made to move along it, the concavity appears at both ends of the eolumn, and is the same in figure and size vhether the tube be held perpendicularly, horizontally, or obliquely. This is not istrietly true, exeept when the diameter of the tube is very small: when the bore is nearly oneutenth, the concavity becomes elongated on the lower side. qar4. When by inclining the tube, the eolumn of water is made to move, it appears to suffer resistance as it approaches either end, and does not completely reach the end, till the tube is either altogether, or very nearly inverted. When the tube is placed in the water, however ſar it be thrust down, the water within never reaches the top, tll the tube is completely immersed. 9r5. If a capillary tube composed of two cylinders oſ different bores, be immersed in water, ſirst with the widest part downwards, and afterwards with the narrowest, the water will rise in both cases to the same height. If the smaller end is such as to require the whole to be filled by suetion, the water stands at the same height as if the whole tube were of the bore of the upper part. This experiment, however, does not succeed in vacuo; and thereſore the water in the wide part of the tube, must be considered as sustained by the pressure of the air. 2u76. If two plates oſ glass be kept parallel, and near to one another, and if their ends be immersed in water, the water will ascend between them to half the height it would rise to in a tube having its diameter equal to the distanoe of the platess. NE?TONS Opties, Book ri. query 8l. HAUY, Traitt Elementaire de Physique, tom. I. § 8883. edit. 1806. a. When the plates make an angle with one another, if they be immersed with the line of their intersection vertical, the water will ascend between them, and form a hyperbola. b. LA PLACE caused experiments to be made ith one tube placed within another; so that their axes coincided, and found that the water ascended in the space between them only half as high as it would have done in a single tube in which the diameter of the bore was equal to the distance of the two tubes from one another. HAUY, ibid. 2r7. If a glass tube of a small bore be immersed in mereury, the mercury does not rise within the tube to the height at which it stands on the outside:: its surface within is conveæ, as it is also without, all round the tube. The convex surface of the mereury vithin the tube, interseets the surface of the tube at an angle of 400. See Dr Youxõs Lectures on Natural Philos0phy;, vol. 11. p. 649., on the Cohesion of Fluids. 8. If into a conical capillary tube, held in a horizontal position, a drop of water be introduced, it will run toward the narrow end; but if a drop of mereury be introduced, it will run toward the vide end. La PLacE, Mecanique Celeste, Lib. x. Supplement, p 6. 279. Whether a ſluid rise or fall between two vertical and parallel planes of glass, immersed in the fluid at their lower extremities, the planes tend to approãch one another. a. It is from this tendency, that two small vessels of glass, of a parallelepiped form, floating on water or mercury, unite, vhenever they approach near to one another. La PLacE, ibid. § Il. b. The phenomena here enumerated, clearly prove the existence of an attractive force between water and glass, but require to be carefully compared before they inform us of the manner in which that force is exertedl. The fact that points most directly to the place where the force resides, is that of the concavity of the surface, mentioned at § 278. 280. From this fact it may be inferred, that a narrow ring or zone of glass immediately above the surface of the water, attracts the water with a force which, when the tube is of a small diameter, is able to suspend a thin film of the fluid in opposition to its gravity, the surface of which is concave upwards, in consequence of the attraction of the glass being combined with the weight of the water, and the cohesion of its particles. Hence is derived the little meniscus of wate, MIOKN (fig. 23.), which terminates the column. This meniscus is, therefore, a body of water stretched across the tube, and sustained there by the attraction of the glass, while it exerts its own attraction on the particles of the column immediately underneath, by which means the gravity of those particles is diminished, and the water rises in the tube above its level on the outsiie, to supply their defſiciency of weight. a. This is the theory of LA PLACE. He has determined the superficies of the meniscus to be nearly spherical, and its attraction to be equal to that of a spherule of water of the same diameter with itself, supposing the attraction to be insensible at all sensible distances. The ascent of the water, in the inverse ratio of the diameter of the capillary tube, is thus accounted for; the attraction of the meniscus being directly as its diameter, or as the diameter of the tube, that is, as the weight of the water sustained. b. It is understood in all this, that the attraction of the particles reaches bevond the nearest, but not to any sensible distance. . In the case of mercury, glass either repels the fluid, or attrãcts it less than its particles attract one another. Hence the convexity of the surface that terminates the column, and the depression of that surface below the natural level . So also, in the movement of the drop t6 the small end of a conical capillary tube; if the attraction of a particle of the tube be resolved into two, one in the direction oſ the axis of the tube, and the other at right angles to it, the former will be directed towards the vertex of the eone. If the force is repulsive, the part in the direction of the axis will be toward the base On the same principle may be explaimed the tendency of two plates to unite, whether water rises or mercury sinks between them. The author of this threory considers the coneave surface of the fluid, and the attraction which the meniscus exerts, as the principal cause of the phenomena of capillary tubes. Ibid. p. 5. We confess, that we cannot but think it more accurate to say, that the principal and primary cause of the suspension of the water, is the attraction of the glass, which sustains the meniscus, and enables it to act on the vater below, without being drawn out of ĩts place. It is not the concavity of its surface which makes the water in the tube press less on the bottom than if its surface were plain, but ĩt is the attraction of the glass, which produces, in a manner equally direet, both the concavity and the diminution oſf the pressure. 281. The reason why the water beteen the two narrow plates of glass rises only to half the height it does in a capillary tube, of a diameter equal to the distance of the plates, is, that the quantity of the attracting surface does not go all round, but is nearly halved. a. The same holds of the tubes, inserted the one within the otherr. Any small column of the water. between them, is supported by the attraction of the glass only on two sides. 282. The adhesion of bodies to the surfaces of ſluids, is an effeet of the same forces which produce the phenomena of capillary tubes. a. This was first remarked by Dr Youx6, Phil. Trans. 1805, and Lectures on Nutural Philosophy, vol. i1. p. 652. The figure of the drops of a fluid supported by a solid, or adhering to it, is connected with the same phenomena. SEGNER treated of this subjeet, Comment. Soc. Reg. Gotting. tom. . I51) p. 301. He considers the surface of the drops as one formed like the. catenarian curve, or like the surface of a sail exposed to the wind; and he assumes the tension over all this surſface to be the same. LA PLACE remarks, that this supposition is erroneous. b. The theory oſ La PLACE, so ſar as the attraction of the tube is concerned, has a great affinity to that OUTLINES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. of Dr JurIN, Phil. Trans. N 868. art. 2Z In vhat respects the form of the upper surface, it is founded on the same principles with CLAIRAUT'S explanation, Theorie de la Figure de la Terre, tirce des Principes de ?Hydrostatique,  59. See also SEGNER, Comment. Soc. Reg. Gotting. tom. 1. I51,) p. 80l. 288. CLAIRAUT has proved, that if the law by which the matter of the tube attracts the fluid, be the same with that by which the parts of the fluid attract one another, the fluid will rise above the level whenever the intensity of the first of these attractions exeeeds half the intensity of the second. If it is exactly the half, the surface of the eolumn within the tube will be a plane, on a level with the surface without. Theorie, &. § 60. In some cases, the attraction of the bottom has an evident effect; when the lower end of the capillary tube is stopped by the finger, and the tube taken out of the water, if the finger is withdrawn, a drop forms, and the water stands higher in the tube than when it vas immersed in the wvater. LA PLACE, ibid. § 1I5. This seems to arise from the action of the bottom and outside of the tube on the drop, by vwhich the column of water in the tube is lifted up, as it were, and raised to a higher level. The circumstance that has so long rendered the theory of capillary tubes a matter of doubt, is the difficulty of finding a perfect experimentum orucis, or a fact vwhich can be explained by one theory only. It cannot be said, that even the theory of CLAIRAUT and La PLACE possesses the demonstrative evidence which such an experiment would afford. HYDRAULICS. SECT. I. FLUIDS ISSUING THROUGH APERTURES IN THE BOTTOM OR SIDES OF VESSELS. 288. I- two bodies be uniformly accelerated over distances that are inversely as the accelerating forces, they will acquire equal velocities. This proposition is given as æa lemma to that which follows. 284. The velocity with which a fluid issues from an infinitely small orifiee in the bottom or side of a vessel that is preserved full, is equal to that which a heavy body would acquire by falling from the level of the surface to the level of the orifice. Bossur, Hydrod. tom. i. § 2l8. Therefore, let d be the depth of the fluid;  the velocity acquired by a falling body in one second; v the velocity with which the water issues; v=vV2 gad. If the velocity with which the fluid issues from the orifice, vere turned directly upward, it vould carry it to the level of the surface of the fluid. 285. The quantity of water that issues in one send, through a given orifice, is equal to a column water having the area of the orifice for its base, d the velocity with which the fluid issues for its titude. a. Hence, if  be the area of the orifice, d the depth of the water above the orifice, and q the quantity o fluid running out in one second, q=a' /à 5d. b. Of the quantities ꝗ;, o and d, any two being given, the third may be found: at / S; dæ q NELũ ]ga* The quantity of water that issues through an oriſice, is as the area of the orificec multiplied into the square-root of the depth. c. When the experiment is made, it is found that a? must not be taken equal to the exact area of the orifico. The vein of water that issues through the small orifice, suffers a contraction, by which its section is diminished in the ratio nearly of 5 to . Therefore ve must take ) of the above result ſor the true value of q; so that =ò  gã. As B. lli q IS nearly Tã ve may suppose q— a V9  . d. As g d is the velocity acquired by falling through a it has been supposed by some writers, that the water issues only with the velocity that would be acquired by falling through halſf the depth of the fluid. CavarLLo falls into this mistake, vol. II. chap. 7. p. 168. 286. Water issuing through an oblique pipe in the side of a vessel which is kept full, deseribes a parabola in a vertical plane, passing through the axis of the pipe; and the directrix of the parabola is the line of common seetion of the said vertical vlane with the surface of the water produced. That the curve is a parabola, follows from the theory of Projectiles, § 98.; and that the directrix is the same, whatever be the angle of elevation, follows ſrom this, that the water issues with the same velocity vhatever direction the axis of the pipe has, viz. that which corresponds to the height of the surſace oſ the ſluid above the orifice, § 94 a. 287. The time that a eylindrie vessel, (the area of its base being b2), requires to empty itself by a hole in the bottom, of which the area is ar, the deput at the beginning of this discharge being d, is v⸗ T and the time that the surface takes to ⸗ nom the depth d to any other depth d, is Lii æ ( Jdad1 5y NE q8 DaN. BERNOUILLI, Hydrodynumico, sect. v. § 18.; Bossur, Hydrodyn. tom. I. § 232. The construction of the clepsydra, or waterlock, depends on this propositionn. If the whole depth through which the surface of the water sinks in I2 hours be divided into 144 parts, it will sink through 3 of these in the first hour, 21 in the second, 19 in the third, and s0 on, according to the series of the odd numbers. 288. The vein of water, as it issues out, is contracted; and from that, and other causes, the actual discharge of water is not so great as it is computed to be in the foregoing theorems. This difference, however, affects only the absolute quantities, and ged being as the square-ròots of the depths x multiplied into the areas of the orifices. ũa. According to some very accurate oxperimonts of Bossur, the actual discharge through a hole made in the side or bottom of the vessel, is to the theoretical as 1 to. 6” or nearly as 8 to 5. The theoretical discharge, vhen computed, must, therefore, be diminished in this ratio to have the true one. b. If the water issues, not through an aperture in the side or bottom of the vessel, but through a pipe from I to 2 inches in length, inserted in the aperture, the contraction of the vein is prevented, and the actual discharge becomes to the theoretical, as 8 to 1O, or as 4 to 5. In this way, therefore, the discharge is increased nearly in the ratio of 4 to 3. Bossur, § 528. See also ProNy, Architect. Hyd. s 840. e. The theoretical diseharge, the discharge through an additional tube, and that through a simple perforation in the side, are as the numbers 16; 18, and IO nearly. 2889. Water thrown up in a jet, ought to aseend to the height of the reservoir; but on aceount of the resistance of the air, the frietion of the pipe, &e. it always falls short of that height; and it is found by experiment, that the differences between the heights of the jets and of the reservoirs, are as the squares of the heights of the jets themselves. I H and H be the heights of two reservoirs, ſi and V the heights of the actual jets, Hnh: H V:: i*: t This observation was made by MARIOTTE. Bossur, II. § 615. The water ascends highest hen the jet is not quite perpendicular; when it is perpendicular, the astent is obstructed by the water falling back on the ascending column. The height to which the water rises in the jet, is called the height of the qffective head. The parabola which an oblique jet deseribes, has its directrix not exactly as determined in § 286; but at the height of the effective head. SECT. II. OF CONDUIT PIPES AND OPEN CANALS. a90. W ae the water from a reservoir is conyed in long horizontal pipes, of the same aperre, the discharges made in equal times are nearin the inverse ratio of the square roots of the ngths. It is supposed that the lengths of the pipes to which this rule is applied are not very unequal. It is an rived immediately from experiment. Bossur, tom. II. § 647, 648. At § 67. he has given a table of the actual discharges of water-pipes, as far as the length of 2840 toises, or 14950 feet English. 29. Water running in open canals, or in rivers, is accelerated in consequence of its depth, and of the declivity on which it runs, till the resistance, increasing with the velocity, become equal to the acceleration, when the motion of the stream becomes uniform. It is evident, that the amount oſ the resisting forces can hardly be determined by principles already known, and therefore nothing remains, but to ascertain by experiment, the velocity corresponding to different declivities, and diſfferent depths of water, and to try, by multiplying and extending these experiments, to find out the law which is common to them all. The Chevalier DU BuAT has been successſul in this research, and has given a formula for computing the velocity of running water, vhether in close pipes, open canals, or rivers, which, though it may be called empirical, is extremely useful in practicee. Principes d Hydraulique, par M. LE CHEVALIEE DU Buar, 2 vol. 8vo. edit. 2. Paris 1786. Professor Ro3isox has given an abridged account of this book, in his excellent articles on Rivers and Water-works, in the Encyclopædia Britannica. Let V be the velocity of the stream measured by the inches it moves over in a second; R a constant quantity, viz. the quotient obtained by dividing the area of the transverse section of the stream, expressed in square inches, by the boundary or perimeter of that section, minus the superficial breadth of the stream, expressed in linear inches. The mean velocity is that with which, if all the particles were to move, the discharge would be the same with the actual discharge. The line R is ealled by DUBuAT the radius, and by Dr RonisoN the hydroulic mean depth. As its affinity to the radius of a circle seems greater than to the depth of a river, we shall call it, with the former, the radius of the section. Lastly, Let S be the denominator of a fraction which expresses the slope, the numerator being unity, that is, let it be the quotient obtained by dividing the length of the stream, supposing it extended in a straight line, by the difference of level of its two extremities; or, hich is nearly the same, let it be the co-tangent of the inclination or slope. 202. The above denominations being understood, d the seetion, as well as the velocity being supsed uniform, 1 lll væ 3807 R T6 ꝗ , l 52 ę log  + 1.6) 3 ꝶ l See DU BUAT, ubi supra, § 51., &e. At § 42. ꝑ. 65. the formula is reduced to English measure, as now given. When R and S are very great, V ; 807 3 R? 15 nearly. Hil 3 og The logarithms understood here are the hyperbolic. The slope remaining the same, the velocities are as . l R — 10 The velocities of two great rivers that have the same declivity, are as the square roots of the radii of their sections. If R is so small, that nt 2 =O0, or R Au the velocity will be nothing; which is agreeable to experience; for in a eylindric tube R æ3 the radius of the eylinder; the radius, therefore, equal 7o of an inch; so that the tube is nearly capillary, and vill not admit the water to flow through it. The veloeity may also become nothing, by the declivity becoming so small, that 807 88 5uc 5y; nòſ q 8 TO if 3: is less than or than ſ45th of an inch to an Enghsh mile, the water will have a sensible motion. 298. In a river, the greatest velocity is at the surface, and in the middle of the stream, from which it diminishes toward the bottom and the sides, where it is least. It has been found by experiment, that if from the square root of the velocity in the middle of the stream, expressed in inches per second, unity be subtracted, the square of the remainder is the veIocity at the bottom. Principes  Hydraulique, par Do Buar, § 67. Hence, if the former velocity be  », the velocity at the bottom v 2v + l. 294. It has been found by experiment, that the mean velocity, (or that with which, were the whole stream to move, the discharge would be the same vith the real discharge,) is equal to half the sum of the greatest and least velocities, as computed in the last proposition. The mean velocity ĩs, therefore, /va/+ v+ l : 2 The formulas of DUBuAT have heen reduced to great simplicity by PRONY, 50 that they are free from logarithms, and require nothing more than the extraction of a square root. Recherches Physico-Mathematiques sur la Theorie des Eauæ Courantes. Paris 1804. Let V, as before, be the mean veloeity; r the length of an open canal, or of a close pipe; æ the difference of level of its tvo extremities; R the radius, defined as in DuBUATS propositions, in the case of a river or open cut; D the diameter, in the case of a pipe; the height oſ the water in the reservoir above the upper orifice of the pipe, and  the height above the lower orifice, at which the water stands in the cistern into vhich it is emptied, through that orifice. Let 2 or the sine of the inclination =I; and r h +2Dn ©59 K. 295. The denominations above heing supposed, wo have for pipes, V541181 +V. 023751  32806. 63: DE, and for rivers or open canals, V= 1541181 . 025751  82806. 6 x RI. These formulas give the velocity in English feet; those of PRONY give it in metres; see the work just quoted, 209, 210.; also Note prefixed to Table ĩi. p. 110. It must be observed, that when the water from the lower end of the pipe is discharged into the air, ' =/O0. From the comparison that has been made of these formulas with actual experiments, they appear to be very accurate. The numbers or constant quantities may perhaps require some correction, but there is no doubt that the form of the expression is exact. They must therefore supersede the use of DU BuATS more complicated theorems. 296. When the sections of a river vary, the quantity of water remaining the same, the mean velocities are inversely as the areas of the seetions. a. This must happen, in order to preserve the same quantity of discharge. b. When the water in a river receives a permanent addition, the velocity is immediately increased. The increase of the velocity augments the action on the sidles and bottom, in consequence of vhich the vidth is augmented, and sometimes also, but more rarely, the depth. The velocity is thus diminished, till the tenacity of the soil, or the hardness of the roek, afford a sufficient resistance to the force of the water. The bed of the river then changes only by insensible degrees, and, in the ordinary language of Hydraulics, is said to be permanent, though in strictness this epithet is not applicable to the course of any river. SECT. III. PERCUSSION AND RESISTANCE OF FLUIDS. 297. Ir the sections of two streams be the same, the forees with which they strike on planes direetly opposed to them, are as the squares of their velocities. For the foree oſf a stream must be as the force of each particle, and as the number of particles that strike in a given time. Now, the force of each particle ĩs as the velocity of the fluid, and the number of particles that strike in a given time, the section being given, is also as that velocity. Therefore the whole force oſf the stream must be as the square of its velocity. Hence if v be the velocity oſ any stream, o the area of the section,  the force, and m a constant co“ efſicient, to be determined by experiment, Smma*?; or if h be the height belonging to the velocity n, so that 2hæſd, fæ/m a' h. The quantity a? h denotes the weight of the column, of whioh the base is a?, and the height h. The constant quantity m is found to be different, according to the manner in which the fluid is received by the plane on which it strikes When the plane is indefinite in extent, m æl, so that ſ2ata gh, or the force is double the weight of the column, of which the base is aè, and the altitude h. This agrees with experiment, and has also been demonstrated by DaN. BERNOUILLI, Comment. Petrop. tom. viiL. ꝑ. 99., &e. See also Encyclopædia Britunnica, d edit. Article Resistunce, p. 109. When the plane is no greater in extent than the seetion of the stream, m 3, and  æ a' h, only half the former column. Since, in two different streams, f: f:: a? V: o vẽ, if a* v, or the quantity of water expended in a second, be the same in both, ſ: :: v: v, or the forces are as the velocities simply. 298. If the plane struck by the stream be itself in tion, the impulse is as the square of the differce of their velocities. If  be the velocity of the stream, and  the velocity vith which the plane retires from it, then the force of percussion = m a? (vVc). f c is opposed to v, then the force is m a'  + c):. and if v=20, the force = m a? ?. The plane, therefore moving against a fluid at rest, with the velocity e, suffers the same impulse as i the fluid were to move with the velocity c, and the plane to remain at rest. Ience the resistanee of a fluid to a body in motion, is the same with the percussion of a fluid moving vith the same velocity against the body at rest. "hough this conclusion seems to be supported by very sound reasoning, yet, in fact, the resistance is less than the percussion, the velocity being in both cases the same, in the proportion of 5 to 6b DoN Juay, in his Eramen Maritime, makes the difference much greater. It arises, no doubt, from the action of the fluid on the hinder part of the moving body, by which the resistance is in some degree counteractedc. It appears, however, to be only the absolute quantities, and not the ratios of the resistances, that are thus affected; the resistances being as the squares of the velocities. n the reasoning on which this proposition is founded, ve have supposed the only resistance to arise from the inertia of the particles There is, however, another arising from the cohesion of these particles, vhich must be proportional to the quantity oſ that cohesion overcome in a given time, that is, to the velocity simply. This resistance is only perceived in slow motions, and is small in respeet of the other, except in ſluids o much viscidity. CouLoMB has made experiments on this kind of resistance, Mém. de UInstitut National, tom. III p. 247., &e. He found the part of the resistance proportional to the velocity to be I7 times greater in oil than in water. It must be remarked, that DoN G. JUAN makes the resistance which ships meet with proportional nearly, cœteris paribus, to their velocities simply. Examen Maritime, tcm. . § 194, 195. 299. If a stream strike obliquely on a plane, its ce is less than if it struck direetly on the same me, in the ratio of the square of the sine of the liquity to the square of the radius. If the area struck be a?, v the velocity of the fluid, and ĩ the inclination or the angle which the plane makes with the direction of the stream, the force =  ũ sin P. This conclusion does not agree with experience, except when the angle i is greater than 60 degrees. Bossur, Hyd. vol. 1. § 875. It appears, from experiment, that the resistance to oblique planes consists of two parts, one of which is proportional to the square of the sine of i, and the other to a certain power (B.3) of the angle i itself. Bossur found, that if a prow, in the form of a wedge, be drawvn through a fluid, and if the complement of the angle vwhich either face makes with the direetion of the stream measured in degrees be called æ, and if the resistance to the base of the wedge be 10000, the resistance to the vedge itself vill be 2 x 81 10000 x cos æ2 + 8.158 x ) i Bossur Hydrod. tom. 1. § 1019, & 1022. This formula, however, is to be considered only as an approximation to the truth. It is entirely empirical, and only agrees with experiment, vhen æ is nearly a right angle, or when the angle ĩ is very small. 300. Supposing the resistance to oblique surces to vary, as the square of the sine of the incliation, the resistance to a sphere is half the resistce that would be made to the eireumseribed eynder moving in the direction of its axis. NEWTONI Prin. Math. lib. 11. prop. 4. This proposition cannot be expected to hold aceurately, as it is derived from a principle that is acknowledged to be erroneouss The propositions concerning the solid of least resistance, are faulty for the same reason. In general, though the theory of the perpendicular pereussion and resistance of the dense fluids, agrees sufficiently with experiment for all practical purposes, that of their oblique percussion and resistance, as it stands at present, is not to be relied on. The experiments relative to percussion are more agreeable to theory than those that concern resistance VINCE has found by experiment, that the force of the percussion of a fluid on an oblique plane, varies nearly as the sine of the inclination of the plane; but their resistance to a plane moving in a fluid, is not subject to any law that admits oſ a simple expression. Encyc. Britan. d edit, Article Hydrodynamics, p. 768. SECT. TV. UNDULATION OF FLUIDS, OR THE FORMATION OF WAVES. 301. WuEN the surface of water is unequally pressed on, in parts contiguous to one another, the columns most pressed on are shortened, and sink beneath the natural Ievel of the surface, while those that are least pressed on are lengthened, and rise above that level. As soon as the former columns have sunk to a certain depth, and the latter have risen to a certain height, their motions are reversed, and continue s0, till the eolumns that were at first most depressed have become most elevated, and those that were most elevated, have become most depressed. The alternate elevations and depressions thus produced are called waves. The water in the formation of waves has a vibratory or reciprocating motion, both in a horizontal and a vertical direetion, by which it passes from the columns that are shortened to those that are lengthened, and returns again in the opposite direction. Progressive motion is not necessary to undulation. 802. The vibrations of water in the form of waves, may be eompared to the reciprocations of the same fluid in a syphon or bent tube; and iĩt was from this that NEWTON deduced the velocity of waves, and the time required to an undulation. The time of an undulation, is the time from the wave being highest at any point, to its being highest at that point againn. The velocity of the wave is the rate at which the points oſ greatest elevation or depression seem to change their places. 308. If a be the altitude of a wave, h half the breadth, æ the cireumference of the cirele, of ux x . tion is TL +b)ẽ, and the space which the wave 8 : . 8 b appears to pass over in a second, is—/7J T Eaxamen Maritime, vol. I. § 816. In these theorems, 8 is put for /24, to which iĩt is nearly equal. If a be neglected, the velocity of the wave becomes 88 vhich is the velocity as determined by n NEWTON, Principia, lib. II. prop. 46. See also Bossur, Hydrod. tom. I. § 812. 804. While the depth of the water is suſficient t0 allow the oscillation to proceed undisturbed, the waves have no progressive motion, and are kept, each in its place, by the action of the waves that surround it. But if by a rock rising near to the surface, or by the shelving of the shore, the oscillation is prevented, or much retarded, the waves in the deep water are not balanced by those in the shallower, and therefore acquire a progressive motion towvard the latter, and form breakers. Hence it is, that waves always break against the shoreb, whatever be the direetion of the wind. Breakers formed over a great extent of shore, are distinguished by the name of Sur?z The surf is greatest in those parts of the earth where the wind blows always nearly in the same direction. SECT. V. HYDRAULIC ENGINES. Engines moved by the IMPULSE of Water. 805. Waes a wheel is put in motion by a stream of water striking against a float-board, the action of the water diminishes, as the veloeity of the wheel inereases, till at last the momentum of the water, or of the accelerating force, is just equal to the momentum of the resistance, or of the retarding foreee The motion of the wheel then becomes uniform. Mills with undershot wheels, or such as receive the impulse of the water at right angles to their radii, are machines of this kind. 306. A machine driven by the impulse of a stream, produces the greatest effect, or does the st work in a given time, when the wheel ves with one-third of the velocity of the waThis theorem was first given by PARENT, Mém. de PAcad. des Sciences, 704. See also MACLAURINS Fluions,  907. EuLER, Nov. Com. Pet. tom. VIII. p. 280. Bossur, Hydrod. tom. I. § 890. If c be the velocity of the stream, v that of the floatboard, a? the section of the stream, or the area of the part struck, the impulse of the stream, by §& 298. =m a (c v)?, and the effect or quantity of work done, in a given time, will be m a? (c v)? v, which . . c is a maæimum when v B The quantity m a (c v)?, or the moving force hecomes then m a x u which, making m æ1, as in the first case oſ § 297., and vriting 2h for , S æ gh, or 8 of the weight of the cobecomes 5 lumn of water that falls on the vheel. If m as in the second case of § 297., the moving foree is only : of the said column. According to the way in which the water strikes the wheel, the moving force may therefore vary in the ratio of 2 to l. c 8ahc t a that is, eight twenty-sevenths of the quantity of motion expended on the machine. he effect, vhen a maximum, is a?  x ) 1 different falls of water, that act on wheels moving vith a velocity in a given ratio to that of the water, if the expenditure be the same, the forces will be as the velocities simply, ( 297.), and the effects of the machines driven by them as the squares of the velocities.  the sections of two streams are the same, their forces will be as the squares of their velocities, or as the heights due to the velocity of the water, ( 297.), and the effects oſ the machines driven by them, will be as the cubes of their velocities, or as the heights due to those velocities multiplied into their square roots. hese conclusions, all except the first, are remarkably verified by the experiments of Mr SMEATON. He found, that an undershotwheel, vhen working to the greatest advantage, had a velocity which varied from one-third to one-half the velocity of the stream; and vas, in great machines, nearer to the latter of these limits than the former. Also, that the load, wvhen the effect was greatest, approached very near to the weight of the whole column of water striking on the wheel. It is found above to be eight-ninths. When the undershot-wheel worked to the greatest advantage, its effect was about one-third of the motion expended; we have found it to be : Mr SMEATON also found, that the expence of water being the same, the effect is as the effective head, or the square of the velocit. And, lastly, that when the section of the water is the same, the effect is as the cube of the velocity, both which results are deduced above. By a mistake, for which it is difficult to account, SMEATON SUpPpOSed these conclusions to be inconsistent with the theory of the percussion of fluids. Maochines moved by the Weight of Water. 307. When a wheel receives the water into buekets, at or near the highest point, it is put in motion by the weight of the water with which it is loaded on one side, and it is then called an overshot wheel. 308. An overshot wheel arrives at a state of uniform motion, When the momentum of the water in the buckets is equal to the momentum of the resistance. The construction of the machine should be such, that when the motion of the wheel becomes uniform, the buckets may contain all the water of the stream, and may carry it down as low as possible before they allow it to escape altogether. 809. If the section of that part of the wheel to which the buckets are fixed be called c?, and the perpendicular depth of the point where the water leaves the wheel, below that where it enters, be called ꝓ, the moving force is a column of water equal to  ꝓ; and as this force acts by a lever r, its momentum =  ꝑr. 810. IF A be the quantity of water issuing in a second, and h the height corresponding to the velocity of the circumference of the wheel, the effeet of the machine, (supposing the wheel to receive the water, at or very near its highest point), is proportional to A (ran). ALs. EULER, Enodatio Quæstionis quomodo vis Aquæ ad Molas circumagendas cum maximo lucro impendi possit, 4t0, Gõttingen, 1754. Bossur, Hydrod. s 415., &e It is evident, that the effeet will be the greater the less h is, or the less the velocity of the wheel; and as that velocity may be diminished indefinitely, 27 A is a limit to which the eſſect may approach nearer than any given quantity. The power oſ the overshot-wheel is greater, cæteris paribus, than that of the undershot, nearly in the ratio of 2 to S. The maxim, however, that overshot wheels are the more powerful the slower they move, is found in practice to be subject to some limitations. Mr SMEATONS experiments led him to conclude, that overshot-wheels do most work when their eircumferences move at the rate oſ ꝗ feet in a second, and that vhen they move considerably slower than this, they become unsteady and irregular in their motionn. This determination is also to be understood vith some latitudle He mentions a wheel 24 feet in diameter, that seemed to produce nearly its full effect, though the circumference moved at the rate of 6& feet in a second; and another of the diameter of 88 fſeet, of which the circumference had only a velocity of 2 feet in a second, without any considerable loss of power. The first wheel turned round in 12.6, the latter in 51.9. SMEATON, Eæperimental Inquiry concerning the Naturul Powers of Woter and Wind to turn Mills, &e. Pnhil. Trans. vol. LI. 59,) P 100, &e. See particularly p. 188, 184. Dr BREWSTER'S Notes on FERGUSONS Mechanics. Machines moved by the Re-uction of Water. 311. Some machines are moved, not direetly by impulse of a stream of water, but indirectly, the relief from pressure which the motion of stream occasions. The machine known by the name of BarERS Mill is of this kind. Let ABGH, (fig. 24.), be a hollow cylinder, moveable about a vertical axis CD, and having the horizontal boxes EB, EG communicating with it, so that the whole may be filled with water from the top. The boxes have each an opening in the sides, opposite to one another, through which the vater issues. When these apertures are shut, and the whole filled vwith water, it remains in equilibrio; but if the apertures are opened, the columns having these apertures for their bases, and the depth of the water for their altitudes, will cease to press on the sides; and therefore the whole pressure on the sides where there are no perforations, will be greater than on the sides vwhere the perforations are, by the sum of these two columns. A moving force, therefore, equal to the pressure of these two columns, vill impel the machine in a direction opposite to that in which the water issues, and in that direction the machine will begin to move. 312. The moving force in this instance becomes greater, aſter the machine has begun to move; for the water in the horizontal boxes acquires a centrifugal force, by which its pressure against the sides is inereaseddc When the machine works to the greatest advantage, the centre of the perforations should move with the velocity ; v hg, ere 7 is the radius of the horizontal arm, meaed from the axis of motion to the eentre of the foration, and ? the radius of the perpendicular œ, & being put for the force of gravity, or 82.3 t. As 2 r is the circumference deseribed by the centre of each perforation, aær is the time of a revoluvhę tion in seconds. The quantity vhę is also the velocity of the efſluent water; therefore, vhen the machine is working to the greatest advantage, the velocity with which vater issues is equal to that with which it is carried horizontally in an opposite direction; so that, on coming out, it falls perpendieularly down. The effect of this machine is equal to Ah, or the momentum of the water expended; so that it could, if there were no force lost by friction, ræise up the whole of the water to the height from which it fell, and in an equal time. It is therefore, in theory, the most advantageous application of water that is known; but, on account of the frietion, which must be great, as the whole body of the water has to turn on the axis CD, (fig. 24.), it will probably be found in practice, that the overshot-wheel is, in many cases, preferablee In the construction of this machine for practical purposes, the water is made to flow in pipes along a conical surface, diverging downwards, and ĩs discharged through several apertures. n the construetion of this machine, see EvLER, MEm. de ?Acad. de Berlin, tom. vi. 750,) p. 81l.; and, again, tom. viI. p. 27. ALB. EULER, Enodatio, &e. § 64. Bossur, Hydrod. tom. I. § 424BREWSTER'S Notes on FERGUSONS Lectures, vol. Ii. p- 205. AEROSTATICS. SECT. I. OF HEAT. I treating of Aẽriform Fluids, we begin with the consideration of Heat, which, though it affect all material substances, acts more remarkably on elastic fluids than on other bodiess. We shall treat of heat as affecting the Bulk, the Fluidity, and the Elasticity of bodies. 318. HEAT or CALORIC may be regarded as a bstance which penetrates and expands all boes, and produces in us the sensation of heat and 1d. Though ve conceive heat to be a substance, it is never found in an independent state, or existing otherwise than as a property of body. 814. As heat is known to us prineipally by its power of expanding bodies, ve may take the expansion of some known substance as a measure of the variations of heat. The substance selected for measuring heat is Mercury; and the Thermometer is an instrument indieating the variations of bulk to which we conceive the variations of heat to be proportional It has been found, that the variation of the bulk of mercury, from being immersed in freezing, and in boiling water, bears always the same proportion to the whole bulk; and, therefore, that variation divided into a certain number of parts, may be taken as a scale of the degrees of heat. In FAERENHEITS thermometer, the interval above named is divided into 180°, and numbered at the lower end 82, and at the upper end 21. In the Centigrade or Centesimal Thermometer, the above interval is divided into 1000, and the degrees are numbered from the freezing point. The word temperature is used to denote the heat indicated by any degree of the thermometer, as existing in the air or in any other body. 315. All bodies, whether solid or fluid, are expanded by heat; but not all in the same proportion. Q 316. At the heat o40 mereury freezes, and at 600 it boils, and is in both cases useless as a measure of heatt. For measuring great cold, a thermometer of aleohol or spirit of wine is employed; for measuring great heat, the expansion of a solid is used, and the instrument is called a Pyrometer. The best pyrometer hitherto in use, ĩs that invented by Mr WEDGWOOD, consisting of a small cylinder of Cornish clay, which controcts continually by heut. The scale of this instrument begins at a red heat, of such intensity as to be visible in day-light, which, on FaurRENHEITS scale, could it be continued so far, would be marked 1077. From this it ascends, (by degrees that are each of them equal to about 185 of FAHRENEEIT,) as ſar as 240, or 3”2fæ1 of F auRENHEIT, which ĩs its utmost limit; 28° marking the melting heat of silver, 89° of gold, 125° the greatest heat of a glass-house furnace, and 150 the temperature at which pig-iron melts. 517. The ſact that all bodies expand by heat, admits also of another exceptionn. Water is most dense at a temperature between 87 and 89', and its specifie gravity diminishes both by the addition and subtraction of heat. When water is converted into ice a new arrangement takes place, and the speciſic gravity is considerably diminished. 318. Heat diffuses itselſ on all sides, and passes continually from bodies in which the temperature is greater to those in which it ĩs less; and if a body be placed in a medium of a temperature different from its own, the momentary variations of its temperature will be as the differences between the temperature of the body and of the medium; so that if the times, reckoned from any instant, be taken in arithmetical progression, the variations of temperature in the body, and also the differences between its heat and the heat of the medium, vill decrease in geometrical progression. This lawv of the heating and cooling of bodies, was first taken notice of by NEWTON, Scala Graduum Caloris, Phil. Trans. 701,) N 2U0. It was aſterwards proved by the experiments of Professor RicHMAN of St Petersburg. Novi Comment. Petrop. tom. 1. 4, 1748,) p. 174., &e. It follows from it, that i D be the difference between the temperature of the medium, and of the body placed in it, and if D be the heat lost in one second, then, at the end of IV, , , &e. the heats are l IV? INò D), n-}), D3), &æ and the decrements of heat in each second , n D ũ H H . &c.; and, therefore, if t OUTLINES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. be the time in seconds, reckoned from the moment vhen the difference of the temperature was D; and if A be the remaining difference of temperature at the nd of the time 4, ve have D Dl a, m and I log D log A : Iog nDIog  I) If this law ĩs rigorously observed, no body ean ever perfectly acquire the temperature of the medium in which it is placed, and this may be the ſact, speaking with mathematical exactness, though the difference of the two temperatures may soon become s0 small as to escape observation. In respeet of us, the bodies are then of the same temperature. 3819. The diffusion of heat through a ſſuid, iĩs promoted by a hydrostatical principle, the heat rarifying the fluid, and so producing a motion and mixture of parts, by which the heat is communicated more rapidly through the whole, than it could be through a mass of which the parts were immovable in respect of one another. The communication of heat in this way, is so rapid, that it renders the ordinary slow progress of acquiring and losing heat by contact almost imperceptible, and has given rise to the error, that heat has no tendency to pass through fluids, except in consequence of the mixture of their parts. Heat escapes from bodies which are heated ove a certain temperature, by radiation, or by s5ing in straight lines through the air with great pidity. The heat thus emitted from bodies, is reflected from the surfaces of metallic specula, like the rays of light. A body heated, though not so as to shine, and placed before a concave speculum of metal, communicates heat instantaneously to a thermometer in the corresponding focus. A cold hody does the same; and it is remarkable, that an effect so difficult to be explained, is, nevertheless, perfectly consistent with the law of continuity. The experiment of the reflection of cold was first made by M. PicrET Of Geneva. Essai sur le Feu, par M. A. PicrET, § 69. Radiant heat from a luminous body, is refracted as wvell as reflected; the rays from a candle or a fire produce heat in the focus of a lens. It does not appear that the same happens in the case of obscure heat, except when it comes from the sun, which, according to the experiments of Dr HERSCHELL, is concentrated in the focus of a lens. Phil. Trans. 1808, p. 298, 804. Dr HERSCHELL, in a series of very interesting experiments, separated the caloric from the light of the suns rays, and shewed that the focus of the former was not the same with that of the latterr. Phil. Trans. ibid. 321. The 321. The heat propagated by radiation from different bodies varies with the nature of their external surfaces, the quantity that flows in a given time from a body with a polished surface, being much less than would flow from the same body with a rough surface. This was discovered by Professor LESLIE, and proved by a variety oſ curious experiments. Exæperimental Inquiry into ihe Nature and Propagution of Heqt, p. I7., & When the fluid contained in a vessel, is intended to retain its heat long, the vessel should be of metal, and it surface smooth and bright. If the fluid is required to cool as fast as possible, the surface should be rough covered vith paper, charcoal, &ec. DALTONs New System of Chemical Philosophy, Part I. p. 116. 322. If two portions of the same fluid, of which the masses are M and M/, and the temperatures t and , be mixed together, the temperature of the : i MIM1V/ mixture will be M This formula is investigated, on the supposition that no part of the heat is lost by the mixture. ] On making the experiment, the results are not found to agree exactly with those deduced from the formula. The expansions of mercury, therefore, do not appear to observe the same law vith the variations of temperature; and it is found, that, ſor equal variations of temperature, the variations of the bulk of the mercury constitute a series, of which the difſerences are in arithmetical progression, or in which the second differences are constant. Henee the relation between the temperature and the expansion of mercury, may be expressed by a quadratic equation, or by the abscissæ and ordinates of a line of the second order. 328. If D be any number of degrees reckoned m the freezing point of water in FAHRENHEITS ermometer, the real temperature corresponding D is 207 i14D 1). This formula is derived from DALTONS experiments. See his System of Chemical Philosophy, Part I. p 14. r D —R, which is known to mark the degree according to FAHRENHEITS thermometer, at which mercury congeals; the temperature, as deduced from this rule, is 207, which, therefore, is the real distance between the freezing of mercury and the freezing of water. Hence the degrees on the mercurial thermometer, reckoned from the degree which marks the congelation of mercury, are as the square of the real temperatures, reckoned from the same point of congelation. The correction of the mercurial thermometer, arising from the law of expansion, has not yet been introduced; but the reality of the law itself seems suſficiently established. 824. When ſluids of different kinds, and of different temperatures, are mixed, as above, the temperature of the mixture is very far from corresponding with the theorem in article 329, n 80 much as to make it certain, that equal hodies, for equal differences of temperature, do not contain equal quantities of heat. Beside the masses M and M', therefore, ve must introduce two indeterminate co-efficients c and , before the formula can be applied; we have then cMit+c M'? MFMY for the temperature of the mixture. In this formula, c and d are the numbers that denote the differences of heat contained in two equal portions of these fluids, for equal differences of temperature They may be said to denote the capacities of the bodies for heat; and their values must be determined by experiment. 825. When cqual weights of water and ico are put into the same vessel, the water being at the stantly melted, and the temperature of the whole is found to be exactly 29. In this experiment, 140 degrees of heat have entirely disappeared; and the same happens whatever be the temperature of the water. Dr BLACK was the first who made this experiment; and as he found that the heat which had thus ceased to aſfect the thermometer, vas not lost, but became sensible again on the congelation of the water, he said that it had become lutenta term ell adapted to express the fact, without any allusion to theory. 826. From the combination of this experiment with the formula in the last article, the beginning of the scale of heat, or the point to which the mercury in the thermometer would sink, if it were to lose all its heat, may be determined; and it will be found, that if c is the capacity of water for heat,  of ice, and æ the number of degrees by which the beginning of the scale of heat is below the beginning of FAHRENHEITS, ? s”+ Iae For, according to this notation, the total heat in ice, of the temperature 39, is  \2 +); and the heat in water of the temperature 176, is c I76+ æ); therefore the total heat, vhen they are mixed, and the whole reduced to water, is 2c 2 + æ). This last expression must be equal to the sum of the two former, or 82c  112 c mc æa æ, and 7= 82 112c c 7¢ If c be to  as 10 toꝗ, which appears, from experiment, to be true, ?=288 + 11201408; this, thereſore, is the distance of the æero of temperature from the ero of FAHRENHEIT, and its distance below the freezing of vater, is, therefore, 1440. In this investigation, it is supposed, that, however low the ice is cooled, c remains of the same value. 327. When water is put in a vessel on the fire, it continually receives heat, and its temperature increases, till, at a certain point, the water boils, and rises in the form of vapour, after which the temperature of the water increases no farther, as much heat being carried off every instant by the vapour, as is received from the fire. The temperature which water then attains, as was before remarked, is nearly constant, and is the same in all cases, except in as far as it is affected by the pressure of the atmosphere, in the manner about to be explained. The vapour thus formed, is an invisible elastic fluid, of a temperature not less than 212 degreess. A great quantity of heat passes into the latent state, vhen vapour or steam is generatedlc This vas also discovered by Dr BLACE. 3828. On the different quantities of heat, therefore, united to the substance which we call water, depends its existence in the state of a solid, a liquid, or an elastic fluidlc. In passing through these states in the order just mentioned, a great increase of temperature is not only necessary, but a great quantity of heat must be absorbed, or from being sensible, must become latent. This i is true not only of water, but of mercury, oil, and probably of all elastic fluidss It perhaps holds of all bodies that are melted by heat, and it may be true even of those fluids, which, like air, appear to be permanently elastic. 829. Since heat is absorbed when a solid passes into a liquid state, whatever produces liquefaction produces a diminution of sensible heat; and this, in the case of what are called Freezing Mixtures, can be employed to produce a cold of90ò. So, also, cold is produced by evaporation, or the conversion of an incompressible into an elastie fluid. A very beautiful process, in which the effeet oſ evaporation to produce cold, is most distinetly shewn, has been discovered by Professor LESLIE:. It consists in exposing vater under a receiver, from vhich the air is partially exhausted, to the action of an acid which has a strong attraction for humidity. The vater is quickly converted into ice See Short Aceount of Experiments and Instruments relaoting to Heat and Moisture, p. 138., &e. 330. Water boils with less heat, vhen the weight of the air diminishes, and, conversely, requires a greater heat to make it boil, vhen the pressure of the air is increased. On going to the top of a high mountain, vhere the weight of the air is diminished by one-tenth, the boiling point of water is somewhat less than 207-. So, on going into a deep mine, where the weight of the air is increased by one-thirtieth, the boiling point oſ water is nearly 2140. If, by means of the air-pump, the pressure of the air be reduced to one-half, water vill boil nearly at the temperature of I80. 331. The elasticity of the steam generated from water, is measured by the weight that compresses it; that is, by the weight of the atmosphere pressing on the surface of water; and the relation between this foree and the heat required to produce the steam, is expressed by the following exponential equation, where æ is the heat measured from the ordinary boiling point, or 212, and f is the force of compression measured in inches of mercury, 4 æ 4 ONF 45 = 30 1.235. ſnlas f ( 015 x 4⸗ This formula is deduced from DaLTONs Eæperiments, Manchester Memoirs, vol. v. p. 5556., &e. and nearly coincides with the method which he used for interpolating between the numbers determined by observation: æ is positive vhen the heat is greater than 219, negative when less. For the purpose of calculation, it is best to take the logarithm of the above expression; it is then li n, 4æ 4æ  E .250.015 x 5) Hence, vhen æ is known,  may be found, which measures both the compression on the surface of the water, and the elastic force of the steam. The mean vweight of the atmosphere is here understood to be equal to 80 inches of mercury; the mean height of the barometer at the level of the sea. In the construction of thermometers, care should be taken to mark the boiling point, or 212, only when the barometer stands at 0 inches. The above formula vill serve to calculate the amount of the corrections to be made, when the barometer stands at any other heightt. The same may be determined from Mr DarToN's Table, ubi suprao, p. 561, or simply, as the variations are but small, by allowing at the rate of I° for six tenths of an inch in the height of the barometer. 832. It appears, from the experiments of Mr ALTON, that the above formula applies to the am produced from all liquids; providing  be reckoned from the ordinary boiling point of the liquid, or that at which it boils when the barometer stands at 30 inches. Manchester Memoirs, vol. v. p. 564. MurEAYS ChPmistry, vol. I. p. 284. 838. In permanently elastic fluids, the law that connects the temperature and the elasticity, is simpler than in the preceding instances; for when the temperature increases in arithmetical, the elasticity increases in geometrical progression, and the difference between the temperature of freezing and boiling water, increases the elasticity and the bulk of such fluids from I to I.876. If, therefore, the elasticity of such a fluid, at the temperature of freezing, be called I; if æ be any number of degrees above that temperature; and f the n corresponding elasticity, f= 1.876) ĩòIn logarithms, log ſ 5 x log (1.376). If the bulk at the temperature of freezing be æ, the bulk at the temperature æ is also x If the centesimal thermometer is used,  I.876) Tõ DaLTONs New System of Chemical Philosophy, part I. p. 44. GAY Lussac had deduced the same conclusion from his experiments. When the variations of heat are small, or not exceeding the ordinary vicissitudes of heat and cold in the atmosphere, the variations of elasticity and of bulk may be supposed proportional to them. In such cases the expansion of air, or of any other permanently elastic fluid, calculated from the preceding formula, is. 004 for a centesimal degree, or 00222 for a degree of FAHRENHEIT. In this estimation of the elastic force of fluids, the thing actually measured is the expansion produced by the heat, while the compressing force remains the same. The force that would be required to reduce the fluid into its former dimensions, the temperature being the same, is the direct measure of the increase of elasticity On the supposition, however, that, vhen the temperature is given, the elasticity is inversely as the space which the fluid occupies, the absolute increase of the elasticity, produced by an increase of temperature, is proportional to the expansion. This supposition will be shewn to hold of air and other elastic fluids. 334. Heat is mechanically produced by Percusn and Frietion. This holds both of solids and of fluidss A nail can be made red hot by hammering, and fire may be produced by the friction oſ one piece of timber against another. CouNT RUMFORD made water boil by the boring oſ a cannon. The condensation of air produces heat; tinder may be lighted, and gunpowder set fire to, if air be suddenly compressed by the stroke of a piston. 885. The greater part of the preceding facts may be explained on the hypothesis, that heat or calorie is an elastie fluid sui generis, the particles of which repel one another, but are strongly attracted, though in different degrees, by the particles of all other bodies. 1. The introducetion of this fluid into bodies, must increase their volume, and an equilibrium in the ſluid vill take place over a certain space, vhen the attraction oſ the bodies within that space, for the caloric contained in it, is able to balance the repulsion of the particles of the calorie for one another, and this vill happen when the calorie is distributed among the bodies, in proportion to the forces with which they attract it. Hence there may be an equilibrium in the calorie of bodies, or a sameness of temperature, though the quantities of caloric be very different; and from this proceeds the different capacities of bodies for heat, and the conversion of sensible into latent heat, or the contrary, when those capacities are changed. Calorie converts solids into liquids, by overcoming their cohesion so far, that the particles attract one another with forces that are as a certain funetion of the distances (and of the distances only) of the particles ſfrom one another. This produces the equilibrium of the particles, or their tendency to obey the action of any force in any direction. The addition of more calorie, so as entirely to overcome the attraction of the particles for one another, converts the liquid into an elastic or aeriform fluid, the particles of vhich; by means of the heat with which they are combined, are made to repel one another. Heat must escape from bodies, both in consequence of the attraction of those bodies that have less heat, and the mutual repulsion of the parts of caloric. When the temperature of a body is raised to a certain height, this last cause may operate without the former. On this account, the caloric in the air is impelled from the radiant body on all sides, and is condensed on the surfaces of the adjacent hodies, vhich, by their attraction, resist its motion. It is probable, that this is effected by undulations, propagated through the caloric fluid. The apparent reflection of cold may also receive a solution on this hypothesis. The production of heat by percussion and ſrietion, is more difficult to be explained on this hypothesis than any of the other phenomena. If we suppose the temperature, or the expansion of a body, to be affected, not merely by the quantity of caloric conoL. tained in it, but by the state of movement or vibration in which the caloric exists, (Which state percussion and friction may very much determine,) this appearance will also admit of a solution. SECT. II. EQUILIBRIUM OF ELASTIC FLUIDS. 336. Tax fundamental theorems demonstrated in the first section of Hydrostaties, are common to the compressible and the incompressible fluids. See articles 247, Us8, &e. 887. As Atmospheric Air is the best known of all elastic fluids, we shall take it for the subject of our investigation, defining it, A heavy and elastie fluid, which resists compression with forces that are directly as its density, or inversely as the spaces within which the same quantity of it is contained. The accuracy of this definition is known from experience. The weight of air is known from the Torricellian experiment, or that of the barometerr. The air presses on the orifice of the inverted tube with a foree just equal to the weight of the column of mercury sustained in it. A hottle, veighed when filled with air, is found heavier than after the air is extractedc The pressure of the atmosphere is about 14 Ib. on every square inch of the earth's surface Hence the total pressure on the convex surface of the earth = 10, 686, 000,000 hundreds of millions of pounds. The elastic force of the air is proved, by simply inverting a vessel full of air in water: the resistance it offers to farther immersion, and the height to vwhich the water ascends within it, in proportion as it is farther immersed, are proofs of the elasticity of the air contained in it. When air is confined in a bent tube, and loaded with different weights of mereury, the spaces it is compressed into are found to be inversely as those veights. But those weights are the measures of the elasticity; therefore the elasticities are inversely as the spaces which the air occupies. Now the densities are also inversely as those spaces; therefore the elasticity of air is directly as its density. This law was first proved by MARIo?TE'S experiments. In all this, the temperature is supposed to remain unchanged. These properties seem to be common to all elastie fluids. Air resists compression equally in all direetionss No limit can be assigned to the space which a given quantity of air vould occupy if all compression were removed. 388. As we ascend from the surface of the earth, the density of the air necessarily diminishes: For, each stratum oſ air is compressed only by the weight of those above it; the upper strata are therefore less compressed, and of course less dense, than those below them. 889. Supposing the same temperature to be diffused through the atmosphere, required the law by which the density and elasticity of the air diminish as the height above the surface increases. Let D, IV, D, be the densities of three contiguous strata oſ air, each of a given thickness, so small, that the density of the air in the whole space may be regarded as constant. Let W be the weight of the incumbent air pressing on the lowest of these strata; W that pressing on the next, and W that pressing on the third, and let m be a co-æfficient, such that D /m W; then, because the densities are as the compressions, D æm W, and D mWV, Therefore D ID æ/ m (W —W), and . Ii Ju_ D' / m W wnm, But W—W is just equal to the weight oſ the ſirst of the three strata, and W——W to that of the second; therefore DDV:  D:: D: D, and multiplying extremes and means DD  D2. The density of the middle stratum, is therefore a mean proportional between the densities of the other two, and whatever be the number of equidistant strata, their densities are in continual proportion. 340. If, therefore, the heights from the surface be taken increasing in arithmetical progression, the densities of the strata of air will decrease in geometrical progressionn. Also since the densities are as the compressing forces, that ĩs, as the columns of mereury in the barometer, the heights from the surface being taken in arithmetical progression, the columns of mercury in the barometer at those heights will decrease in geometrical progression. As logarithms have, relatively to their numbers, the same property, therefore if b be the column of mercury in the barometer at the surface, and ã at any height h above the surface, taking m for a constant co-efficient, to be determined by experiment, h m (log b log 8), or h=mog; It is evident, that m may be determined by fſinding trigonometrically the value of  in any case, where b and à have been already ascertained Nov, vhen this is attempted in different states of the atmosphere, it is found that the values of m are the same vhen the mean temperature of the columns of air intercepted between the stations at which the observations are made, is the same; but that the values oſf m are different, vhen the mean temperatures are different. It has been found, that when h is to be expressed in English fathoms, and the common tabular logarithms are employed, and if the mean temperature be that of freezing, m = 10000, so that the difference of the tabular logarithms, counting the first four places integers, gives the height in fathoms. For other temperatures, the value of m involves the expansion of air for one degree of heat, vhich has been taken at. 00248, or 00244, as determined by the experiments of General Roy and Sir GEORGE SHUCKBURGH. This, however, does not perfectly agree with the expansion as stated above, § 828., vhere it appears to be only. 00222. A correction is also required for the temperature of the mercury itself; for that being rarely the same in the two barometers, a reduction is necessary to bring them hoth to one temperature. 341. If, therefore, b be the height of the mereury in the barometer at the lowest station, à at the highest, ? and ? the temperatures of the air at those stations, ſ the fixed temperature at which no correction is required for the temperature of the air; and if  and ꝗ be the temperatures of the pansion of a column of quicksilver, of which the length is I, for I of heat;  being the perpendicular height (in fathoms) of the one station above the other, t h =210000  +.00244 f) log E r: : l n being nearly 5i When the centesimal thermometer is used, because the beginning of the seale agrees with the temperature f, so that ?/=2o, the formula becomes more simple; and if the expansion for air and mercury be both adapted to the degrees of that scale, ll t+? b h=10000 (+.00441 () log 3490. LA PLACE has given a formula for barometric measurement somewhat different from the preceding. If ? and ? be the temperatures according to the centesimal thermometer, all other things remaining as above, the height in metres, or n=163981  2ſ) 1o8 N=pi +5am 1 this formula, the expansion for the temperature of one degree is. 004; according to the formula of Sir GEORGE SHUCKBURGH and General Rovy, it is 00441 'he former expansion agrees very well with the rate and law of expansion, stated in the last seetion, from the experiments of DaLTON and Gay Lussac. The expansion in the English formula is therefore probably too great, though the barometric results deduced by means of it agree very vell with observation. were, hovever, better to introduee the true expansion, vhich may be done by increasing the constant multiplier by 49, or, which is nearly the same, 100 by & viſ his formula, giving ſ in fathoms, using also the true expansion, and the centesimal thermometer, will then become, 2ſæ⸗ b h=10050 (I t0) 1ę 8% +.000I8 ) 'he addition to be made on account oſ the 50 added to the constant multiplier, is very easy, as it only requires the difference of the logarithms, or the approximate height, to be inereased by a two hundredth, or the half of a hundredth part. In practice, the centesimal thermometer will be found by the more convenientt. LA PLACE has introduced a correction, on aceount of the difference of the intensity of gravity in different latitudes; it is found by multiplying the approximate height into .002887 x cos 2 lat.; and is additive, vhen the latitude is less than 45; subtractive, hen greater. The same correction may be applied, in the same manner, vhatever formula is used. he fact, that the mercury in the barometer sinks on ascending into the atmosphere, was first suggested by PascaL, and ascertained by experiments under his directionn. The application of this to the measurement of heights, vas made in France by MarIOTTE, and in England by HALLEY. It remained, however, very imperfſect, till DE Luc applied the corrections for heat, and directed simultaneous observations to be made at the top and bottom of the mountainn. He fell into some errors, which were pointed out by TREMBLEY, and afterwards correted by the observations and experiments of Sir GEORGE SHUCKBUERGH and General Rox. La PLACE has, more lately, made barometrical measurement the subject of his researches, and has given the formula mentioned above. ee DE Luc, Recherches sur les Modifications de TAtmosphere. HoRSELY and MASKELYNE, Phil. Trans. vol. Lxiv. ꝑ. 2I4, & 158. TREMBLEY, apud SAuSSURE, vol. II. p. 616. DaMEN, Dissertatio Phys. & Math. de Montium Altitudine, Barometro metienda, Hague, 1788. General Roy, Phil. Trans. vol. LxviI. ar,) p. 658, &e. Sir GEORGE SHUCKBURGH, ibid. 518, &. La PLACE, Mecanique Celeste, tom. IiI. p. 289. BiOT, Astron. Phys. tom. nI. Additions, 2d editt. Also, Mémoire sur la Formule Barometrique. par L. RAMOND. Though much has been done by the authors just named, the barometrical method o measuring heights is probably not yet so perfect as it may be rendered. Tts exactness depends on the comparison of trigonometrical measures with barometrical observation. Now, the trigonometrical measures of heights are subject to considerable inaccuracy, from the variations oſ refraction, unless the refraction itsel be observed at the same time with the angle of elevationn If this is done, or if the height be taken by levelling, the result may be obtained vwith great precisionn. The number of instances, however, in which either of these precautions has been used, is not great enough to afford an exact determination of the constant quantities that enter into the barometric formula. It would be useful also to ascertain by more accurate experiments, the law according to which the temperature oſ the air diminishes on ascending from the surface of the earth. 48. The temperature of the air diminishes on nding into the atmosphere, both on aceount of greater distance from the earth, the principal ce of its heat, and the greater power of absorbheat that air acquires, by heing less comsed. 'he heat of the atmosphere appears to decrease in a less ratio than the distance increasess M. DE SAUSSURE found, that by ascending from Geneva to Chamouni, a height of. 847 toises, REAUMURS thermometer fell 40.2, and that on ascending from thence to the top of Mont Blanc, 1941 toises, it fell 200.7: this gives 221 feet English for a diminution of I0 of FAHRENHEIT in the first case, and 268 in the second. Nevertheless, from the accuracy which the rule for barometrical measurement possesses, it may be inferred, that the decrease of heat for the greatest height which we can reach, is not far from uniform; but that the rate for any particular case must be determined by observation, though the average in our climate may be stated at 1 for 270 feet of perpendicular ascent. On this subject, see La GRrANGE, Mèm. de Berlin, 177, p. 206., &e. He thinks that the hypothesis of a uniform decrease of heat ĩs the most conformable to appearances. ULER, in a volume of the same Memoirs, for 1754, p- 140., considers a harmonical progression as the most probablee If the sole cause of the diminution of temperature were distance from the earth, and if it were admitted that there is no current of air perpendicularly upwards, as there certainly is not, the diminution of temperature would follow the inverse ratio of the distance from the centre of the earth. Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. vi. p. 865. Professor LESLIE, in the Notes on his Elements of Geometry, p. 495. edit. 2d, has given a formula for determining the temperature of any stratum of air vhen the height of the mercury in the barometer is givenn. The column of mereury at the lower of two stations being b,, and at the upper à, the diminution o heat, in centesimal degrees, ĩs C 25. This seems to agree not ill with observation. 544. If t be the temperature of the air in centesimal degrees, and b the height of the barometer in inches; the specifie gravity of the mereury in the barometer, is to the specific gravity of the air, as 4349.944 x 72 +.004 ſ) to b; or the specific gravity of mercury being , the specific gravity of air . b 18 79 x à349.944  +.004 ĩ Suppose the barometer to be carried to any infinitely small height ĩ, above the place where it was first observed; and let the mereury sink by the small quantity b. Let the temperature be supposed to remain the same. Then the rule, § 842, gives h= b ; or, taking the hy8 y perbolic, instead of the tabular logarithms, hæ 4842.944 ũ + .004 t) hyp. log . b b But 1+ : nearly; and hyp. log + u : therefore h = 4842.944 * + .004 ĩ) 4 h is here given in fathoms, but in inches hæ 4242.944 (17  + 0041) B Hence H  4842 944 3 12 ũ +.0045) : But h: b:: specific gravity of mereury, to speciſic gravity of air; because the eolumn of air, of the height h, and of mereury, of the height b, have the same weight. This gives the proposition above enunciated. The quantity , x b is the height of an atmosphere vhich, having throughout the same density and the same temperature as the air at the surface, sphere. The height of this homogeneous atmosphere, in fathoms, is therefore 4849.944 +.004 4). 345. Let a balloon, of a given cubical content, c;, in feet, be filled with hydrogeni gas, 13 times as elastic, and therefore 18 times as rare as common atmospheric air, under the same compression; and let ĩit also be loaded with a given weight W; required to what height it will ascend. If 5 be the speciſic gravity of any stratum of air, in which the balloon is placed, that of water being unity, since a eubic foot of water weighs 62.48 Ib. avoirdupois,  x (62.48) y is the weight of the air displaced, or the whole force tending to support the balloon. But the whole weight of the balloon is w + 62.48) / x3 and ther efore vhen the balloon is just upported, and has no tendency to ascend, 62.48 x  y  + a  3, or I8v 79m60 When the density of the stratum where the balloon vill float is found, the density at the surface being computed by the last article, the height will be determined by the rules for barometric measurement. PNEUMATICS. 846. T HE doctrine o Pneumaties, treats of elastic fluids, as accelerating or retarding the motion of bodies; of air, as the vehicle of sound; and, lastly, of air, as the vehicle by which heat and moisture are distributed over the surface of the earth. It is, therefore, naturally divided into three sections. SECT. I. AIR AS ACCELERATING OR RETARDING MOTION. Machines for raising Water. 347. IF a bent tube, open at both ends, have the end of the shorter leg immersed in water; and the air in the tube be sueked out, or otherwise tracted, the water will flow through the tube in continued stream, providing the height from the rface of the water, to the top of the bending, es not exceed 2 or 8 feet. A bent tube of this kind is called a syphon. If the syphon, instead of having the ait extracted by suction, be filled with water, and the ends stopped till it is inverted, with the shorter leg immersed in vater, the same effeet will follow. It is the greater weight of the water in the longer leg of the tube, that determines the fluid to descend on that side, and the pressure of the air continues the supply. The syphon may be employed to raise water over a height less than 88 feet, if it is to descend below the level oſ the fountain on the opposite side. It could not, however, be conveniently applied, if the height was near to 88 feet; because the velocity with which the water in the shorter leg is made to ascend, depending on the difference between that height and 85 feet, the length of the column which the air is just able to sustain, might not afford a sufficient supply for the stream descending in the longer leg. The syphon is properly a pneumatico-hydraulic machine, the action of water and of air being both necessary to its efſect. It is, however, the simplest of all the instruments employed in raising water. 848. The Air-pum) is a machine by which the air is extracted from close vesselss A eylindrie barrel in which a piston works, communicates by a valve in its bottom, which opens inwards, with the receiver or close vessel. The piston is also furnished with a valve, which opens outward; so that when the piston is thrust down, the air in the barrel opens the valve of the piston, and makes its escape. After the piston has been forced down to the bottom, it is drawn up, when its valve shuts, and that in the bottom opens, and admits the air from the receiverr. This operation is repeated, and the air in the receiver becomes continually rarer. The air-pump was invented by Or70 GUERICKE, a gentleman of Magdeburg in Germany, about the year 1654, and marks a great era in the history of the physical sciences. It has received great improvements. CAVALLO, vol. 1I. p. 465., &e. HurTON'Ss Mathematical Dictionary, article Air849. When the number of strokes of the piston increases in arithmetical progression, the quantity of air remaining in the receiver, and also its density, form a series of terms decreasing in geometrical progression; so that i R be the capacity o the receiver, B of the barrel, D the density of the air in the receiver, after n strokes of the piston, the density of the external T. R W almnm being l D - Ge” . Hence log D =n log b r from which D may be found when n is given, or n when D is given. It is evident that the exhaustion can never be complete, as no more than a certain proportion of the air that remains can be taken out by the next stroke of the piston. There is even a limit which it cannot exceed in the ordinary air-pump; for the spring of the remaining air, being the power which opens the valves, vhen it becomes too weak to overcome their stiſſness and their weight, the exhaustion necessarily ceasess. In air-pumps of the most improved construction, the valves are opened by a mechanical contrivance, so that this limit to the perfection of the instrument is removed. 350. When the end of a cylindrie barrel con strueted as above, is either immersed in water, or made to communicate with a reservoir of that fluid, on the piston being drawn up, and the air in the barrel rarefied, the water will ascend on account of the pressure of the external air. By repeated strokes of the piston, it may be made to rise so high, as to pass through the valve in the piston, and a quantity of it is then lifted up every time the piston is raised. This machine is called the Sucking Pump, and the piston is called the Sucker. The valve of the piston, vhen Iowest, must be nearer to the surſace of the water in the reservoir than 88 feet, otherwise the water can never rise above it. 851. The piston of the sucking pump, when iĩt is raised, sustains the weight of a column of water, of a base equal to the seetion of the piston, and a height equal to that at which the water in the pump stands above the surface of the reservoir. This is the measure of that part of the pressure of the external air that is not counteracted by the elasticity of the air under the piston. To work the pump, a force must, therefore, be employed, able to overcome the weight of this column, and of the piston, together with the friction of the piston against the sides of the pump. 852. In a sucking pump, the height of the Iower, or fixed valve, above the surface of the water = a, the length of the stroke of the piston æ2, brium with the pressure of the atmosphere æ⸗; the height to which the water is raised by the first a+b+hnx bFhyaàb& 2 stroke, is Bossur, Hydrodyn. vol. I. p. 10l. 853. The same notation being retained, and being put for a b, or the greatest height to which the piston ascends, bL must be greater than 5 , otherwise the water will not rise above the piston. The water will cease to rise, vhen the air in the barrel of the pump, which is always rarer the higher the water is raised, becomes so rare, that when the piston is thrust down, it is not 5o0 much condensed as, by its elasticity, to open the valve in the piston, or, vhich is the same, is not so dense as the external air. This leads to the limit just assigned. Besides the pump just described, there is one with a solid piston, without any valve, by the raising of which, the water is drawn up through the valve in the bottom of the pump, and on thrusting down the piston, the water is forced through a pipe in the side, having a valve that opens outwards, by ficient force be applied This is oalled the Forcing Pump. The Lifting Pump is in principle no way diſferent from the Sucking Pump. 854. The discharge of water by pumps, though naturally intermitting, may be rendered continual by the elasticity of the air condensed in what is called an aĩr-vessel. This contrivance is represented in fig. 25. See DESAGULIER, Course of Experimental Philosophy, vol. 11. p. 152., 8d editionn. MUSCHENBROEE, §& 124., &e. Bossur, Hydrodyn. vol. 1. § 6., &c. Steum Engine. 855. Let a eylinder ABCD ſſig. 20.), placed vertically, have a piston working in it, the rod of which ĩis fixed to the end of a beam GH, turning on the axis O, and loaded at its other extremity by a weight W, and when the machine is at rest, let the beam incline toward the side where the weight is. Then if a vacuum be any how made in the part of the eylinder under the piston, the whole pressure of the atmosphere will tend to depress the entum be not greater than that of a column of iter 38 feet high, having for its base the seetion the cylinder, and acting by the lever GH. In this way, an air-pump might be made to raise water to any height whateverr. But the production of the vacuum by the mechanical means of valves and pistons, ſfrom its difficulty and expence, could not be reduced to practic For this reason, recourse is had to steam, which, from its facility o being generated and destroyed, affords the means of producing a vacuum over a great extent, and of renewing it at pleasure. Suppose, therefore, the steam of water from a boiler to be introduced through a valve into the eylinder, and to expel the air; and wvhen this is done, the valve to be shut, and another valve opened, by which a jet of cold water is injected into the eylinder, the steam will be quickly condensed; a vacuum vill be produced, and the piston will be forced down by the pressure of the atmosphere. The introduction of the stcam at the bottom of the cylinder will again clevate the piston,, and the reproduction of the vacuum will cause the depression of it; so that the end of the lever to which W is attached, may be employed to raise any weight, or to pump up any quantity oſ water within certain limitss., This is the Steam Engine in its simplest state. 856. If b be the length of the stroke of the piston, 7 the radius of the cylinder, and  the height of the column of water which balances the pressure of the atmosphere, ? ? ſi is the moving foree, and its momentum is æ 7?? h x b. If the radius of the piston of the pump worked by the beam be 7, d the depth of the water, and ' the height to which it is raised at one stroke, æ7 d  will be the momentum of the resistance: then, in order that the machine may work, ? bh d ll. To a complete theory of the steam engine, much more is necessary than the knowledge, that 7 b h is greater than 7? d '; for the rate of working depends on that exeess, and must be determined as in the problem, § 186. The weight of the pump rods must be included, and also the effect of frietion. It is here supposed, that a perfeet vacuum is produced in the cylinder by the jet of cold water. This, however, is not the fact, for by the alternations of the heat and cold to which the cylinder is exposed, it can neither acquire the heat necessary to the full elasticity o the steam, nor the cold necessary for its complete condensationn. On this account, the effect of the machine ſalls much under the computation. 3857. When the cylinder is full of steam, if a valve be opened, by which the steam is alloed to escape into another vessel, where a jet of eold water is introduced, the condensation is much more complete, and the heat of the eylinder being preserved, the steam possesses its full elasticity. This improvement was made by Mr WarT, and completely changed the character of the steam-engine. In the old engines, the power was reduced nearly to half its real value, so that the moving force, instead of amounting to I4 Ib. on every square inch of the area of the piston, was reduced to little more than seven. In Mr War?Ts engines, the moving force is not less than I2Ib. on the square inch. 858. A farther improvement has been made on this engine, by injecting the steam into the eylinder, alternately above and below the piston, so that the whole motion is produced by the elasticity of steam, and has no dependence on the weight of the atmosphere. This improvement is also due to Mr WarT, and could not have been made without the previous contrivance of condensing the steam in a separate vessel. It is particularly accommodated to the production of a rotatory motion by means oſ a steam engine. In the double-stroke engine, the pistonrods require to be forced down as well as to be dravn up, in the same vertical limee The method by which Mr Wart has accomplished this depends on a geometrical theorem. 859. If the ends of a straight line given in magnitude, deseribe circles given in position, and having their convexities turned opposite ways, a point may be found in that line, which will describe a curve, having, where it interseets the line of the centres, an arch of contrary flexure, not differing sensibly from a straight line. The point to be found divides the given line in the ratio of the radii of the circles deseribed by its extremities. A rectilineal vertical motion is also produced by another construetion. Two of the adjacent angles of a parallelogram, are made to deseribe concentrie circles, so that the side between them passes through their centre, and one of the remaining angles another circle, having its convexity opposed to that of the two former; then the third angle of the parallelogram deseribes a line that differs insensibly from a straight line. PRONY treats of this motion, Arch. Hydraulique, tom. 1I. § 148, &c.; but has not given a complete theory of it. He says, on the authority of Apaus, (Geometrical and Graphicol Essuys), that the contrivance was suggested to Mr WarT by one of the instruments for describing curves, invented by SoaꝶDI. See Nuovi Istrumenti per la descriæione di diverse Curve, &e. del Conte GIAMBATISTA SOARDI, Padova, 1750. I have looked into this work vith considerable attention, but have found nothing that has an aſſinity to the motions just described. 8360. In steam-cngines of similar construetion, the effects are nearly as the quantity of fuel consumed. In this estimate time is necessarily involved, as, in order to derive the greatest advantage from a given quantity of fuel, the combustion must neither he too quick nor too slow. It is computed, that an engine of the best construction, will raise 20,000 cubic feet of water to the height oſ twenty-four feet for every hundred weight of good pit-coa. An engine with a cylinder of thirty-one inches diameter, and making twelve strokes in a minute, will do the work oſ ſorty horses, and will burn 11,000 Ib. of the best Staſfordshire coal in a day. See Encyclopædia Britunnica, article Steam, p. 769. PrONY, Arch. Hyd. § 1499, vol. .. Motion produced by Gunpowder. 361. When gunpowder is fired, a permanently elastic fluid is generated, which being very dense, and much heated, hegins to expand with a force at least 1000 times greater than that of air under the ordinary pressure of the atmosphere. RoBINS Tructs, New Principles of Gunnery, Prop. vI. HuTIONS Mathematical Dictionury, art. Gunpowder. In the acceleration of a ball by the fluid thus generated, three circumstances must be attended to. 362. 1. The elasticity is inversely as the space which the fluid occupies, and, therefore, as it forces the ball out of the gun, it continually diminishes. 2. The elasticity would diminish in this ratio, even if the temperature remained the same; but it must diminish in a much greater ratio, both from the dispersion of heat, and the absorption of it by the fluid itself, during its rarefaction. 8. The air propels the ball by following it, and acts with a force that ĩs, cœteris paribus, proportional to the excess of its velocity above the velocity of the bal. The greater the velocity that the ball has acquired, the less, therefore, is its momentary acceleration. The effect of the elastic fluid must, for these reasons, decrease much faster than the space it occupies increases; and a formula expressing the law of acceleration, as depending on all these causes, more especially on the latter, might be expected to be very complex. Nevertheless, it appears from Dr HuæTONS experiments, that the velocity with which a ball actually issues from the mouth of a cannon, other things being the same, is nearly as the square root of the weight of the gunpowder, or more generally, if v be the initial velocity of the shot, P the weight of powder, and B the weight of the ball, that P . i o=mi/ B m being a constant co-efficient, to be determined by experiment. hilosophical Transactions, 1778. Also HUTTONS Course of Mathematics, vol. iI. p. 270. ow that v =mm V E is exactly the conclusion that would be deduced, from supposing the acceleration of the ball to depend simply on the expansion of the elastic fluid, without taking into account the diminution of the impulse, arising from the velocity which the ball has already acquired This may be shewn from the Principles of Dynamics,  100. That diminution, therefore, is inconsiderable, which arises no doubt from this, that the velocity acquired by the ball is very small, compared with the immense velocity with which the elastic fluid in the gun expands itself. he value of » given above, is only exact on the supposition, that the piece is long enough to allow the elastic fluid generated by the gunpowder to produce its full effeet.. The augmentation of the charge may so much lessen the space over which the fluid is to act, that the velocity of the ball shall be less from a great charge than from a smaller. 368. The Balistic Pendulum is an instrument invented by Mr ROBINS, for determining the velocity with which balls are projeeted by ordnance of different kinds. The ball is made to strike a heavy block of wood, suspended from a centre; the velocity is thus reduced to a quantity that ĩs moderate, and easily admitting of being measured. From thence the original velocity is computed by help of the principles explained, Mechanies, Sect. 7. on the Rotation of Bodies, j 216. For a particular description of this instrument, see RoBINS New Principles of Gunnery, p. 8. Also EuLERS Notes on RoBINS Gunnery7. The rule for computing the velocity of the ball from the vibration of the pendulum is there investigated, as iĩt iĩs likewise, HurroN's Tracts, p. 115., &. The initial velocity of shot estimated in this way, varies from 1600 to 2000 feet in a second. The latter ĩs nearly as great as it is ever found. The velocity with which the elastic fluid, disengaged from the gunpowder, expands itself, is probably more than double of this Dr HuTTON estimates it at 5000 feet per second. Course of Mathematics, vol. 1. p. 270. 364. The depth to which a ball penetrates into wood, earth, &e. is nearly as its weight multiplied into the square of its velocity. Hence, since 7 æ m? x p , B v /m? P; so that the effect of a shot is nearly as the quantity of gunpowder. From the Table given by Dr HurTON, Course of Mothematics, vol. II. p. 272. the value of m may be deduced nearly  2000. The following proposition, vhich has been already mentioned, is applicable to many researches in Mechanics and Hydrodynamics, and particularly to such as are now treated of. 365. When bodies, whether solid or fluid, act on one another by impulse or percussion, in such a manner that their action is subject to the law of continuity, the sum which is made up, at any instant, by multiplying every mass into the square of its veloeity, and adding all the produets together, is a constant quantity, or one which remains always of the same magnitude. The sum thus made up is the vis viva of the bodies, and this proposition is therefore called the conservotion of the vis viva. 866. If the bodies are subjected at the same time to the action of an accelerating force, the sum made up by multiplying every body into the square of its velocity, and adding all the products together, is equal to the sum made up by multiplying every body into the square of its initial velocity, and adding to the amount the sum made up by multiplying every one of them into the square of the velocity which it would have acquired by the action of the accelerating force alone, if it had moved freely in the same line which it has actually described. a. See Dynamique par M. DALEMBERT; Where the vhole of the 4th chapter is employed in demonstrating the different cases of these propositions. CLAIRAULT has also given a demonstration, Mẽm. Acad. des Sciences, 174 DAN. BERNOUILLI had before founded an entire system of Hydrodynamics on the preservation of the vis viva, merely assuming it as truee. Hydrodymamica sive de Viribus et Motibus Fluidorum, Argent. 1788. b. DALEMBERT has shewn, that the preservation of the vis viva depends on this principle, That vhen any number of forces are in equilibrium, the velocities of the points to which the forces are applied, estimated in the direction of the forces themselves, are in the inverse ratio of those forcess. Dynamique, p. 267. edit. 2dO. The conservation of the ] vis viva is therefore an inference from the principle of the virtual velocities. ZEodies impelled by Currents in the Atmosphere, or by Winds. 867. The impulse of a stream of air striking with the velocity v, on a plane of the area &, inclined at an angle ĩ to the direction of the stream. =m x & v' sin P. m is a quantity to be determined from experiment, and is constant, vhile the density of the fluid continues the same. This proposition coincides with that which is enunciated of non-elastic fluids, § 299. 2368. The sails of a windmill are so disposed as to turn in a vertical plane round a horizontal axis, they themselves being all inelined to that plane toward the same side; when, therefore, the plane in which the sails turn, is placed at right angles to the direction of the wind, the force on each sail is resolved into two, one at right angles to its surface, and the other parallel to it. The latter has no effect, but a part of the former impels the sail, on the side toward which it makes an acute angle th the direction of the wind. Thus a cireular rotatory motion is given to the sails. The sails are so constructed, as to have different inclinations to the plane of their motion at different distances from the axis, greatest nearer the centre, and least at their extremities. This is called the weathering of the sails, and is done in order to make the momentum of the wind nearly the same at all different distances from the centre of motion. 369. Supposing the sail of a windmill to be a ane, and the inclination of that plane to the axis the direction of the wind to be i, the effect of e wind to turn the sail, in a plane at right angles its axis, will be the greatest when cos ĩ x sin * a maximum, or cos i / 5 This gives i = 540 44, and therefore the incſination of the sail to the plane oſ its motion, or what is called the angle of weather, =850 16. This is true only when the sail is at rest, or just beginming to move. When the sail is in motion, and of course near the extremities of the sail, vhere it moves ſaster, the angle of weather must be lesss MACLAURIN has given a formula for this case, Fluxions, vol. I. s 9138, 914. MACLAURINS theorem makes the weather to vary from 260 34, at the point of the sail nearest the centre, to 9 at ĩts extremity. SMEATON made some corrections on this rule, from experiment. See Experimental Inquiry concerning Mills, p. 45, and 46. 870. From SMEATONS experiments it appears, that a windmill works to the greatest advantage, when it is so construeted that the velocity of the sails, is to their velocity when they go round without any load, as 6.5 to I0 nearly; and also that the load, when the mill works in this manner, is to the load that would just keep it from moving, as 8.5 to IO nearly. Exæperimental Inquiry, p. 49 and 50. 371. With different velocities of wind, the load that gives the maximum ęffect, varies nearly as the square of the velocity of the wind, and the effect itself nearly as the cube. Ibid. p. 52. The effect is always measured by the produet of the velocity of the load into its weight. The velocity of the load varies in the simple and direct ratio of the velocity of the wind. a ſ Resistance of the Air to Prqjectiles. 872. Though we should be led, as in hydraulies, to conclude that the resistance which air makes to moving hodies is as the square of their velocities, experiment appears to prove, especially hen the velocity is great, that the resistance is partly proportional to the square, and partly to the simple power of the velocity. The resistance to the same ball, its velocity being v, is m v? +n v; where m and n are given co-efficients. HuTTONS Course of Mathematics, vol. 111. p. 278. 1 In this formula m =00002576 and 1l i n =—003888 "σ the diameter of the ball being 1.965 inches. Hence for any ball of which the diameter is q, m =.00000666, and n=001, that is, ⸗ and n L æi 3000006-  T05 m/ 1000 It may be shewn by this, that a ball 1.05 Ib., discharged with a velocity of 2000 feet, will ascend only to the height of 20%0 feet, or little more than half æa mile, whereas in vacuo it would have ascended to the height of eleven miles and three-fourths. HurTON, ibid. p. 284. 374. If a body descending in the atmosphere, has acquired such a velocity, that the resistance is equal to its weight, the accelerating and retarding forces being equal, its motion will become uniform. Hence, since. 5286 d is the weight of an iron ball of the diameter d, if we make a sQ} 5286 d T5060 o0 n), (§ 872.), or 2 . i 528.6 d æ 300 ve have a quadratic equation, from the solution of which  may be found. The velocity thus found is called the terminal velocity of the falling body, or of the projectile For an iron ball of I Ib., the terminal velocity is 244 feet; for one of 42 Ib., it is 456. Vid. TasLE, HUTTONS Course, vol. 1I. ꝑ. 29l. In strictness this velocity is not acquired till aſter an infinite time, and a descent infinitely long: the time of acquiring a velocity differing ſfrom it, by any quantity, however small, is finite, and can easily be assigned. 875. The great problem in gunnery, viz. having given the weight, the magnitude, the direction, and the velocity of a projectile, to determine ĩts path through the air, supposing the law of resistance to be known, is very difficult, and the solutions of it hitherto given, have not led to results easily applicable to practice. An approximation has been given by NEWTON, and complete solutions by EvLER and LE GENDEE. Prin. Math. lib. 11. Prop. 10. EVLERS Remarks on RoBINS, BROWNS translation, p. 822., &. LE GENDRES SOlUtion is in FRANCEUR'S Meconique, p 196., &e. d edit. Dr HuTTON of Woolwich is in possession of many valuable materials relative to this problem, furnished by his ovn experiments, and there is reason to expect a more useful solution than has yet been given, from one vho unites profound mathematical knowledge with great practical skill. D AxToNI has proposed a method oſ determining by experiment an indefinite number of points in the path of the same projectile. If a series of stations, one above another, be taken on the declivity of a hill, at the bottom of which there OUTLINES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. is stretched out a plain of considerable extent; and if the same piece oſ artillery be carried successively to these stations, and fired at the same angle, and in the same circumstances in all respects, and the points marked where the shot in all these cases strikes the plain, it is evident, that all these are points in the curve described by the same shot. The same might be done still more easily, by removing the gun from one distance to another in the plam, and firing against the side of the hill. If the points ſrom which the shot were fired, and those which they struck, vere all marked on an accurate profile of the ground, they would enable us to determine as many points in the path of the projectile as there vere experiments made. It is unnecessary to observe, that at each station a great number of shot might be fired at different elevations, so that many curves might be determined from the same set of experiments; and that at each particular elevation many shots ought to be fired, and a mean taken among the points where the balls strue. 876. The ranges of the same ball, with the same elevation, but different charges, are nearly as the square roots of the initial velocities; and the times of flight are nearly as the ranges. LHourros Mathematical Dictionary, article Gunnery, p. 567. Both these propositions are empirical, or deduced solely from experiment. Besides the works already quoted, see the article Resistance, by Professor RoBISON, in the Encyclopdia Britannica. SECT. II. AIR AS THE VEHICLE OF SOUND. Vibration of Sonorous Bodies. 37. Tus bodies which we consider as sonorous or as causes of the sensation of sound, at the time when they produce that sensation, are observed to be in a state of tremor or vibration. This is exemplified in a bell, and in a drinking glass, when sound is produced by rubbing its edge with a vet finger, in a musical string, &e. The latter affords the simplest case of this fact, and that in vwhich the laws of the vibration are most easily investigated. 378. If a musical string streteched hetween two fixed points, be struek any where between those points, so as to be forced out of the straight line by a small quantity, it will vibrate backwards and forwards on each side of that lIine, and the curves into which it will suecessively pass in the course of these vibrations, will have their eurvature at every point proportional to the distance from the straight line joining the fixed points; the accelerating foree at each point will also be proportional to that distance, and the great and small vibrations vill be performed in the same time. It is usual to reckon the vibrations of a string differently from those of a pendulum; the passage from the highest point on one side, to the highest on the other, is reckoned a vibration of a pendulum. The passage ſrom the farthest distance on one side to the farthest on the other, and back again to its first position, is accounted a vibration of a musical string. It is properly a double vibration. 879. The figures which a musical string assumes in ĩts vibrations, constitute a series of elastic curves, or clongated eycloĩds. The construction of these curves is easy. See the Notes in LE SEUR, and JAcQuIERS Commentary on the Principia, lib. I1. prop. xti. the Note 0I. AlsO SMITH S Harmonics. 380. If L be the length of a musical string of niform thickness, B its weight, S the weight by hich it is stretehed, or the measure of its tension, the time of a double vibration, LP =2, t, as usual is measured in seconds, and  is the velocity acquired in ' by a falling body, expressed in the same measure with LL. The most convenient unit in this case is an inch; so that  886. The value of ? may be made more convenient, by supposing w to denote the weight of an inch of the QL. V w vg8 If N be the number of vibrations in a given time, for rm PLL J w If the lengths and weights of two chords are the same, their times of vibration will be inversely as the square roots of the forces by which they are stretched; and the number of vibrations which they perform in the same time, directly as those square roots. string; so that P=/u L, then 1 instance in one second, N / S0 also, the tension and the weight remaining the same, the celerity of the vibration is inversely as the square-root of the length; or, the tension and weight per inch remaining the same, the celerity of vibration is inversely as the length. The problem of the musical chord was first resolved, and the preceding theorems investigated, by Broox TayLor, in his Methodus incrementorum, prop. 21. 98., &e. His solution, though very ingenious and extending to most of the cases that occur in nature, was not general, nor complete, vhen mathematically consideredc The first complete solution was given by DALEMBERT, in the Berlin Memoirs for T747, and it led him at the same time to discoveries which form a great era in the history of the Differential and Integral Calculuss. Méèm. de Berlin, 114, p. 2l4., &e. 381. When the sounds of different musical strings are compared, a certain difference between them is pereeived by the ear, which is called difference of tone; and this difference is also expressed by saying, that the one sound is raver, and the other more acute; the variations of tone are found to have a constant or fixed relation to the comparative celerities of vibration. As the string performs more vibrations in a given time, the sound ĩit yields becomes more acute; and as it vibrates more slowly, the sound is graver. This is easily brought to the test of experiment. The strings that vibrate faster, either from the greater tension, or their smaller length and weight, invariably produce sounds that are more acute, &e. 882. If eight strings be such, that the number of vibrations which they perform in a given time are as the numbers 24, 27, 80, 32, 86, 40, 45, 48, the sounds of the first seven will be pereeived as increasing in acuteness one above another, from the first to the last, and will yield the notes from the combinations of which all musical effects are produced. The tone is not affected by the extent of the vibrations, but merely by their time. The loudness of the sound is supposed to depend on the greater extent of the vibrationss Noise and discordant sounds arise from a vant of isochronism of vibrationn. When the vibrations of a sonorous body are isochronous, the sound is always musical. The Iast of the strings will sound what is called the octave above the first, and the same series may be repeated again between the number 48 and its double 96, and each note will be an octave above its corresponding note in the first interval; the numbers of vibrations will be 54, 60, 64, 72, 80, 90, 96; and it is evident that this series may be continued either up or down without limit. The musical scale thus formed, is called the Diatonic Scale. The pleasure derived from the suceessive or simultaneous perception of the sounds of this series, appears to be an ultimate fact vhich can be no farther analysed, but must be referred to the original eonstitution of the mind. The selection of the combination of these notes, capable of affording high degrees of pleasure, is the objeet of the musical art. 888. All other sonorous hodies, at the time they emit sound, vibrate in like manner, but aceording to laws less simple. In wind instruments, the sounding and vibrating body is the air itself. The number of vibrations performed in a given time, by any sonorous body, may be determined hy comparing its sound with the note which is sounded by a musical string of a given length, weight and tension. The ear is suſficient to decide vhat string in a harpsichord is in unison with the given sound. The number of vibrations performed in a given time by the former, is equal to the number of those performed in the same by the latter. 384. All musical sounds are computed to be eontained within ten ocetaves; so that the number of vibrations in a given time that vields the gravest note, is to that which yields the most acute, as I to 19, or as I to 1024. Propagation of Vibrations through the Air. 885. The vibrations of sonorous bodies are communieated to the air, and by the impression thus made on the ear, excite the sensation of sound. That air is necessary to the production of sound, is evident from including a bell in a receiver, exhausting the air, and making the clapper strike on the bell: the sound is hardly audible. 886. It is not every kind of vibratory motion produced in the air that is the cause of sound; a musical string may vibrate, but if it ĩs touched by a bit of cloth, or any soft body, no sound is heard. The vibrations in the air that produce sound must be eommunicated by some elastic substance. Sound is produced by the explosion of gunpowder, that is, by the sudden extrication of a fluid mass, dense, and highly elasticc. It is produced also by the sudden rushing in of air to supply a vacuum. The crack oſ a whip appears to be an example of this last. 3887. Though the vibrations of the air which ternate condensations and rarefactions of that fluid, in consequence of which the particles go and return, or oscillate backwards and forwards for some time, even though there is no renewal of the impulse of the sonorous body, yet every such oscillation acts only once, or by a single impulse on the ea. Were it otherwise, sound would be always something inarticulate and ĩll defined. 888. The velocity with which vibrations are propagated through the air, is the same that a heavy body would acquire by falling through half the height of the homogeneous atmosphere, or that which the atmosphere would be reduced to, if it were every where of the same density, and the same temperature with the air at the surface of the earth. TThe height of this homogeneous atmosphere has been formerly computed at 4848 fathoms, when the temperature ĩs that oſ freezingg If this height be called H, then v, the velocity of the aerial vibrations,  2  H. Hence vl057, which is too small, as it is found by experiment to be 1142 feet per second. The nature of the vibrations of an elastic ſluid, was first considered by NEWTON, and their velocity defined, as in the preceding proposition, by comparing them with the vibrations of a pendulum. Princip. Muth. lib: ũ. prop. 41. & 49. The soundness oſ this reasoning, however, was questioned by EuLER; and it vas aſterwards shewn by CRAMEE, that the same argument might be used to prove conclusions very different from that at hich NEWToN had actually arrivedl. Commentary on the Principia, lib. ĩi. vol. ĩi. p. 864. LA GRrANcE aftervards gave an accurate solution of the problem, by vwhich, though he pointed out the error of NE?TONS reasoning, he confirmed the truth of his conclusion. 389. The velocity of the pulses propagated in elastie fluid, are as the square root of the elastiy divided by the density of the fluid. Prin. Math. ibid. prop. 48. The velocity of sound, computed as in the last article, comes out less than by actual experiment. LA PLACE has suggested a very probable explanation of this, viz. that the condensation of the unduIœ, vhich must take place in these vibrations, produces a degree of sensible heat, by which the elasticity is increased, or, to speak more correctly, the density diminished, while the elasticity remains the same. The heat required for that efſfeet has been shewn by Bror to be within the probable limits which analogy, in the absence of direct experiment, would lead us to assignn. HAUY, Legons de Phys.  4S. 390. There is perhaps, in the economy of nature, no contrivance more wonderful, than that by which things apparently so Ittle susceptible of precision as the impulses communicated to an elastie fluid, beeome the means of eonveying to the mind such a multitude of distinet impressions as it receives through the ear; the finest modulations of harmony, ans the nicest distinetions oſ artieulate language. 391. An Echo is a repetition of sounds produced by the refleetion of the aẽrial pulses that convey sound to the ear. A vall, a rock, a grove of trees, may be so placed, as to cause an echoo. That an echo may return one syllable as soon as ĩt is pronounced, the refleeting surface should be 80 or 90 ſeet distant; for a dissyllabic echo, 170 feet, &e. The sound, vhether direct or reſleeted, appears to proceed nearly at the rate of 1142 ſeet in a second. 399. The Speaking Trumpet is an instrument ntended to transmit the sound of the voice in some particular direction, to a greater distance than iĩt would otherwise reach. The best form of a speaking-trumpet, is found to be that of a hollow cone, with a mouth-piece at the narrow end, to receive the lips, and confine the voice of the speaker. The beat of a watch may be heard to twice the distance through a speaking-trumpet, that it can be heard at without one. This experiment is said to succeed equally whether the trumpet is cylindrical or conical. See the Edinburgh Encyclopædia, article Acoustics, Part 11. Sect. ĩi. The instrument seems to produce its effect, by preventing the undulæ generated in the air, from diffusing themselves all round, by which means they are longer subjected to an impulse in the same direction. SECT. III. IR, AS THE VEHICLE OF HEAT AND MOISTURE. 3938. Thar Earth and the Atmosphere, taken merally, receive at all times nearly the same quany of heat and light from the sun. As the whole of one side of the earth ĩs constantly turned to the sun, the only difference in the quantity oſ heat and lIight which the earth receives in a given time, must arise from the changes vhich take place in its distance from the sun at different seaT2 z0ns of the year. In consequence of these changes, the quantities of light and heat received by the earth are not proportional to the times, but to the angles described by the earth round the sun in those times. These variations, however, are but inconsiderable, and as they are annual, they do not produce any inequality in the whole heat or light of one year compared with those of another 2894. Though the earth is thus receiving heat continually, and nearly at the same rate, its average temperature appears to remain invariable; as much heat as comes from the solar rays, flying off constantly into the space, whether empty or occupied by subtle matter, which surrounds the earth. 8395. While the general temperature of the earth remains invariable, the distribution of heat over its surface is extremely unequal, being different in different places, and in the same place subject to variations, both regular and irregular. 896. The causes which determine the distribution of heat over the earth's surface, are either the direct influence of the solar rays, or the communication of heat by the air from one part of the earth's surface to another. : 397. The first of these depends on the latitude the place, or its distance from the equator, by ich the intensity of the heat and light from the 1, and also the length of the day, are determined different seasons of the year. The intensity of the sun's rays, hen they strike on any plane, is as the quantity that falls on a given space, or as the sine of the suns elevation above the planee. The nearer the sun is to the zenith oſ any place, at a given moment, the greater the intensity of heat produced by his rays. The heat for an entire day, depends also on the length of the day, and as the day is longer where the distance from the zenith is greater, the inequality in the distribution of heat arising from the one of these causes, compensates that proceeding from the other, and brings their combined effects nearer to an equality than might be imagined. FoNraNa has shewn, that the heat of the day of the summer solstice at Pavia, is greater than the heat of the same day at Petersburgh, in a ratio not greater than that of 68 to 6, though the latitude of the former be 45 I/, and of the latter 5 56. The same author finds, that when the suns declination exceeds 18, or from about the IOth of May to the 30th of July, the heat in twenty-four hours proceeding from the suns rays is greater at the north pole than at the equator. GREG. FONTANA, Disquisitiones Plysico-Mathematicœ, Ima & Qda, The distribution of heat, therefore, if only the direct influence of the sun were to aet, would be very diſferent from that which takes place in nature. The intensity of the solar heat is less in low elevations than is supposed in these calculations, on account of the rays coming through a large mass of air, and oſ air more loaded with vapour, so that a great quantity of them is interceptedl. BoucuEE, Traitè d Optique, sur la Gradation de la Lumiere, Liv. 11. Sect. iv. 308. The efſeets of the direet influence of the sun, are greatly modified by the transportation of the temperature of one region into another, in consequence of that disturbance in the equilibrium of the atmosphere which the action of those rays necessarily produces. In order that there may be an equilibrium in a fluid like the air, every stratum of air that is level or horizontal all round, ought to be of the same density. It ought, therefore, also to be every where oſ the same temperature, which not being the case, the constant motion of the air is the necessary consequence of heat being unequally distributed. The columns of air that are lighter, are displaced by those that are heavier, and hence a general tendency in the air to move from the poles toward the equator, This general tendency, which is caleulated to moderate the extremes of temperature, is al-  greatly modiſied by local cireumstances. 899. The sea is preserved of a moderate temperature by the statical prineiple which makes the heavier columns of a fluid displace the lighterr. A more uniform temperature is thus given to the sea, which communieates itself to the air incumbent on it, and to that on every side. 400. Conversely, the efſeet of great and unbro ken continents, is favourable to the extremes of heat or of cold. The constitution oſ the surface may tend to increase and sometimes to diminish this effect. High mountains especially, if covered with snow, may enforce the rigour of a cold climate, or temper the heats of a warm one. Forests tend to inerease the cold, by preventing the sun's rays from striking on the ground. Evaporation produces cold; and marshes and lakes are therefore favourable to the severity of the weather. The congelation of water produces heat, and moderates the cold; the melting of ice, on the other hand, increases the capacity for heat, and so produces cold. 401. Height above the Ievel of the sea, causes a diminution of heat at the constant rate of I° for 270 feet nearly, vhen not far from the surface of the earth. It has already been remarked, that this decrease seems to be somewhat slower as ve ascend, but not very considerably, as far as our observations have extended. 402. The combination of these causes gives to every place a mean temperature, which remains always nearly the same, and which decreases from the equator to either pole, according to a law that has been determined by observation. 408. Let ? be the mean temperature of any parallel of which the latitude is L, M the mean temperature of the parallel of 45, and M + E the mean temperature of the equator; then is tM  E cos 2 L. In this formula, M æ 58, and E æ207. When ?L> 90, cos2 L is negative. This theorem was first given by MAVER, Opera inedita, vol. I. ꝑ. 4., &c. Also Kinwav, Estimate of the temperature of different Latitudes, p. 18. From this a geometrical construction, for finding the mean temperature, may be readily deduced. In the line AC (fig. 27.), divided into equal parts, numbered ſrom A, so as to represent the scale of a thermometer, let ACæ285, and AB=58 From the centre B, with the distance BC or 2, describe the semicirele CGH; take the arch CGequal to the double latitude of any parallel; and from G drav GO perpendicular to AC; then is AO the mean temperature of that parallel, according to FAHRENHEIT'S scale. The mean temperatures thus ſound, agree very well with observation. Springs, in which the water does not considerably change its heat from one season of the year to another, afford an expeditious and accurate way of ascertaining the mean temperature. 404. If the place is at any height H above the ES 270 H is understood to be expressed in English feet. level of the sea, t /M V E cos 2L. 405. On ascending into the atmosphere, at a certain height in every latitude, a point is found where it always freezes, or where it freezes more than it thaws, 50 that the mean temperature is below 32. The curve joining all these points, from the equator to the pole, is called the line of perpetual congelation. The equation to it will be found, by making E E + E cos 2L. This line at the equator is elevated 15577 feet above the level of the sea;3 so that for determining n ve have 82 =58I577 o or n=29s. m Thus, H =642 +988 cos 2 L, and this seems nearly to agree with actual observation. Professor LESLIE has given a different equation, ſoundd on the law of the diminution of heat mentioned at § 839. In the table calculated from it, heights come out rather belov what observation requires. Elements of Geometry, àd edit. p. 495. On great elevations, the variations of temperature ſrom day to night, and from summer to vinter, appear to be less than at the surfacee SAUSSURE, tom. Iv. ꝑ. 4ẽ 406. The temperature of the latter end of April is observed, at least in the temperate zone, to be nearly the mean temperature of the year. From that time the heãt inereases, and is at ĩts maximum about the 2lst of July; it goes on decreasing from that time till it come to the mean in the end of October, and it passes from thence to the greatest cold about the 2lst of January. All these vicissitudes may be nemly represented by the formula in which G is the mean temperature for the given place, F a constant co-eſficient to be found by observation,  the mean longitude of the sun computcd from the first of Aries, for any day of the ycar, the mean temperature oſf which ĩis u. Thus, v=G + F sin . 800). This supposes the mean heat to take place about a month after the equinox, and the extremes about a month after the solstices. In this latitude we may suppose F æ 15. 407. From this formula, compared with the two former, one theorem may be deduced, including the effeets oſ the latitude, the elevation above the surface, and the season of the year, viz. -_ H : z. y?M35 +E2 L + F⸗uſ 300); Where 5 is the mean temperature for any day of the year, in the latitude L, and at the elevation H. 408. The formula for the mean temperature, as laid down above, would probably hold over the whole globe, if it were every where covered by the ocean; but it agrees strictly only with the Atlantic Ocean, and the western part of the Old Continent. The editor of MAYER'S Posthumous Works observed, that his theorem applied accuratelv only to the OUTLINES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. portion of the globe contained between the parallels of Stockholm and of the Cape of Good Hope, and between the meridians of Stockholm and Mexico. This does not seem quite exact; no part of North America having its mean temperature the same vith that of places of the same latitude in Europe. It would require at least I0 to be taken from M, to adapt the formula of the last article to the New Continent. See KinwaN's Estimate of the temperature of different Latitudes, p. 15. 409. As we go eastward from the shores of the Atlantie, the mean temperature of any parallel becomes lower, at a rate that may perhaps, for the north part of the temperate zone, be estimated at a degree for I50 miles. At St Petersburgh, lat. 5 56, about 750 miles from vhat may be accounted the shores of the Atlantic, the temperature is 55 below the standard. The medium temperature of J anuary is no more than 10 ByY computation from the formula above, it ought to be greater than 8. The winter lasts from Oetober to April, and the cold is sometimes as great as the freezing point of mereury, r89. From a mean of several years, the mean oſ the winter oold is2ab. Kirvay, ibid. p. 61. It was at Krasnojark, lat. 56 80, long. 98 E. that mereury was ſirst known to freese by natural rold. : If we were to begin where any parallel intersects the shore of the Atlantic, and draw on the map a line along vhich the mean temperature should be constantly the same as at the first-mentioned point, ĩt would incline greatly to the south. The point, for instance, in the meridian of Petersburgh, which has the same temperature with the standard belonging to the parallel of that city, is about 5 south of it, or in the latitude of 540 80 nearly. At Irkutz, latitude 52015, longitude 1050 east, the mean temperature from October to April has heen known to be as low as 6.8, a temperature which for severity and duration exceeds any thing that has yet been observed elsewhere. 470. This increase of the severity of the winter, and the consequent diminution of the mean temperature, on going eastward, holds in all the latitudes north of the parallel of 30°; but the diminution is slower as we approach that parallel; to the south of 80 the mean heat inereases on retiring from the ocean. This diminution takes place all the ay to the shores of the Pacific, or very near them. The climate of Pekin is vastly more severe than that of the same parallel (9° 54) in Europe. 411. In all the part of the New Continent vwhich is to the north of the Tropic of Cancer, the mean temperature is much lower, and the severity oſ the winter much greater than in the same Iatitudes in Europe. At Prinee of Wales Fort, Hudson's Bay, lat. 59, long. 920 west, the mean temperature is 200 under the standard; at Nain in Labrador 160; at Cambridge in New England (lat. 420 25,) 1I0 degrees. Mercury has been supposed to be frozen by the natural cold as far south as Quebec, lat. 479. A very low mean temperature, and extreme cold in vinter, are characteristic of the climate of North America. 412. In the higher latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere, the temperature is lower than in the same latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. ForsTER describes a small island on the coast of South Georgia, latitude 54 south, which, in the middle of summer, was covered almost entirely vith frozen snow, to the depth of several fathoms. The South Pole is surrounded to the distance of 18 or 19 degrees with a barrier of solid ice, through which even the skill and intrepidity of Captain Coox could not force a passage. It is known also, that detached masses of ice float down in that hemisphere as low as the latitude of 460. The cause of this extraordinary cold is hy no means suſficiently understood. 418. The varieties of temperature to be met with on the surface of the earth, appear to be confined between the limits of 4- 100 and 40°. No degree of natural cold much belor 40° has ever been observed, even vhen thermometers have been employed containing a fluid not liable to congelation. Sir CHARLES BLAGDEN on the Congelation of Mercury, p. 61. The heat of I00° ĩs rare, but a heat approaching to 90°, is found in the summer of most countries within the limits of the temperate Zones. There is hardly any climate, even in the frigid zone, vhere a temperature between 60 and 50 ĩs not occasionally experienced. The greatest heat is much less above the mean temperature than the greatest cold is below it. The mean temperature for the whole surſace may be taken at 58; the greatest summer heat is only 42 above this; the greatest winter cold is 98° under it. 414. There is reason to think that the climates of Europe were more severe in ancient times than they are at present, and that the change which has taken place may with great probability be aseribed ie hetter and more extensive cultivation of the md. æ5AR says, that the vine could not be cultivated in Gaul on account of the severity of the winter The rein-deer was then an inhabitant of the Pyrenees. The Tiber was sometimes frozen over, and the ground about Rome covered with snow for several veeks together. See HuME on the Populousness of Ancient Nations, Essays, vol. i. p. 451. edit. I772. DAINES BAREINGTON, Phil. Truns. vol. iii. 1768) P 58., &e. ultivation may improve a climate, Imo, By the draining of marshes, and lessening the evaporation, vwhich is so great a cause of cold; àdo, By turning up the soil, and exposing it to the rays of the sun; tio, By thinning or cutting down forests, which, by their shade, prevented the penetration of the sun's rays. The improvement which is continually taking place in the climate o North America, proves that the power of man extends to the phenomena, which, from the magnitude and variety of their causes, appear most beyond its reach. At Guiana in South America, the rainy season has been shortened by the clearing oſ the country, and the varmth has been greatly increased. It thunders continually in the woods; rarely in the cultivated parts. BuFFON, Sup. tom. ix. p. 846. octavo. Wind. 415. The principal cause of those currents oſ air which we give the name of Winds, is the disrbance of the equilibrium of the atmosphere by e unequal distribution of heat. In order that an equilibrium may take place in an elastic fluid, circumfused about a solid, to which it gravitates, every level stratum of the fluid, that is, every stratum which, when continued round, cuts the directions of gravity every where at right angles, should be of the same density, and therefore of the same temperature As this is not the case, the equilibrium of the atmosphere is inconsistent with the actual distribution of heat on the earth’s surface. The general tendency, in such circumstances, is for the heavier columns to displace the lighter, and for the air at the surface to move from the Poles tovard the Equator. The only supply for the air thus constantly abstracted from the higher latitudes, must be produced by a counter-current in the upper regions oſf the atmosphere, carrying back the air from the Equator toward the Poles The quantity of air transported by these opposite currents, is s0 nearly equal, that the average weight of the air, as measured by the barometer, is the same in all places oſ the earth. If the surface of the earth were wholly covered with water, so that there were no part of it more disposed than another to obstruet the motion of the air, or no part which had a greater capacity than another, of acquiring or communicating heat, the air would probably circulate continually from the Poles to the Equator, and back again, without any irregularity whatsoever. 416. In consequence of the rotation of the earth on its axis, another motion is combined with that of the eurrents just deseribedl. The air, which is constantly moving from points where the earth's motion on its axis is slower, to those where it is quicker, cannot have precisely the same motion eastward with the part of the surface over which it is passing, and therefore must, relatively to that surface, deseribe a curve, having its convexity turned to the east. The two currents, therefore, from the opposite hemispheres, when they meet toward the middle of the earth, having each acquired an apparent motion westward; and as their opposite motions from south and north must destroy one another, nothing will remain but this motion westward, by which they will go on together, and form a wind blowing direetly from the east. This is the cause of the Trade Wind, which (#ith certain exceptions) blows continually between the Tropics, or rather between 80° on the one side of the Equator and 8C on the other. The Trade Wind declines somewhat from due east toward the parallel to which the sun ĩs vertical at different seasons of the year. As the sun approaches the southern tropie, the Trade Wind is directed somevhat to the south; and as he approaches the northern, somewhat to the north. The cause usually assigned for the Trade Wind is the constant motion, toward the west, of the spot to which the sun is vertical, and where of course the rarefaction is greatest. This, it is supposed, draws along with it the air from the east. This, however, is by no means a satisfactory explanation, and it seems certain, that if the Trade Wind were produced in that way, it must blow with great force, instead of being a gentle breeze, moving at the rate of seven or eight miles an hour. The opinion that the Trade Wind is produced by the air, in its motion southward, falling back toward the west, is mentioned, but rejected by HALLEY. It has since been espoused by FRANKLIN and La PLACE, and is, on the whole, less objectionable than any other. The matter is here stated somewhat differently ſrom vwhat is done by those authors, particularly the effect of the currents from the opposite hemispheres, in determining the motion to be vholly from the cast. 417. The attractions of the sun and moon have sometimes been considered as among the general causes of the winds. They have no doubt a tendency to produce in the atmosphere an undulation backwards and forwards, like the tides which they cause in the ocean. It does not appear, however, that they could produce any continued progressive motion of the air, similar to that of the Trade Winds. Their effects also, are too minute to be perceived, amid the action of 5o many more poverful causes. DALEMBERT in his Itecherches sur les Causes Gènbrules des Vents, has treated of the forces of the sun and moon to produce currents in the atmosphere His essav is more remarkable for the resource and ingenuity it displays in the management of the calculus, than for the physical conclusions to which it leads. 418. The superior current above deseribed, restores the air carried from the higher latitudes to the lower, with such a degree of equality, that the average weight of the atmosphere, as measured by the barometer, is nearly the same in all climates. This restoration is, however, subject to great Iocal and temporary irregularities, from the different grees oſ resistance which the air meets with in s5ing over the surface, and the different capaci3 of that surface for receiving and communicang heat. The motion of the inferior and superior currents, may be seen exempliſied on opening a door, between two apartments oſ different temperaturess. The flame of a candle near the ground, will shew the stream that sets ſfrom the colder room to the warmer; near the top it vill indicate a stream in the opposite direction. As the average quantities of the air earried by these opposite currents are equal, the surſace that separates them is probably not far different from that at vhich the barometer would stand at I5 inches, or half its medium height at the surface. If we suppose the mean temperature is , this elevation will be found  8010 fathoms, or 18, 0GO feet =8.425 miles, not so high as the summits of the Cordilleras. The upper stream in each hemisphere being directed to one point, the pole of that hemisphere, there must arise a considerable condensation, and acceleration of the air, as the currents approach that point, and hence the causes of irregular winds must be increased on approaching the poles. The general direction oſ the upper current must be to the westward, for the same reason that that of the lower was toward the east. 419. The Trade Wind itself is subject to certain irregularities. As the sun advances into the Northerm Hemisphere, the Trade Wind becomes irregular; and about the middle of April, in all the tract between Africa and the peninsula of India, and muceh farther to the east, it changes from north-east to south-west, and continues to blow in that direction, till the sun returns to the Southern Hemisphere. The cause of this change is difficult to be assigned. It seems probable, that by the suns entry into the Northern Hemisphere, he communicates great heat to the sandy deserts of Africa, which lie to the west or south-west of the seas just mentioned. The great heat acquired by the sand of those deserts, produces a rarefaction in the columns of air incumbent on them, and consequently a tendency, in the columns that are near them, and more moderately heated, to flow in and displace the heated air. The air of the Atlantic is most likely to do this, and in passing over Nigritia, &e., to acquire a velocity that carries it on eastward through the Indian Ocean. Perhaps the direction of the eastern coast of Africa has a share in producing this effect. The advance of the sun into the Northern Hemisphere, would naturally give the Trade Wind an inclination to the north, vhen, meeting obliquely with the coast of Africa, and the elevated tracts in the interior, ĩt is turned yet more to the north. Here, again, receiL ving an impulse ſrom the great body of air descending from the north, it goes round vholly to the vest, and becomes, as it were, an eddy of the Trade Wind. These periodical winds are called Monsoons. The change, or the setting in of the monsoons, does not happen all at once. In some places the shifting of the wind is accompanied ith calms; in others vith variable winds, heavy rains, thunder, and violent storms. 420. The tract from the parallel of 0° to the Pole, in each hemisphere, is the region of variable winds; and their unsteadiness and violence seem to inerease, the nearer they approach the Polar Circles. The irregularity of winds proceeds from inequalities in the motion of the general currents above mentioned, and from a variety of local causes; also from the chemical changes that are carried on in the air, such as the solution and precipitation of moisture, and the action of the electric fluid on the different gases that compose the atmosphere. 421. Sudden and strong gales of wind appear almost always to arise from a diminution of the weight of the air in the tract where the wind prevails, and are accompanied, or preceded, by a fall of the barometer. OUTLINES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. The sudden sinking of the barometer almost always indicates a gale of wind, though a gale that is sometimes at a considerable distance When the barometer begins to rise, it is a symptom that the gale has reached ĩts height; and though it may still continue to blow for a long time, it is usually with decreasing violence. 4292. Notwithstanding these irregularities, there in most countries a tendency to periodical winds, ore or less remarkable, according to the steadiness the climate. Even vwith us, vhere an insular situation, with a great Continent on one side, and a great Ocean on the other, unites all the causes of a variable climate, the East wind usually prevails in the spring, from the vernal equinox to the summer solstice, and beyond it; during the rest of the year, the Westerly winds prevail, though not without frequent incursions oſ the east, by which our most unpleasant weather ĩs always produced. The Etesiun, or northerly wind, prevails very much in summer all over Europe. PLINY describes it as blowing regularly in Italy, for forty days after the summer solstice, lib. ĩl. cap. 47T. It is part of the great current that earries the atmosphere of the higher latitudes down to the tropical regions. 428. The velocity of the wind varies from one at is hardly sensible, to one of I00 miles in an ur. The force of the wind, is as the density of the air multiplied into the square of itsævelocity. SMEATON has given a table of its force, expressed by its pressure in avoirdupois pounds, on a plane of one foot square directly opposed to it. Phil. Trans. vol. li. p. 165., &e. Also CavaLLo, vol. ĩi. p. 287. A gentle light breeze is there estimated as moving at the rate of four or five miles an hour, and pressing vith a force of about two ounces: A brisk but pleasant gale from ten to fifteen miles; with a force from half a pound to a pound: A high wind goes at the rate oſ thirty or thirty-five miles, and presses with the force of five or six pounds: A hurricane, that tears up trees, and blows down houses, has a velocity of one hundred miles an hour, and a foree oſ forty-nine pounds on a square foot. The velocity of the wind may be estimated by the velocity of elouds, or of light bodies carried by it. Rain. 424. The vapour that rises from water uniting itself to the air, ascends into the higher regions of the atmosphere, and is carried by the winds to great distances. It cannot be doubted, that the humidity raised in this manner is chemically dissolved in the air. The humidity does not lessen, but increases the transparency of the air, and cannot be withdrawn from it but by substances which attract it powerfully. 495. The power oſ air to dissolve humidity increases in a greater ratio than that in which iĩts temperature increases. It appears from SaUSSURES experiments, that while the temperature increases in arithmetical progression, the humidity vhich the air is able to contain increases in geometric progressionn. A cubic foot of air, of the temperature 66, is able to hold in solution 1 or 12 grains of water: the air itself weighs 570 grains: so that air of the temperature 66°, dissolves about a 50th part of its ovn weight of vater. Essui sur THygrometrie, x1. chap. x. p. 167., &e. 426. Hence, if two portions of air, oſ different temperatures, and hoth saturated with humidity, be mixed together, a precipitation of humidity must necessarily take place. If the abscissæe AB, AB' (ig. 28.) be the temperatures of two equal portions of air, and the ordinates BC, B'C represent the quantities of humidity contained in them, the curve CFC, which represents the dissolving power, corresponding to different temperatures, will be convex toward AB, and vill, so far as experiment has shewn, he a logarithmic curvee. Now if CC be joined, and if BB be bisected in D, the perpendicular DE ill represent the humidity contained in a given weight of the mixture of the two portions of air, AD the temperature of the mixture, and DF the quantity of humidity which the air of the temperature AD is able to containn. The quantity precipitated from each portion of the air is therefore EF; so that the whole quantity precipitated is 2 EF. In general, if T and ? are the temperatures of two equal portions of air, H and à the humidity contained in them when saturated, the quantity of humidity precipitated from the mixture will be, H +h—Q2V HE. 497. If, therefore, large portions of the atmosphere, of different temperatures, and saturated, or nearly saturated, with humidity, be driven against one another by contrary winds, the consequence must be a precipitation of humidity, or the formation of clouds. This simple and ingenious theory of the formation of clouds, vas a discovery of the late Dr HuTTON. See Edinburgh Transuctions, vol. I. p. 4l. It is not necessary to the theory, that the curve which terminates the perpendiculars BC, B'C, &c. should be a logarithmic curve; it is sufficient that it be a curve convex towards the axis AB. Of this Dr HuTTON had satisſied himself by the observation of natural phenomena. If the line terminating the perpendiculars was straight, and much more were it concave, no precipitation could ever take place. Professor LESLIE has shewn, that the collision of opposite currents of air of different temperatures, may furnish a supply sufficient for the produetion of the heaviest rainn. Experiments on Heat and Moisture, p- 180. 428. The clouds thus formed, are not disposed equally over the whole atmosphere, but occupy a peculiar region, elevated at an average between two and three miles above the earth. The mixture of different portions of air is likely to take place most frequently when the two opposite currents already mentioned come in contact with one another. This is at the height of 18, 000 feet and upwards, vhich agrees very well with the medium height of the elouds. 429. The clouds thus formed, have their particles united into larger masses or drops by different causes, such as the mutual attraction of aqueous particles, the force of the wind, or the operation of electricity, and so fall down in rain on the surface of the earth. The intimate connection between rain and the existence of different currents of air, is evident from many appearances. 1. When the Trade Winds blow uniformly, hardly any rain falls; but vhen the monsoon changes, heavy falls of rain seldom fail to take place. 2 In the tropical climates, the rainy season is always on the sun's approach to the zenith, at which time also the winds are most variable. 8. There are some spots of continual rain, vhich seem to be where opposite streams of air constantly meet one another. 4. There are several tracts on the earths surſace, vhere it hardly ever rains. These are usually far inland, and are extensive plains, without any of those inequalities of surface that promote the mixture of air. 5. In the midst of such deserts, vhere hills occur, moisture is precipitated, sometimes in the form of rain, but most frequently of dew, so that springs of fresh water arise, and great fertility is produced. 6. There is in our climate hardly any instance of rain vithout a change of wind, and very rarely a change of vind without rain in a greater or smaller quantity. . The lowness of the mercury in the barometer is a sign of rainn. It is a certain indication of the subversion oſ the equilibrium of the atmosphere, and makes it probable, that before the equilibrium is restored, winds from different quarters, and of different temperatures, must come into collision with one another. 480. The Hygrometer is an instrument intended to measure the quantity of humidity contained in the air at any time. The power of evaporation to produce cold has been very happily applied by Professor LESLIE, to the construetion of an instrument of this kind. 481. The vapour raised up into the air, is of a quantity sufficient to afford all the rain that falls, supply all the springs, and of consequence all ivers derived from them, on the surface of the l r HALLEY shewed, that the evaporation from the sen alone is a sufficient supply for all the water that the rivers carry into itt. His calculation was founded on a very complex view of the subject, and liable to several objections. BUFFON took a more simple view of the matter, by selecting one of those lakes that sends out no stream to the ocean, and shewing that the probable evaporation from the surface of the lake is equal to all the water carried into it.  may be also satisſfactory to shew, that all the water annually emptied by a river into the sea, is less than the rain, which falls on the surface drained by itt. Thus, according to Dr HALLEYS computation, the water which the Thames carries down through Kingston Bridge, to which the tide does not reach, is 25844000 cubic yards, or 684288000 cubic feet per day, which gives 249765120000 cubic feet for the quantity of water hich the Thames discharges annually into the sea. Nov, the surface drained by the Thames and its branches, appears to be about equal to a circle of 40 miles radius; that is, nearly to 5086 square miles, or 140895622400 square feet. But if we suppose that the depth of rain which falls annually, at an average, over this surface, is two feet, ve have a quantity which exceeds that carried down by the Thames by 81026124800, or nearly an eighth part of the whole, which is therefore left to be taken up by the evaporation. Maror?TE? has made a similar computation for the Seine, in his Traitè de Mouvement des Eouæ. 482. The disputes that prevailed so long concerning the origin of fountains and rivers, chieſly arose from the difficulty of conceiving, how a precarious and accidental supply could be rendered equal to a regular and great expenditure. The opinions of the ancients, concerning the origin of fountains, are to be ſound in SENECA, Nut. Quæst. lib. 11. See also VARENIUS, sect. Iv. chap. xvi. prop. 5. 488. The quantity of rain that falls in different places in the same year, and in the same place in different years, is extremely various; and even in the temperate zone runs between the extremes of 1I8 and 1I00 inches. In places not very distant from one another, the difference in the quantity of rain is often very great. The neighbourhood of the sea on one hand, and mountains on the other, is most favourable to the mid atmosphere, and from the second the prevalence of winds of difſerent temperatures. When the rain exceeds 25 inches a-year, the climate is to be accounted moist. In the year 1809, the rain that fell at Dalkeith, near Edinburgh, vas 28.5; at Glasgow 25.1 at Largs, at the mouth of the Clyde, 40.6 and at Gordon Castle, on the east coast of Scotland, 24.5: At London, in the same year, 20.7; in the preceding year, the fall was but 18.8. In some places oſ this island, such as Kendal and Keswick, the rain amounts to 64 and õ8 inches in a year. 484. The disposition of the rocks in strata, contributes much to the collecting of the waters under the surface, and the eonveying them without waste, as if in close pipes, till they are united in fountains, lakes, rivers, &e. BERNARD PALLASSY scems to have been the first who made this remark; he even brought it to the test of experiment. 4385. The region of the air in which the precipitation of humidity takes place, is one where the temperature is frequently below freeæing; the frozen particles then uniting, as in the case oſ melted vapour, form flakes of Snow, which reach the ground in that state, hen the eold of freezing continues down to the surface. When the aqueous particles first form a drop, and are aſterwards frozen in their descent, they hecome Hail, vhich is sometimes found crystallised vith some degree of regularity. The whiteness and opacity of the hail, is probably owing to the congelation being performed where the air is very rare. Professor LESLIE has remarked, in the curious experiments he has made on the produetion of ice by evaporation, in a receiver where the air was considerably rarefied, that the ice is more porous, and less transparent, than that which is formed under the ordinary pressure of the atmosphere. 486. Dew is a precipitation of humidity from the Iower strata of the atmosphere, which does not disturb the transparency of the air, and to which the mixture of different streams of air does not seem necessary. When air containing humidity eools below a certain point, it must begin to deposite its humidity. It is in this vay that dew is formed in warm veather, vhen, on the sun's going down, the heat oſ the air at the surſace is greatly diminished. The temperature at which the deposition of dew takes place, is therefore an indication of the quantity of humidity contained in the air. BrucE has remarked, that during the dry season no dew falls in Egypt, hbut that it is usually observed in the Delta five or rix days heſore the inundation. 487. Besides these deposites from the atmosphere, which are all of one substance, there are others that cannot be traced to the same originn. These are the Stones which have often been said, and have of late years been ascertained beyond all doubt, to fall down from the air; on examination, they are found to be eomposed in a manner similar to one another, but in many respects unlike to any thing that is found either on the surface or in the bowels of the earth. For an account of Meteoric Stones, see Howanrb, Phil. Trans. 1802. IzarN, Lithologie Atmospherique, Paris, 80, 1808: and CAVALLO, vol. iv. D. 972., cc In the absence of all analogous appearances, it is perhaps unphilosophical to offer any explanation of the Meteoric Stoness We would only suggest as a mere possibility, that gaseous substances may he thrown up into the air, from the numerous volcanoes on the earths surface, and may carry vith them certain elements oſ metallic and stony bodies from the mineral regions; these, while floating about in the atmosphere, may sometimes be collected in considerable quantities into one place, vhere, being subjected to electric or galvanic action, they are united into a solid mass. The fſact, that many of these stones have fallen during thunder storms, seems to limit the place of their formation to the atmosphere of the earth. Three Plates, to be in the order of the F contains ſrom Fig. 1 Fig. 11. to Fig. 19. 