OF ECHANICAL PHILOSOPHY. BY JOHN ROBISON, LL. D. LATE PEOFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOBOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH. VITH NOTES, BY DAVID BREWSTER, LL. D. FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON, AND SECRETARY TO THE ROVAL SOCIETY OF EDINBEURGH. IN FOUR VOLUMES, AND A VOLUME OF PLATES VOL. II. EDINBURGH: RINTED FOR JOHN MURRAY, LONDON. 1822. or VOLUME SECOND. LETTER from Mr Watt to Dr Brester, on the History oſ the Steam Engine, iii On Steam, On the Steam Engine TO DrR BREWSTER ?ROM MR WATT. DEAR SiE, Ar your request, I have careſully perused my late excellent friend Dr RoBISON'S articles Steam” and è Steam- Engines,” in the Encyclopædia Britannica, and have made remarks upon them in such places where, either from the want of proper inſormation, or from too great a reliance on the powers oſ his extraordinary memory, at a period when it probably had been weakened by a long state of acute pain, and by the remedies to which he was obliged to have recourse, he had been led into mistakes in regard to ſacts, and also in some places where his deductions have appeared to me to be erroneous. There had been but very little interchange of letters between us for some yeurs previous to his writing those articles, and our opportunities oſ meeting had been rare, and of short duration, and not occupied by philosophical a discussionss. Had I been apprised of his design, I might at least have prevented the errors respecting the ſacts in which I was concerned; but, upon the whole, it is more surprising to me that his recollection should have served him so vell in narrating transactions of 30 years standing, than that it should sometimes have led him astray If I had not retained some memorandums made at the time of, or soon aſter, their occurrence, I should myself have felt great diſficulty in recalling to mind the particulars at the period when I ſirst perused those articles, which was some time aſter their publication. Ihad about that period an opportunity oſ personally stating to Dr RoBISON s0me remarks upon them, of which he availed himself to a small extent in the Supplement to the Encyclopædia Britannica, and probably would have done so still more, had he been called upon to remould these articles. I have endeavoured to throw most of my corrections into the form of notes; but in some places I judged it necessary to alter the text; which alterations I have marked to be printed in Italics, that they may be readily distinguished from the original. In a few places I have cancelled part of the text without any substitution, none appearing to me to be required. In others I have leſt part of the reasoning unaltered which I did not concur in; as in mere matters of opinion, vhere no maniſest error was involved, I did not conceive it proper to introduce my own speculations. As the subjects of Steam, and Steam- Engines, had been almost dismissed from my mind ſor many years previous to my undertaking this revision, I have called in the aid of my ſriend Mr Jous SouTHERN, and of my son, whose daily avocations in the manuſacture of steam-engines, render them more conversant with some points, to direct my attention to them; and of the former, to examine such of the algebraic ſormulæ as appeared essential, an ofſice for 4 which he is much better qualified than myself; and he has accordingly marked those formulæ with his initials. I have not attempted to render Dr RoBISONS memoir a complete history of the Steam- Engine; nor have I even given a detailed account of my own improvements upon it. The former would have been an undertaking beyond my present powers, and the latter must much have exceeded the limits of a commentary upon my friends work. I have thereſore conſined myself to correcting sueh parts as appeared necessary, and to adding such matter as he had not an opportunity of knowing. Here it vas my intention to have closed this letter; but the representations of friends, whose opinions I highly value, induce me to avail myself of this opportunity oſ noticing an error into which not only Dr RoBISON, but apparently also Dr BLACE, has fallen, in relation to the origin of my improvements upon the Steam-Engine, and which not having been publicly controverted by me, has, I am informed, been adopted by almost every subsequent writer upon the subject of Latent Heat. Dr RoBsison, in the article Steam-Engine, aſter passing an encomium upon me, dictated by the partiality of friendship, qualiſies me as the  pupil and intimate friend of Dr BLACE; a description which, not being there accompanied with any inſerence, did not particularly strike me at the time of its first perusal. He afterwards, in the dedication to me of his edition of Dr BLACK'S Lectures upon Chemistry, goes the length of supposing me to have proſessed to owe my improvements upon the Steam- Engine to the instructions and information IT had received from thal gentleman, which certainly was a misapprehension, as, though I have always felt and acknowledged my obligations to him for the information I had received from his conversation, and particularly for the knowledge of the doctrine of Latent Heat, I never did, nor could, con- sider my improvements as originating in those communications. He is also mistaken in his assertion, p. 8 of the Preface to the above work, that  I had attended two  courses oſ the Doctor's Lectures; for, unfortunately for me, the necessary avocations of my business prevented me from attending his or any other lectures at College; and as Dr RoBisSON was himself absent ſrom Scotland for four years at the period reſerred to, he must have been misled by erroneous informationn. In page 184 of the Lectures, Dr BLACK says, I have the pleasure of thinks ing that the knowledge we have acquired concerning s the nature of elastic vapours, in consequence of my forès tunate observation of what happens in its ſformation and s condensation, has contributed in no inconsiderable des gree to the public good, by suggesting to my friend Mr  Warr of Birmingham, then of Glasgow, his improve-  ment on this useſul engine, (meaning the steam- engine, of which he is then speaking). There can be no doubt, ſrom what ſollows in his description of the engine, and from the very honourable mention which he has made of me in various parts of his Lectures, that he did not mean to lessen any merit that might attach to me as an inventor; but, on the contrary, he always was disposed to give me fully as much praise as I deservedl. And were that otherwise doubtſul, it would, I think, be evident ſfrom the following quotation from a letter oſ his to me, dated 19th February, 1783, where, speaking of an intended publication by ãa ſriend of mine on subjects connected with tho history of steam, he says,  I think it is very proper ſor  you to give him a short account of your discoveries and s speculations, and purticulurly to assert clearly and fully * Repeated more in detail,with the :ame erroneous inſerences, in his note, vol. I. p. 504.  your sole right to the honour of the improvements of the i Steum- Engine; and in a written testimonial which he very kindly gave on the occasion oſ a trial at lav agninst a piracy of my invention in 1796-7, after giving a short aceount of the invention, he adds,  Mr Wait was the sole  inventor oſ the capital improvement and contrivunce ubove s mentioned Under this conviction of his candour and ſriendship, it is very painful to me to controvert any assertion or opinion of my revered friend; yet in the present case I find it necessary to say, that he appears to me to have ſallen into an error, and I hope, in addition to my assertion, to make that appear by the short history I have given of my invention in my notes upon Dr RoBISON'S essay, as well as by the following account of the state of my knowledge previous to my receiving any explanation of the doctrine of Latent Heat, and also from that of the facts which prineipully guided me in the invention. It was known very long before my time, that steam was condensed by coming into contact with cold bodies, and that it communicated heat to them. Witness the common still, &e. &e. It was known by some experiments of Dr CULLEN, and others, that water and other liquids boiled in vacuo at very low heats; water below IO. It was known to some philosophers, that the capacity or equilibrium of heat, as we then called it, was much smaller in mercury and tin than in water. It was also known, that evaporation caused the eooling of the evaporating liquid, and bodies in contact with it. I had myselſ made experiments to determine the following ſacts. Ist, The capacities for heat of iron, copper, and some sorts of wood, comparatively with water. Similar experiments had also subsequently been made by Dr IRvINE, on these and other metals. 2d, The bulk of steam was compared vith that of water. 3d, The quantity of water which could be evaporated in a certain boiler by a pound of coals. 4h, The elasticities of steam at various temperatures greater than that of boiling water, and an approximation to ihe law which it ſollowed at other temperatures. 5th, How much water, in the form of steam, was required every stroke by a small NEWCOMENS engine, with a wooden cylinder six inches diameter, and twelve inches long in the stroke. 6&th, I had measured the quantity of cold water required in every stroke to condense the steam in that cylinder, so as to give it a working power oſ about 7 Il. on the inch. Here I was at a loss to understand how so much cold water could be heater so much by so small a quantity in the form of stenm, and applied to Dr BLAC, as is related in the short history, p. 116, Note, and then first understood what was called Latent Heat. Bpt this theory, though useful in determining the quantity of injection necessary where the quantity of water evaporated by the boiler, and used by the cylinder, was known, and in determining, by the quantity and heat of the hot water emitted by NEWCOMENS engines, the quantity of steam required to work them, did not lead to the improvements I afterwards made in the engine. These improvements proceeded upon the old-established fact, that steam was condenscd by the contact of cold bodies, and the later known one, that water boiled in vacuo at heats below 1009, and consequently that a vacuum could not be obtained unless the cylinder and its contents were cooled every stroke to below that heat. These, and the degree of knowledge I possessed of the elasticities oſ steam at various heats, were the principal things it was necessary ſor me to consider in contriving the new engine. They pointed out that, to avoid useleis con- densation, the vessel in which the steam acted upon the piston ought always to be as hot as the steam itself; that to obtain a proper degree oſ exhaustion, the steam must be condensed in a separate vessel, vhich might be cooled to as Iow a degree as was necessary, without afſecting the cylinder; and that as the air and condensed water could not be blown out by the steam as in NEWCOMENS, they must be extracted by a pump, or some other contrivance; that, in order to prevent the necessity of using water to keep the piston air-tight, and also to prevent the air from cooling the cylinder during the descent of the piston, it was necessary to employ steam to act upon the piston in place of the atmosphere. Lastly, to prevent the cylinder ſrom being cooled by the external air, it was proper to inclose it in a case containing steam, and again to inclose that in a ease of wood, or of some other substance which transmitted heat slowly. Although Dr Black's theory of latent heat did not suggest my improvements on the stenm-engine, yet the knowledge upon various subjects which he was pleased to communicate to me, and the correct modes oſ reasoning, and of making experiments oſ which he set me the example, certainly conduced very much to ſacilitate the progress of my inventions; and I still remember with respect and gratitude the notice he was pleased to take of me when I very little merited it, and which continued throughout his liſe. To Dr RoBisoN I am also bound to acknowledge my obligations for very much inſormation and occasional assistance in my pursuits, and above all, ſor his friendship, which ended only with his liſe; a ſfriendship which induced him, when I was beset with an host of foes, to come to London in the depth of winter, and appear as a vitness ſor me in a court of justice, whilst labouring under an excessively painſul disorder, which ultimately deprived him of liſe. To the remembrance oſ that friendship is principally owing my taking upon myself the oſfice of his commentator at my advanced age. May I request, sir, that you and the public will permit that age to be my excuse for any errors I may have committed, and ſor any deſiciencies in the performance oſ an office which at no period would have been congenial to my habits; and allow me to remain, with esteem, DEAR SiR, Your most obedient humble servant, JAMES WATT. HEATEHPIELD, May I8 14. ARTICLES STEAM AND STEAM-ENGINES, WRITTEN POR THE ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA, BY JOHN ROBISON, LL.D. F.R.S.E. &e. LATE PROPESSOR OP NATURAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, &c. WITH NOTES AND ADDITIONS, BY JAMES WATT, LLD. F.R.S. L. & E MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FRANCE, AND OF THE BATAVIAN SOCIETY OF ROTTERDAM, a A LETTER ON SOME PROPERTIES OF STEAM, BY THE LATE JOHN SOUTHERN, Eso. 1. StraM, is the name given in our language to the vi3ible moist vapour which arises from all bodies which contain juices easily expelled from them by heats not suſficient for their combustion. Thus we say, the stenm of boiling water, oſf malt, of a tan-bed, &e. It is distinguished from smoke by its not having been produced by combustion, by not containing any soot, and by its being condensible by cold into water, oil, inflammable spirits, or liquids composed of these. 2. Wo see it rise in great abundance ſrom bodies when they are heated, forming a white cloud, which diffuses itself and disappears at no very great distance from the body from which it was produced. In this case the surrounding air is found loaded with the water or moisture which seems to have produced it, and the steam seems to be completely soluble in air, as salt is in water, composing, while thus united, a transparent elastic fluid. 3. But in order to its appearance in the form of an opaque white cloud, the mixture with or dissemination in air, or in some elustic fluid colder than itself, seems absolutely necessary. IF a tea-kettle boils violently, so that vOL. II. A the steam is ſormed at the spout in great abundance, it may be observed, that the visible cloud is not formed at the very mouth of the spout, but at a small distance beſore it, and that the vapour is perſectly transparent at its first emission. This is rendered still more evident by fitting to the spout of the tea-kettle a glass pipe of any length, and of as large a diameter as we please. The steam is produced as copiously as without this pipe, but the vapour is transparent through the whole length of the pipe. Nuy, i this pipe communicate with a glass vessel terminating in another pipe, and if the vessel be kept suſficiently hot, the stenm will be as abundantly produced at the mouth of this second pipe as before, and the vessel will be quite transparent. The visibility therefore of the matter which constitutes the steam, is an accidental or extraneous circumstance, and requires the admixture with air; yet this quality again leaves it when united with air by solution. It appears thereſore to require a disemination in the air. The appearances are quite agreeable to this notion: for we know that one perſectly transparent body, when minutely divided and diſfused among the parts of another transparent body, but not dissolved in it, makes a mass which is visiblee. Thus oil beaten up with water makes a white opaque mass. 4. In the mean time, as stenm is produced, the water gradually wastes in the tea-kettle, and will soon be totally expended, iſ we continue it on the fire. It is reasonable thereſore to suppose, that this steam is nothing but water changed by heat into an aerial or elastic form. If so, we should expect that the privation oſ this heat would leave it in the form of water again. Accordingly this is fully veriſied by experiment; ſor if the pipe fitted to the spout of the tea-kettle be surrounded with cold water, no steam will issue, but water will continually trickle ſrom it in drops: and if the process be conducted with the proper precautions, the water which we thus obtain from the pipe will be found equal in quantity to that which disappears from the tea-kettle. 5. This is evidently the common process ſor distilling; and the whole appearances may be explained by saying, that the water is converted by heat into an elastic vapour, and that this, meeting with colder air, imparts to it the heat which it carried off as it arose from the heated water, and being deprived of its heat, it is again water. The particles of this water being vastly more remote from each other than when they were in the tea-kettle, and thus being disseminated in the air, become visible, by reſlecting light from their anterior and posterior surfaces, in the same manner as a transparent salt becomes visible when reduced to a fine powder. This disseminated water being presented to the air in a very extended surſuce, is quickly dissolved by it, as pounded salt is in water, and again becomes a transparent fluid, but oſ a different nature from what it was before, being no longer convertible into water by depriving it of its heat. 6. Accordingly this opinion, or something very like it, has been long entertained. Muschenbroeck expressly says, that the water in the form of vapour carries oſſ with it all the heat which is continually thrown in by the fuel. But Dr Black was the first who attended minutely to the whole phenomena, and enabled us io ſorm distinet notions of the subject. He had discovered, that it was not suſficient for converting ice into water that it be raised to that temperature in which it can no longer remain in the form of ice. A piece of ice of the temperature 32° of Fahrenheit's thermometer, vill remain a very long while in air of the temperature 50° beſore it be all melted, remaining all the while of the temperature 329, and thereſore continually absorbing heat from the surrounding air. By comparing the time in which the ice had its temperature changed ſrom 28° to 320, with the subsequent time of its complete lique- ſaction, he found that it absorbed about 1I80 or 140 times as much heat as would raise its temperature one degree; and he ſound that one pound of ice, vhen mixed with one pound of water 140 degrees warmer, was just melted, but ithout rising in its temperature above 32°. Hence he justly concluded, that water difſered ſrom ice of the same temperature by containing, as a constituent ingredient, a great quantity of fire, or oſ the cause of heat, united with it in such a vay as not to quit it for another colder body, and thereſore so as not to go into the liquor of the thermometer and expand it. Considered thereſore as the possible cause of heat, it was latent, which Dr Black expressed by the abbreviated term, LATENT HEAT. If any more heat was added lo the water it was not latent, but would readily quit it for the thermometer, and by expanding the thermometer, would show what is the degree oſ this redundant heat, while fluidity alone is the indication of the combined and latent heat. Dr Black, in like manner, concluded, that in order to convert water into an elastic vapour, it was necessary, not only to increase its uncombined heat till its temperature is 212°, in which state it is just ready to become elastic, but also to pour into it a great quantity of fire, or the cause of heat, which combines with every particle of it, so as to make it repel, or to recede ſrom, its adjoining particles, and thus to make it a particle oſf an elastic fluid. He supposed that this additional heat might be combined with it 50 as not to quit it for the thermometer; and thereſore so as to be in a latent state, having elastic ſluidity for its sole indication. 7. This opinion was very consistent with the phenomenon of boiling oſf a quantity of water. The application of * 5ee Dr Blacks own account oſ this matter in his Lectures, published by Dr Robison. heat to it causes it grãdually to rise in its temperature till it reaches the temperature 212°. It then begins to send off elastic vapour, and is slowly expended in this way, continuing all the while oſ the same temperature. The steam also is of no higher temperature, as appears by holding a thermometer in it. We must conclude that this steam contains all the heat which is expended in its formation. Accordingly the scalding power of steam is well known; but it is extremely difficult to obtain precise measures of the quantity oſ heat absorbed by water during its conversion into steam. Dr Black endeavoured to ascertain this point, by comparing the time of raising its temperature a certain number of degrees with the time of boiling it off by the same external heat; and he ſound that the heat latent in steam, which balanced the pressure of the atmosphere, was not less than 800 degrees. He also directed Dr Irvine oſ Glasgow to the ſorm of an experiment for measuring the heat actually extricated from such steam during its condensation in the reſrigeratory oſ a still, vhich was found to be not less than 774 degrees. Dr Black was aſterwards informed by Mr Watt, that a course of experiments, which he had made in each of these ways with great precision, in 1781, determined the latent . uThe ſollowing is the account oſ my experiments on latent heats, made in February and March 1781. ]  Apipe oſcopper 5. 8ths oſ an inch diameter inside, I-50th oſ an inch thick, and 5 ſeet long, having 3S inches oſ one oſ its ends bent downwards, was ſixed steam- tight on the spout oſ a tea-kettle, ſrom which the pipe inclined upwards, 120 that the bent end was about two ſeet higher than the spout oſ the Eettle; and a cork perſorated with a hole of about 2- 10ths oſ an inch diameter, kept open by a hit oſ quill, was fixed in the opening oſ the bent end.  The tea-kettle was ſilled with water halſ way up the entry of the spout; the lid was ſized on tight with some oatmeal dough, and held down by a piece oſ wood reaching up to the handle. A tin pan, 4 inches deep and õ inches diameter, had 25 pounds avoirdupois oſ water put into it, which heat of steam under the ordinary pressure of the atmosphere to be about 948 or 950 degreess. Mr Watt also ſound that water would distil in vacuo when of the temſlled it nearly to 23 inches deep. The waler was veighed very accurately; the tin pan and a disk oſ strong paper (ciled with linseed oĩl and dried in a stove,) ſitted to its inside, being first connterpoised when they were quite dry.  The pan and water weræ placed upon several ſolds oſ ſlannel on a stand, und the extremity oſ ihe cork in the bent end oſ the pipe was immersed in the water. The water in the hettle was made to boil for some time beſore the end oſ the pipe was immersed in the cold water in the pan, which was not done until it was observed that no water dropped ſrom it, but that all the condensed part oſ the steam returned by the inclined tube o the tea- etile.  When the end oſ ſhe tube was immersed in the cold water in the pan, the steam issuing ſrom it was condensed with a crackling noise, and began to heat the water in contact with itt The water being constantly stirred vith a circular motion, the heat was thereby diſfused equably throughout the whole, and the experiment was continued until the water had acquired ©he heat oſ from 70° to 9°, which happened generally in ſrom 4 to 6 minutes. Immedintely aſter the thermometer had shewn what the heot was, which was in less than halſ a minute, the water wos covered hy the disk oſ oiled paper, to prevent evaporation; which would otherwise have lessened its weight during the operation oſ weighing. The thermometer employed became stationary in about I0 seconds. æ When the experiments were ſinished, the tin pan, made quite dry, was set in a room where the air was about 409, and stood there ſor halſ an hour, when it was thought to have acquired the heat oſ the pluce, two pounds oſ water at 76 were then poured into it, and the heat was ſound to be 755.  Then ſor every 3530 wilh two ponnds oſ water, or ſor every 44 with 23 pound oſ water, halſ a degree must be allowed ſor the heat absorbed by the pan.  The heat oſ the room, when the experiments were made, was generally about 569.  Fleven experiments were mude in the ſoregoing manner, ſrom which the latent heat was calculated accordiug to the ſollowing example. ExrERiuENT I. FERRUARY 23, ITBI.  The heat oſ the water in the pan, on beginning the experiment, was 15.5. Wnhen the experiment was ended, the heat oſ that water was 89.5, consequenily it had gained 4 ſrom the steam it had condensed. The - : uu NSl Ettr2 perature 70°; and that in this case the latent heat of the steam appeared to be about 1000°, and some other experiments made him suppose that the sum of the sensible and latent weight oſ the water on commencing the experiment, was 2— pounds avoirdupois, or 17,500 grains; aſter the experiment, ils weight was 18,260 grains, consequently it had gained 760 giains ſrom the condensed steam. Thus, multiplying 17,500 grains by 46, the heat received ſrom the condensed steam, and 0.5 the heat absorbed by the pan, = 4.5, we have 8,137,500, which, divided by 760 grains, the weight oſ the water which in the state oſ steam communicated the heat, we have 1070; to which we must add the heat retained, being that oſ the mixture,  89. 5, which produces 1159.5, as the sum oſ the sensible and Iatent heat oſ the steam; and deducting 217, 1he sensible heat, we have the latent heat 947.5.  The results and other particulars of the eleven experimeats, tried and calclated in the same manner, are shewn in the ſollowing Table. latent Heat. Quantity oſ eold Water in Pan densed Steam. heated Water. Temperature of the Weight oſ ihe conTemperature oſ the Increase oſ Heat. Total sensible and No. oſ Experiments. Lutent Heat, s viI. 1159:5 1136.9 1149.1 1175.6 1158. 1m 1155. 1150.5 1166.5 . 1165.66  958.66 1133. 922.  Adding together the sums in he 8th column, and dividing by II, gives 945.3 ſor the average; but the 2d and IIth experiments, giving a much smaller result than any oſ the others, appear to me to be objectionable, and iſ rejected, will give 9499.9 ſor the average. heats is a constant quãntity. This is a curious and not an improbable circumstance; but we have no inſormation of  But there being several causes which aſſect the resulis of these experiments, and which ſor the most part tend to give the latent heat rather less than what it probubly is, we shall not err in excess hy calling the lutent heat 9609 W.  Not being satisſied with the experiments Ihad tiied upon the latent heat oſ distillation in vacuo at Glasgow in 1765, which were made in a hasty manner, I made other experiments in 1785, the result oſ which still did not prove satisſactory. I shall, however, give a short account oſ the apparatus, and oſ the only experiments oſ which I have retained minutes, hoping it may excite some person to ascertain the matter more accurately.  A small still A, surrounded by a balneum, was nude oſ tin plate, in the ſorm aunexed, which communicated by a pipe with the two double cones B and C, each of which had a very small opening in its lower apex, shut air-tight by a brass plug. There was also an opening, shut in the same manner, in the tube at D. The conical mouth of the still at A was shut by a good cork.  A pint of water was poured into the inside vessel, and as much into the outside one. The whole was then set upon a chaſing dish and made to boil. The steam was allowed to issue at B and C until it was supposed that all the air was extruded. The aperture C was then shut, and just immersed in a vessel oſ water, to prevent the air ſrom entering. The steam was allowed to issue somo time longer at B, and it was also shut, and immediately immersed to a small depth in water. Cold water was then poured into the balueum, s0 as to cover the orifice and ĩts cork. A degree oſ exhaustion was instantly produced in the internal vessel, ond in the two double cones communicating with it. The double cone B was then In 1803 Mr Southern examined with great care the latent heat oſ steam at the temperatures oſ 2299, 2700, and 295, and aſter muing the due corrections, ſound it to be 94290, 9499, and 950; ſor the particulars oſ which, I reſer to his oWn aceount oſ those experiments, in a letter to me, which I have placed at the end oſ my remarks on Dr Robison's urticles . the particulars of these experiments. The conclusion evidently presupposes a knowledge oſ that particular tempervholly immersed in a tin pan 6 inches deep, and 8 inches diameter, filled with cold water to within an inch oſ its mouth. This water weighed 130 oz  dr. 40 gr. troy weight, or 62800 grains. Its heat at the begiuning oſ the experiment was 52 (ay 5175). When it was supposed a suſficient quantity had distilled into the receiver B, the heat oſ the water in the reſrigeratory was 9, consequently had increased 9 4 (a5 9). The plug at D was withdrawn, and the air admittedl. The reſrigeratory was removed, and the double cone B being wiped dry, its plug was withdrawn, and the water it contained let out, ĩts heat examined, and then weighed. The heat was 62, and its weight was I oz. and 54 gr., or 534 gr., to which 6 gr. were added hy æstimation, ſor water adhering to the inside oſ the cone, in all 540 gr. The heat oſ the water in the balneum at the beginning of the experiment was 134°, and at the end 1589; consequently at the latter period about one-third part oſ air, or other elastic vapour, remained in the still and receiver. The duration oſ the experiment was 9 minutes. The heat oſ the chaſing dish was prevented ſrom aſecting the reſrigerutory by a screen of bricks. The heat oſ ibe air in the room was about 58°.  The double cone B weighed 1000 grains, and as it was oſ 134° of heat at the beginning, and was cooled to 62 by the reſrigeratory, it lost 729 Iis speciſic gravity was probably about 73 times that of water, and conequently its bulk that of L = 134.6 graius of water, and ils capacity ſor heat being about à of that of the same bulk oſ water, it would contain the same quantity oſ heat as about 101 grains oſ water; and this heat not being communicated by the condensed steam, contained in the cone at the end oſ he operation, is to be deducted ſrom the heat acquired by the water in the reAsrigeratory, or, which is the same thing, 10 grains are to be deducted ſrom ãts weight.  The result oſ the experiment may be stated as ſollows:  The weight oſ the water in the reſrigeratory 62L"800 grain: Deduct IOl grains as the equivalent for the bulk oſ the cone IoI - Remainder 62699 Adã the heat absorbed by the reſrigeratory which was oſ ſin plate, and weighed 243 oz.; but ſor the wire round its mourh, and other parts not in cuntact with the water, I allow 43 o7.: remains 20 o2. æin bulk to about 1320 grains oſ waier, but its capacity for heat being ouly J oſ that of water, is equal only to 980 grains oſ water, which is to be added to ihe water in the reſrigeratory. 980 ature in which the water has no heat; but this is a point which is still sub judice.* 8. This conversion of liquids (for it is not conſined to water, but obtains also in ardent spirits, oils, mercury,  Total weight oſ the water, &e. heated 63679 grains which multiplied by 99.25 the heat acquired / 589050.75 and divided by the veight oſ the condensed steam  540 grains gives 1099.79 to which, adding the heat retained 6290. gives the sum oſ the sensible and latent heat u52.79 ſrom which, deducting the average sensible heat oſ the steam 146. gives the latent heat at that temperature - 1006.79 è I have said that I am by no means satisſied with the accuracy oſ this experiment. Too many things are taken by estimation which ought to havæ been ascertained by experiment, and the degree oſ exhaustion was not so great as it might have been, or as I have obtained in some other experiments. The cone B ought to have had a slip joint in its neck at E, by which it could have been taken oſf and weighed beſore and aſter each experiment, to ascertain the quantity oſ water which adhered to its inside.  ſts speciſic gravity ought also to have been determined by weighing it iu water, and its capacity ſor heat examined accurately. The cone C was intended to catch any water which might come over in consequence oſ a vioIent ebullition; but by cooling the still souner than the cones, that did not take place, and the cone C was superſluons, and might be omitted in another case.  The vacuum onght to have been made more perſect by repeatedly boiling the water, condensing the steam, and blowing out the air, until the ditillation should take place at 700 or 80° All this I should probably have done, had I not been called away by business ſfrom prosecuting the experiment at that time, and my attention having never been drawn ſo it since. Nov it is too late.” W, a  In my ſirst experiments, made in a rude vay in 1765, the latent heat appeared to be above 12009, but later experiments, which I have related in the preceding note, have made me suppose the ſormer ones lo be erroneous.  Mr Southern is iuclined to conclude, ſrom the experiments on the latent heat oſ steam at high temperatures, which I have mentioned, that the loten: heat is a constant quantity, instead oſ the sum oſ the latent and sensible heats being so. Dr Priestley ſavoured me with his company during the ninth and tenth experiments in 1781 and in 1783; Mr De Luc attended a repetition oſ these experiments, and the distillations in vacuo. W. e. is the cause of their boilingg The heat is applied to the bottom and sides of the vessel, and gradually accumulates in the ſfluid, in a sensible state, uncombined, and ready to quit it and to enter into any body that is colder, and to diffuse itselſ between them. Thus it enters inlo the ſluid of a thermometer, expands it, and thus gives us the indication of the degree in which it has been accumulated in the water; for the thermometer swells as long as it continues to absorb sensible heat from the water: and when the sensible heat in both is in equilibrio, in a proportion depending on the nature of the two fluids, the thermometer rises no more, because it absorbs no more heat or fire from the water; for the particles oſ water which are in immediate contact with the bottom, are now (by this gradual expansion of liquidity) at such distance from each other, that their laws oſ attraction for each other and for heat are totally changed. Each particle either no longer attracts, or perhaps ĩt repels its adjoining particle, and now accumulates round itselſ a great number of the particles of heat, and forms a particle of elastic ſluid, 30 related to the adjoining new-formed particles, as to repel them to a distance about lwelve and a half times greater than their distance in the state of water. Thus æ mass of elastic vapour oſ sensible magnitude is formed. Being about to thousand times lighter than an equal hulk of water, it must rise up through it, as a cork would do, in a form of transparent ball or bubble, and getting to the top, it dissipates, filling the upper part of the vessel vith vapour or steam. 9. Thus, by tossing the liquid into bubbles, which are produced all over the bottom and sides of the vessel, it produces the phenomenon of ebullition or boiling. Observe, that during its pussage up through the water, it is not changed or condensed; ſor the surrounding water is already so hot that the sensible or uncombined heat in it, is in equilibrio with that in the vapour, and thereſore it is not disposed to absorb any of that heat which is combined as an ingredient oſ this vapour, and gives it its elasticity. For this reason, it happens that water will not boil till its whole mass be heated up to 2120; for iſ the upper part be colder, it robs the rising bubble oſ that heat which is necessary for its elasticity, so that it immediately collapses again, and the surſace of the water remains stil. This may be perceived by holding water in a Florence flask over a lamp or choffer. It will be observed, some time before the real ebullition, that some bubbles are formed at the bottom, and get up a very little way, and then disappear. The distances which they reach before collapsing increase as the water continues to warm farther up the mass, till at last it breaks out into boiling. If the handle of a tea-kettle be grasped with the hand, a tremor will be felt for some little time beſore boiling, arising from the little succussions which are produced by the collapsing of the bubbles of vapour. A much more violent, and really a remarkable phenomenon appears, if we suddenly plunge a lump of red-hot iron into a vessel of cold water, taking care that no red part be near the surface. If the hand be now applied to the side of the vessel, a most violent tremor is felt, and sometimes strong thumps: these arise from the collapsing of very large bubbles. If the upper part of the iron be too hot, it warms the surrounding water so much, that the bubbles from below come up through it uncondensed, and produce ebullition without this succussion. The great resemblance of this tremor to the feeling which we have during the shock of an earthquake, has led many to suppose that these last are produced in the same way; and their hypothesis, notwithstanding the objections which we have elsewhere stated to it, is by no means unfeasible. 10. It is owing to a similar cause that violent thumps are sometimes ſelt on the bottom of a tea-kettle, especially one which has been long in use. Such are ſrequently crustcd on the bottom with a stony concretion. This sometimes is detached in little scales. When one of these is adhering by one end to the bottom, the water gets between them in a thin film. Hence it may be heated considerably above the boiling temperature, and it suddenly rises up in a large bubble, which collapses immediately. A smooth shilling lying on the bottom will produce this appearance very violently, or a thimble with the mouth down. 1l. In order to make water boil, the fire must be applied to the bottom or sides of the vessel. If the heat be applied at the top of the water, it will waste away without boiling; for the very superſicial particles are ſirst supplied with the heat necessary ſor rendering them elastic, and they fly oſf without agitating the rest.* 12. Since this disengagement of vapour is the eſſect of its elasticity, and since this elasticity is a determined ſorce vhen the temperature is given, it ſollows, that ſluids cannot  u We explained the opaque and cloudy appearance of steam, by saying that the vapour is condensed by coming into contact with the cooler air. There is something in the ſorm oſ this cloud which is very inexplicable. The purticles oſ it are sometimes very distinguishablb by the eye; but they have not the smart star- like brilliancy of very small drops oſ water, but give the ſointer reſlection oſ a very thin ſilm or vesicle like a soap bubble. Iſ we attend also to their motion, we see them descending very slowly in compari30n with the descent oſ a solid drop; and this vesicular constitution is established beyond a doubt by looking at a candie through a cloud of steam. It ĩs seen surrounded by a ſaint halo with prismatical colours, precisely such as wo can demonstrate by optical laws to belong to a collection oſ vesicles, but totally different ſrom the halo which would be produced by a collection oſ solid drops. It is very diſficult to conceive how these vesicles can be ſormed oſ watry particles, each of which was surrounded with many purticles oſ fire, now communicated to the air, and how each oſ these vesicles shall include within it a ball oſ air; but we cunnot reſuse the ſuct. We know, that iſ, while linseed oil is boiling, or nearly boiling, the surſace be obliquely struck with the ladle, it will be dashed into a prodigious number oſ exceedingly small vesicles, which ill ſlont about in the air ſor a long while. Mr Saussure was (we think) the first who distinctly observed ſhis vesicular ſorm oſ mists and clouds; and he makes comsiderable use oſ it in explaining several phenomena oſ the atmosphere.” Dr R. boil till the elasticity of the vapour overcomes the pressure of the incumbent fluid and of the atmosphere. Therefore, when this pressure is removed or diminished, the fluids must sooner overcome vhat remains, and boil at a lower temperature. Accordingly it is observed that water will boil in an exhausted receiver vhen of the heat of the human body. If two glass balls, A and B, (Plate I. Fig. I.) be connected by a slender tube, and one of them A be filled with water (a small opening or pipe b being leſt at top of the other), and this be made to boil, the vapour produced from it will drive all the air out of the other, and will at last come out itself, producing steam at the mouth of the pipe. When the ball B is observed to be occupied by transparent vapour, we may conclude that the air is completely expelled. Now shut the pipe by sticking it into a piece of tallow or bees-wox, the vapour in B vill soon condense, and there vill be a vacuum. The flume of a lamp and blow-pipe being directed to the little pipe, will cause it immediately to close and seal hermeticall. We now have a pretty instrument or toy called a PULSE-GLASS. Grasp the ball A in the hollow of the hand; the heat of the hand will immediately expand the bubble oſ vapour which may be in it, and this vapour vill drive the water into B, and then will blow up through it ſor a long while, keeping it in a state oſ violent ebullition, as long as there remains a drop or film of water in A. But care must be taken that B is all the while Eept cold, that it may condense the vapour as fast as it rises through the water. Touching B with tho hand, or breathing warm on it, will immediately stop the ebullition in it. When the water in A has thus been dissipated, grasp B in æ  The invention oſ the pulse glass is ascribed to Dr Franklin, its date uncertuin, probably subsequent to my improvement oſ the Steam Engine, at Ienst certainly uot known to me at that time.  The boilling in vacuo was known long beſore the pulse-glass was invented. Pulsc-gltises succeed better when ſilled with spirits oſ wine than with water” W. the hand; the water will be driven into A, and the ebullition will take place there as it did in B. Putting one of the balls into the mouth will make the ebullition more violent in the other, and the one in the mouth will ſeel very cold. This is a pretty illustration of the rapid absorption of the heat by the particles oſ water which are thus converted into elastic vapour. Wo have seen this little toy suspended by the middle of the tube like a balance, and thus placed in the inside of a window, having two holes a and b cut in the pane, in such a situation that when A is ſull of water and preponderates, B is opposite to the hole . Whenever the room became suſficiently warm, the vapour was ſormed in A, and immediately drove the water into B, which was Eept cool by the air coming into the room through the hole b. By this means B was made to preponderate in its turn, and A was then opposite to the hole a, and the process was now repeated in the opposite direction; and this amusement continued as long as the room was warm enough. 18. We know that liquors diſſer exceedingly in the temperatures necessary for their ebullition. This forms the great chemical distinetion between volatile and ſfixed bodies. But the diſſerence oſ temperature in which they boil, or are converted into permanently elastic vapour, under the pressure of the atmosphere, is not a certain measure of their differences of volatility. The natural boiling point of a body is that in which it will be converted into elastic vapour under no pressure, or in vacuo. The boiling point in the open air depends on the law of the elasticity of the vapour in relation to its heat. A fluid A may be less volatile, that is, may require more heat to make it hoil in vacuo, than a fluid B: But if the elasticity of the vapour of A be more increased by an increase of temperature than that of the vapour of B, A may boil at as low, or even at a lower temperature, in the open air, than B does; for the increased elasticity of the vapour of A may sooner over- come the pressure oſ the atmosphere. Few experiments have been made on the relation between the temperature and the elasticity of different vapours. So long ago as the year 1765, we had occasion to examine the boiling points of all such liquors as we could manage in an airpump; that is, such as did not produce vapours which destroyed the valves and the leathers of the pistons: and we thought that the experiments gave us reason to conclude, that the elasticity of all the vapours was aſfected by heat nearly in the same degree.+ 14. For we found that the diſference between their boiling points in the air and in vacuo was nearly the same in all, namely, about 120 degrees of Fahrenheits thermometer. It is excedingly diſſicult to make experiments oſ this kind: The vapours are so condensible, and change their elusticity so prodigiously by a triſling change of temperature, that it is almost impossible to examine this point with precision. It is, however, as we shall sce by and by, a subject of considerable practical importance in the mechanic arts; and an accurate knowledge of the relation would be of great use also to the distiller; and it would be no less important to discover the relation oſ their elasticity and density, by examining their compressibility, n the same manner as we have ascertained the relation in  u Mr Dalton supposes ihe diſſerence oſ the temperature oſ two vapours oſ the same elustic ſorce, raised ſrum two diſferent liquids, 1o be a constant quantity; thus supposing alcohol to boil at 1759, and water at 2129, the constant difference is 37 belonging o those two liquids, and that the vapour oſ ulcohol of IOO would be as elastic as that oſ water at 157, &c. &c. On this principle the case supposed above could not happen; but it is consistent with the conclusion (Art. I4) as to principle, though not as to quantity, for 212970 æ I4ę. J. S. 1 æſnese experiments were unknown to me at the time I invented the improved engine in 1765, and ſor long aſter; perhaps that invention was the cause oſ their heing made. W, the case of what we call aerial fluids, that is, such as we have never observed in the form of liquids or solids, except in consequence oſ their union with each other or with other bodies. In the article PNEUMATICS we shall take notice of it as something like a natural law, that all those airs, or gases, as they are now called, had their elasticity very nearly, if not exactly, proportional to their density. This appears from the experiments of Achard, of Fontana, and others, on vital air, inſlammable air, fixed air, and some others. It gives us some presumption to suppose that it holds in all elastic vapours whatever, and that it is connected with their elasticity; and it renders it somewhat probable that they are all elastic, only because the cause of heat (the matter of fire if you ill) is elastic, and that their law of elasticity, in respect of density, is the same vith that of fire. 15. But it must be observed, that although we thus assign the elosticity of fire as the immediate cause of the elasticity of vapour, in the same way, and on the same grounds, that we ascribe the ſluidity of brine to the ſluidity of the water which holds the solid salt in solution, it does not ſollow that this is owing, as is commonly supposed, to a repulsion or tendency to recede from each other exerted by the particles of firc. We are as much entitled to infer a repulsion of unlimited extent between the particles of water; for we see that by its means a single particle of seasalt becomes disseminated through the whole of a very large vessel. If water had not been a visible and a palpable substance, and the salt only had been visible and palpable, we might have ſormed a similar notion of chemical solution. But we, on the contrary, have considered the quaquaversus motion or expansion of the salt as a dissemination among the particles of water; and we have ascribed it to the strong attraction of the atoms of salt for the atoms of water, and the attraction of these last ſor each other, thinkvOL. II. B ing that each atom of salt accumulates round itselſ a multitude of watery atoms, and by so doing must recede from the other saline atoms. Nay, we ſarther sce, that by ſorces which we naturally consider as attractions, an expansion may be produced of the whole mass, which will act against external mechanical forces. It is thus that wood swells vith almost insuperable ſoree by imbibing moisture; it is thus that a sponge immersed in water becomes really an elastic compressible hody; resembling a blown bladder; and there are appearances which warrant us to apply this mode oſ conception to elastic fluids.When air is suddenly compressed, a thermometer included in it shews a rise of temperature; that is, an appearance of heat noW redundant which was formerly combined. The heat seems to be squeezed out as the water from the sponge. 16. Accordingly this opinion, that the elasticity of steam and other vapours is owing merely to the attraction ſor fire, and the consequent dissemination of their particles through the whole mass of fire, has been entertained by many naturalists, and it has been ascribed entirely to attraction. We by no means pretend to decide; but we think the analogy by far too slight to found any confident opinion on it. The aim is to solve phenomena by attraction only, as if it were of more easy conception than repulsion. Considered merely as ſacts, they are quite on a par. The appearances of nature in which we observe actual recesses of the parts of body from each other, are as distinet, and as frequent and familiar, as the appearances of actual approach. And if we attempt to go farther in our contemplation, and to conceive the way and the forces by which either the approximation or recesses of the atoms are produced, we must acknowledge that we have no conception of the matter; and we can only say, that there is a cause of these motions, and we call it a force, as in every case oſ the production of motionn. We call it attraction or repulsion just as e happen to contemplate an access or a recess. But the analogy here is not only slight, but imperfect, and fails most in those cases which are most simple, and where we should expect it to be most complete. We can squeeze water out of a sponge, it is true, or out of a piece of green wood; but when the white of an egg, the tremella, or some gums, swell to a hundred times their dry dimensions by imbibing water, we cannot squeeze out a particle. If fluidity (for the reasoning must equally apply to this as to vapourousness) be owing to an accumulation of the extended matter of fire, vhich gradually expanded the solid by its very minute additions; and if the accumuItion round a particle of ice, which is necessary ſor making it a particle of water, be so great in comparison of what gives it the expansion of one degree, as experiment obliges us to concludeit seems an inevitable consequence, that all fluidè should be many times rarer than the solids from which they are produced. But we know that the diſference is trifling in all cases, and in some (water, ſor instance, and iron) the solid is rarer than the ſluid. 17. Many other arguments (each of them perhaps of little weight when taken alone, but which are all systematically connected,) concur in rendering it much more probable that the matter of fire, in causing elasticity, acts immediately by its own elasticity, which we cannot conceive in any other way than as a mutual tendency in its particles to recede from each other; and we doubt not but that, if it could be obtained alone, we should find it an elastic fluid like air. We even think that there are cases in which ĩt is observed in this state. The elastic force of gunpowder is very much beyond the elasticity of all the vapours which are produced in its deflagration, each of them being expunded as much as we can reasonably suppose by the great heat to which they are exposed. I exploded some gunpowder mixed with a considerable portion of finely powdered quartz, and another parcel mixed with fine ſilings of copper. The elasticity was measured by the penetration of the ball which was discharged, and was great in the degree nov mentioned. The experiment was s0 conducted, that much of the quartz and copper was collected; none of the quartz had been melted, and some of the copper was not meltedl. The heat, therefore, could not be such as to explain the elasticity by expansion of the vapours; and it became not improbable that fire was acting here as a detached chemical ſluid by its own elasticity. But to return to our subject. : 18. There is one circumstance in which we think our own experiments shew a remarkable difference (at least in degree) between the condensible and incondensible vapour. It is well known, that when air is very suddenly expanded, cold is produced, and heat when it is suddenly condensed. When making experiments with the hopes of discovering the connection between the elasticity and density oſ the vapours of boiling water, and also of boiling spirits of turpentine, we found the change of density accompanied by a change of temperature vastly greater than in the case of incoercible gases. When the vapour of boiling water was suddenly allowed to expand into five times its bulk, we observed the depression of a large and sensible air thermometer to be at least four or five times greater than in a similar expansion of common air of the same temperature. The chemical reader will readily see reasons ſor expecting, on the contrary, a smaller alteration of temperature, both on account of the much greater rarity of the fluid, and on account of a partial condensation of its water, and the consequent disengagement of combined heat. 19. This difference in the quantity of fire which is combined in vapours and gases is 50 considerable, as to authorise us to suppose that there is some diſference in the chemical constitution of vapours and gases, and that the connection between the specific bases oſ the vapour and the fire which it contains, is not the same in air, for instance, as in the vapour of boiling water; and this difference may be the reason why the one is easily condensible by cold, while the other has never been exhibited in a liquid or solid form, except by means of its chemical union with other substances. In this particular instance we know that there is an essential difference; that in vital or atmospheric air there is not only a prodigious quantity oſ fire which is not in the vapour of water, but that it also contains light, or the cause of light, in a combined state. This is ſully evinced by the great discovery of Mr Cavendish of the composition of water. Here we are taught that water (and consequently its vapour) consists oſ air from which the light and greatest part of the fire have been separated. And the subsequent discoveries oſ the celebrated Lovoisier show, that almost all the condensible gases with which we are acquainted, consist either oſ airs which have already Iost much of their fire (and perhaps light too), or of matters in which we have no evidence oſ fire or light being combined in this manner. This consideration may go far in explaining this difference in the condensibility of these different species of aerial fluids, the gases and the vapours; and it is with this qualification only that we are disposed to allow that all bodies are condensible into liquids or solids by abstracting the heat. In order that vital air may become liquid or solid, we hold that it is not sufficient that a body be presented to it which shall simply abstract its heat. This would only abstract its uncombined firee But another and much larger portion remains chemically combined by means of lightt. A chemieal aſfinity must be brought into action which may abstract, not the fire ſfrom the oxygen (to speak the language of Mr Lavoisier), but the oxygen ſrom the fire and light. And our production is not the detached basis of air, but detached heat and light, and the formation of an oxide of some kind. To prosecute the chemical consideration of SrEA s farther than these general observations, which are applicable to all, would be almost to write a treatise of chemistry, and would be a repetition of many things which have been treated of in suſficient detail in other articles oſ this work. We shall therefore conclude this article with some other observations, which are also general, with respect to the diſferent kinds of coercible vapours, but which have a particular relation to the following article. 20. Steam or vapour is an elastic fluid, whose elasticity balances the pressure oſ the atmosphere; and it has been produced ſrom a solid or liquid body raised to a suſficient temperature ſor giving it this elasticity; that is, ſor causing the ſluid to boil. This temperature must vary with the pressure of the air. Accordingly it is found, that when the air is light (indicated by the barometer being low), the fluid will boil sooner. When the barometer stands at 30 inches, water boils at the temperature 212°. Iſ it stands 80 low as 28 inches, water will boil at 208]. In the plains of Quito, or at Gondair in Abyssinia, where the barometer stands at about 2I inches, vater will boil at 195°. Highly rectified alcohol will boill at 160°, and vitriolic ether will boil at 88° or 850. This is a temperature by no means uncommon in these places; nay, the air is ſrequently warmer. Vitriolic ether, thereſore, is a liquor which can hardly be known in those countries. It is hardly possible to preserve it in that ſform. If a phial have not its stopper firmly tied down, it will be blown out, and the liquor will boil and be dissipated in steam. On the top of Chimbora0, the human blood must be disposed to form vapour or steam. 2l. We said some time ago, that we had concluded, from some experiments made in the receiver oſ an airpump, that fluids boil in vacuo at a temperature nearly 120 degrees lower than that necessary ſor their boiling in the open air. But we now see that this must have been but a gross approximation; for in these experiments the fluids were boiling under the pressure of the vapour which they produced, and which could not be abstracted by working the pump. It appears from the experiments of Lord Charles Cavendish, (1760) mentioned in the article PNEUMATICS, that water of the temperature 72 was converted into elastic vapour, which balanced a pressure of àths of an inch of mercury, and in this state it occupied the receiver, and did not allow the mercury in the gauge to sink to the level. As ſast as this was abstracted by working the airpump, more of it was produced ſrom the surface of the water,. so that the pressure continucd the same, and the water did not boil. Had it been possible to produce a vacuum above this water, it would have boiled for a moment, and would even have continued to boil, if the receiver could have been kept very cold. 22. Upon reading these experiments, and some very curious ones of Mr Nairne, in the Phil. Trans. (1777,) I was induced to examine more particularly the relation between the temperature of vapour and its elasticity, in the ſollowing manner: ABCD (Fig. 2.) is the section of a small digester made of copper. Its lid, which is ſastened to the body with screws, is pierced with three holes, ench of which had a small pipe soldered into it. The first hole was furnished with a brass saſety-valve V, nicely ſitted to it by grinding. The area oſ this valve was exactly Jth of an inch. There rested on the stalk at the top of this valve the arm of a steelyard carrying a sliding weight. This arm had a scale of equal parts, so adjusted to the weight, that the number on the scale corresponded to the inches of mercury, whose ' pressure on the under surſace of the valve is equal to that of the steelyard on its top; so that when the weight was at the division 10, the pressure of the steelyard on the valve was just equal to that of a column of mercury 10 inches high, and ;th of an inch base. The middle hole contained a thermometer T ſirmly fixed into it, so that no vapour could escape by its sides. The ball of this thermometer was but a little way below the lid. The third hole received occasionally the end of a glass pipe SGF, whose descending leg was about 36 inches long. When this syphon was not used, the hole was properly shut with a plug. : The vessel was half filled with distilled water which had been purged oſ air by boiling The lid was then fixed on, having the third hole S plugged up. A lamp being placed under the vessel, the water boiled, and the steam issued copiously by the saſety-valve. The thermometer stood at 213, and a barometer in the room at 29.9 inches. The weight was then put on the ſifth division. The thermometer immediately began to rise; and when it was at 290, the stenm issued by the sides of the valve. The weight was removed to the 10th division; but, before the thermometer could be distinctly observed, the steam was issuing at the valve. The lamp was removed ſarther from the bottom of the vessel, that the progress of heating might be more moderate; and when the steam ceased to issue from the valve, the thermometer was at 227. The weight was now shiſted to I5; and, by gradually approaching the lamp, the steam again issued, and the thermometer was at 2523. This mode of trial was continued all the way to the 75th division of the scalee. The experiments were then repeated in the contrary order; that ĩs, the weight being suspended at the 75th division, and the steam issuing strongly at the valve, the lamp was withdrawn, and the moment the steam censed to come out, the thermometer was observed. Tho same was done at the 70th, 65th division, &c. These experiments were several times repeated both ways; and the means of all the results for each division are expressed in the ſollowing table, where eolumn Ist expresses the elasticity oſ the steam, being the sum of 29.9, and the division of the steelyard; column 2d expresses the temperature of the steam corresponding to this elasticity. Elasticity. Temperature. 35 inches. L14 226 45 289 50 237 55 249 6O 27 65 251 70 255 5 259 8 268 85 207 90 Q704 95 Qu4; 100 Q8 105 281 A very diſſerent process was necessary ſor ascertaining the elasticity of the steam in lower temperatures, and consequently under smaller pressures than that of the atmosphere. The glass syphon SGF was nov ſixed into its hole in the lid of the digester. The water was made to boil smartly for some time, and the steam issued copiously both at the valve and at the syphon. The lower end of the syphon was now immersed into a broad saucer of mercury, and the lamp instantly removed, and every thing was al10 ' Iowed to grow cold. By this the steam was gradually condensed, and the mercury rose in the syphon, without sensibly sinking in the saucer. The valve and all the joints were smeared with a thick clammy cement, composed of oil, tallow, and rosin, which effectually prevented all ingress of air. The weather was clear and frosty, and the barometer standing at 29.84, and the thermometer in the vessel at 42°. The mercury in the syphon stood at 29.7, or somewhat higher, thus showing a very complete condensation. The whole vessel was surrounded with pounded ice, oſ the temperature 32. This made no sensible change in the height of the mercury. A mark was now made at the surſace of the mercury. One observer was stationed at the thermometer, with instruetions to call out as the thermometer reached the divisions 42, 47, 52, 57, and so on by every ſive degrees till it should attain the boiling heat. Another observer noted the corresponding descents of the mercury by a scale oſ inches, vhich had its beginning placed at 20.84 from the surſace of the mercury in the saucer. The pounded ice was now removed, and the lamp placed at a considerable distance below the vessel, so0 as to wvarm its contents very slowly. These observations being very ensily made, were several times repeated, and their mean results are set down in the following table: Only observe, that it was found diſficult to note down the descents for every ſiſfth degree, because they succeeded each other so fast. Every 10th was judged sufficient for establishing the law of variation. The first column of the table contains the temperature, and the second the descent (in inches) of the mercury ſrom the mark O.84. Temperature. Elasticity. EV 0.0 40 O.1 50 0.2 60 0.85 70 0.55 80 0.82 90 l.I8 100 l.61 110 2.25 120 8.00 130 3.95 I40 5.15 150 6.72 160 8.65 170 11.05 180 14.05 190 17.85 200 22.62 2l0 28.65 Four or five numbers at the top of the column of elasticities are not so accurate as the others, because the mercury passed pretty quickly through these points:. But the progress was extremely regular through the remaining points; s0 that the elasticities corresponding to temperatures above T0 may be considered as very accurately ascertained. Not being altogether satisſied with the method employed for measuring the elasticity in temperatures above that of boiling water, a better form of experiment was adopted. (Indeed it was the want of other apparatus which made it necessary to employ the former.) A glass tube was procured of the ſorm represented in Fig. S. having a little cistern L, from the top and bottom of which proceeded the syphons K and MN. The cistern contained mercury, and the tube MN was oſ a slender bore, and was - 6 about six feet two inches long. The end K was firmly fixed in the third hole ofſ the lid, and the long leg of the syphon as furnished with a scale of inches, and firmly ſastened to an upright post. The lamp was now applied at such a distance ſrom the vessel as to warm it slowly, and make the water boil, the steam escaping for some time through the safety-valvee A heavy weight was then suspended on the steelyard; such as it was known that the vessel would support, and, at the same time, such as would not allow the steam to force the mercury out of the long tube. The thermometer began immediately to rise, as also the mercury in the tube MN. Their correspondent stations are marked in the following table: Temperature. Elasticity. 212° 0.0 220 6bB.9 280 14.6 240 25.0 250 56.9 260 50.4 270 64.2 280 76.0 This form of the experiment is much more susceptible of accuracy than the other, and the measures of elasticity are more to be depended on. In repeating the experiment, they were found much more constant; whereas, in the ſormer method, differences occurred of two inches and upwards. We may now connect the two sets of experiments into one table, by adding to the numbers in this last table the constant height 29.9, which was the height of the mercury in the barometer during the last set of observations. Temperoture. Elasticity. 852°0 0.0 40 O.1 56 0.2 60 O.85 7 0.56 80 0.82 20 l.18 100 1.6 l10 2.25 120 8.0 130 3.95 140 5.156 150 6.72 160 B. 65 170 11.05 180 14.05 190 17.85 200 22.62 2l0 28.65 220 35.8. 230 44.5 240 54.9 250 66.8 260 80.5 27 94.1 280 105.9  u Experiments on this subject have heen published I court, (ee Prony Arch. Hydraulique) bx Mr Schmidt, a (seæ Monchester Memoirs).  In the winter 1764-5, I made experiments at Glasgow: the course oſ my endeavours o improve the steam-engine, then think oſ any simple method oſ trying the elasticities o ratures less than that oſ boiling water, and had at hand a the elasticities at greater heats could be tried, Iconsidered ing the ratios in which they proceeded, the elusticities at 33. In the Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Berlin ſor 1789, there is an account of some experiments made by Mr Achard on the elastic force of steam, from the be found nearly enough for my purpose. I thereſore ſitted a thermometer to the digester with ita bulb in the inside, placed a small cistern with mercury also within the digester, ſixed a small barometer tube with its end in the mercury, and leſt the upper end open. I then made the digester boil ſor some time, the steam issuing at the saſety-valve, until the air contained in the digester was supposed to be expelled. The saſety-valve being shut, the steam acted upon the surſace oſ the mercury in the cistern, and made it rise in the tube. When it reached to I5 inches above ihe surſace oſ the mercury in the cistern, the heat was 236; and at S0 inches above that surſuce, the heat was 2520. Here I was obliged to stop, as I had no tube longer than 34 inches, and there was no white glass made nearer than Newcastle upon Tyne. I thereſore sealed the upper end oſ the tuhe hermetically whilst it was ompty, and when it was cool immersed the lower end in the mercury, which now could only rise in the tube by compresing the air it contained. The tube was somevhat conical; but by ascertaining how much it was 50, and making allowances accordingly, the following points were ſound, which, though not exact, were tolerably near ſor an appergu. At 293 inches (ith the sealed tube) the heat was 2529, at 753 inches the heat was 264, and at 1104 inches 209. (That is, aſter making allowances ſor the pillar of mercury supported, and the pillar which would he necessary to compress the air into the space which it occupied, these were the results). From these elements I laid down a curve, in which the abscissæ represented the temperatures, and the ordinates the pressures, and thereby found the law by which they were governed, sufiiciently near ſor my then purpose. It was not till the yean 1778-4, that I found leisure to make ſurther experiments on this subject, of which, though I do not consider the results as accurate, I shall give an account here, as they were in point oſ date prior to any others that I was then acquainted with.  A tin pn oſ about ſive inches in diameter, and ſour inches deep, had a hole made in ils bottom, near one side, and in this hole was soldered a socket somewhat conical, which nearly fitted a burometer tube with which the experiments were to be made. This tube was about 36 inches long, and had a ball at one end abonut Ij inches diameter, the contents oſ which were nearly equal to those of the stem oſ the tube; some paper was lapped round the tube near the ball, and ĩt was ſorced light into the conical socket oſ the pan, s0 that the ball was within the latter, at such a height that it might bæ immersed in water. The tube and pan were then inverted, and the ball was filled with clean mercury, and the stem with distilled water ſresh boiled. The tube was re-inverted, so that the ball and pan wero uppermost; the lower o 2Ię. They agree extremely well ed here, rarely diſfering more than two - -m-—-—- ——+—H5+—j—-—7-7-+}9H9B+ end of the tube being shut by the ſinger, the water nscended into the ball, and the mercury occupiod the tube. The lower end oſ the latter being then placed in a cistern oſ mercury, and released ſrom the ſinger, the mercury and water descended, and the ball was leſt partly empty: being agitated in this position, and let stand ome time, much air was extricated ſrom the water; the tube was inclined as much as it could be, and again inverted, the uir let out, and its place supplied with boiling water. It was again placed with the ball uppermost, the end oſ the tube stopt, the pan ſilled with hot water which was made to boil by means oſ a lamp, the lower end oſ the tube being placed in the cistern, and released ſrom the ſinger, the mercury descended into the cistern, but upon the water in the pan being sufſered to cool, partly rose again into the tube. Much air was thus liberated, and more was got rid oſ by agitation, in the manner oſ the water-hammer, and by leaving it standing ſor some time erect, until at last I got it so ſreœ ſrom air, that when I raised it upright, it supportæd a column oſ mercury 34 inches high; and no vacuum was ſormed until it was violently shaken, vhen it ſell down suddenly and settled at 28.75 inches, but upon being inclined, a speck oſ air always remained, though, when it was expanded by a pillar oſ mercury 27 inches high, this speck was not larger than a pin's head. * J was much assisted in the means oſ ſreeing the water from ait by Mr De Luc's very valuable Treatise upon the Modiſications oſ the Atmosphere, vwhich came to my hands about this time; but I had not the pleasure oſ meeting the author until long aſterwards, when we commenced a ſriendship which has continued uninterrupted to the preent time. W. or three-tenths of an inch. He also examined the elasticity of the vapour produced from alcohol, and found, that when the elasticity was equal to that of the vapour oſ water, the temperature was about 35 lower. Thus, when the elasticity oſ both was measured by 28. 1 inches oſ mercury, the temperature of the watery vapour was 209°, and that of the spirituous vapour was 17839. When æ In this state, when the tube was perpendicular, I ſound the mercury to stand at 28.75 inches, the column oſ water above it was about 64 inches, halſ an inch oſ mercury The whole then being 29.25 inches when the stationary burometer stood at 29.4, the diſerence, or pillar supported by the elasticity oſ the steam = O. 15 inch. The water in the pan was then heated exceedingly slowly by a lamp, and stirred continually by a feather to make the heat as equal as posible. The results are shewn in the ſollowing Table. o At this time (1774) I tried a set oſ experimenis in the same manner on a aturated solution of common salt. When this solution was perſectly saturated by boiling, and was put into the tube, it precipitated a quantity oſ slt which disturbed the experiment. I was thereſore obliged to take it out, and filter it, during which process it altracted moisture ſrom the air, and appeared by its builing point not to be perſectly saturated. Though it was more ſree from air than water is, yet it parted ſrom what it contained with great diſiculty, and would part with none when shaken as a water-hummer, though it opened in all puris oſ the liquor. The result oſ this experiment is contained in the annexed Table. the elastieity was i8.5, the temperature oſf the water was 189.5, and that of the alcohol 154.6. When the elasticity STATIONARY BAROMNETEER, 29.5. TABLE, No. II. Elasticities. In the same manner I tried a set oſ experiments upon spirit oſ wine, the tesults oſ which are contained in the annexed Table. TABLE, No. III. 162.5121.65  Upon considering the probable causo oſ the diſference, especially in the lower heats, between my experiments and those oſ Mr Southern, related in his letter annexed to this essay, F can unly reconcile them by suppusing that the stationary barometer with which the comparison was made, had ĩts scale vOL. II. c was I1.05, the water was 168°, and the alcohol 1840.4. Observing the diſference between the temperature of equalplaced 0.2 of an inch 100 low, and by adding that quantity to the elasticities in Table Ist, they approach nearly to Mr Southerns experiments.  If that conjecture is adopted, the same addition will be necessary to Tables 2d and 3d, as they were compared vith the same stationary barometer.  To determine the heats at which water boils when pressed by columns oſ mercury above 30 inches, a tube oſ 55 inches long was employed; one end was put through a hole in the cover oſ æ digester, and made tight by being lapped round with paper, and vithin the digester the end oſ Ihe tube was immened in a cistern oſ mercury. A thermometer was ſired in another opening, so that the bulb was in the inside oſ ſlie digester, and the stem and scalo without; and the bulb was kept half an inch ſrom the cover oſ the digester by a wooden collar. The cover being fixed on tight, and the digester half filled with water, it wes heated by means oſ a lurge lump.  The uir in the upper part oſ the digester expanding by heat, the column oſ mercury in the tube was considerably raised by that expansion beſore the water boiled. The nir was let out, and the water heateũ ſo boiling; still, hovever, some air remainied, ſor the mercury stood at 2155. That deduetion being made, the ſollowing Table showa the heats and corresponding elasticities. i : g 5 3  In making thiese experiments, the digester was heated very slovly, and the heat was kept stationary as much as was possible at each observation, so that the whole series occupied some hours. The degrees oſ elasticity were observed by my friend Dr Irvine, whilst I observed those of the thermometer in all these experiments.  With the whole oſ the observations, I was, aſter all, by no means satisfied, as I perceived there were irregularities in the results which my more urgent avocations did not permit me to explore the causes of and to correęt, ly elastic vapours of /water and aleohol not to be constant, but gradually to diminish, in Mr Achard’s experiments, along with the elasticity, it became interesting to discover whether, and at what temperature, this difference would vanish altogether. Experiments were accordingly made by the writer of this article, similar to those made with water. They were not made with the same scrupulous care, nor repeated as they deserved, but they furnished rather an unexpected result. The ſollowing table will give the reader a distinet notion of them: Temperature. Elasticity. 520 D0.0 40 O.1 60 0.8 80 1.8 1050 3.9 120 6.9 140 22 160 2.3 180 34. 200 524 2200 8.5 240 116.  The matter remained in that state till 1796, when I requested Mr Southem to try them over again, in the perſormance oſ which hèe was assisted by Mr William Creighton. The results oſ these observations are contained in M: Southeri's letter to me, which ſollows this memoir; and, from the very great care with which the experiments were made, the known accuracy oſ both Mr Southern and Mr Creighton, and the agreement of the experiments with one another, I have reason to believe them as nearly perſect as the subject admits ofl. The method he adopted oſ trying the elasticitios above the temperature oſ boiling water hy a piston, accurately ũtted to a cylinder, is much to be preſerred to that adopted by Dr Robison, and is more manageable under great elasticities than that oſ a long pillar of mercury.? W, that although they both sensibly coincide at 32°0, and have the abscissa for their common tangent, a very small error of observation may be the cause of this, and the curve which expresses the elasticity oſ spirituous vapour may really intersect the other, and go backwards considerably beyond 352°. 25. This range of experiments gives rise to some curious and important reflections. We now see that no particular temperature is necessary for water assuming the form of permanently elastic vapour, and that it is highly probable that it assumes this form even at the temperature 32°9; only its elasticity is too small to afford us any sensible measure. It is well known that even ice evaporates (see experiments to this purpose by Mr Wilson, in the Philosophical Transactions, when a piece of polished metal, covered with hoarfrost, became perſectly clear by exposing it to a dry frosty wind.). Even mercury evaporates, or is converted into elastic vapour, vhen all external pressure is removed. The dim film which may frequently be observed in the upper part of a barometer which stands near a stream of air, is found to be small globules of mereury sticking to the inside of the tube. They may be seen by the help of a magniſying glass, and are the best test of a well-made barometer. They will be entirely removed by causing the mercury to rise along the tube. It will lick them all up. They eonsist oſf mercury which had evaporated in the void space, and was aſterwards condensed by the cold glass. But the elasticity is too small to occasion a sensible depression of the column, even vhen considerably warmed by a candle. 26. Many philosophers accordingly imagine, that spontaneous evaporation in low temperatures is produced in this way. But we cannot be of this opinion, and must still think that this kind of evaporation is produced by the dissolving power of the air. When moist air is sudenly rarefied, there is always a precipitation of water. This is most distinctly seen when we work an air-pump briskly. A mist ĩs produced, which we see plainly full to the bottom of the roceiver. But, by this new doctrine, the very contrary should happen, because the tendency of water to appear in the elastic form is promoted by removing the external pressure; and ve really imagine that more of it now actually becomes simple elastic watery vapour. But the mist or precipitation shows incontrovertibly, that there had been a previous solution. Solution is performed by forces which act in the way of attraction; or, to express it more saſely, solutions are accompanied by the mutual approaches of the particles of the menstruum and solvend: all such tendencies are observed to increase by a diminution of distance. Hence it must follow, that air of double density will dissolve more than twice as much water. Thereſore, vhen we suddenly rareſy saturated air (even though its heat should not diminish) some water must be let go. What may be its quantity we know not; but it may be more than what would now become elastic by this diminution of surrounding pressure; and it is not unlikely but this may have some efſect in producing the vesicles which we found so diſſicult to explain. These may be filled with pure watery vapour, and be ſloating in a fluid composed of water dissolved in air. An experiment of Fontana's seems to put this matter out of doubt. A distilling apparatus AB (ſig. 4.) was so contrived, that the heat was applied above the surſoce of the water in the alembic A This was done by inclosing it in another vessel CC, filled with hot water. In the receiver B there was a sort of barometer D, with an open cistern, in order to see what pressure there was on the surface of the fluid. While the receiver and alembic contained air, the heat applied at A produced no sensible distillation during several hours; but on opening a cock E in the receiver at its bottom, and making the water in the alembic to boil, steam was produced which s00n expelled all the air, and ſollowed it through the cock. The cock was now shut, and the whole allowed to grow cold by removing the fire, and applying cold water to the alembic. The barometer fell to a level nearly; then warm water was allowed to get into the outer vessel CC. The barometer rose a little, and the distillation went on briskly without the smallest ebullition in the alembic. The conclusion is obvious: while there was air in the receiver and communicating pipe, the distillation proceeded entirely by the dissolving power of this air. Above the water in the alembic it was quickly saturated; and this saturation proceeded slowly along the still air in the communicating pipe, and at last might take place through the whole of the receiver. The sides of the receiver being kept cold, should condense part of the water dissolved in the air in contact with them, and this should trickle down the sides and be collectedl. But any person who has observed how long a crystal of blue vitriol will li at the bottom of a glass of still water beſore the tinge will reach the surſace, will see that it must be next to impossible for distillation to go on in these circumstances; and accordingly none was observed. But when the upper part of the apparatus was filled with pure watery vapour, it was supplied from the alembic as fast as it was condensed in the receiver, just as in the pulse-glass. 27. Another inference which may be drawn ſrom these experiments is, that Nature seems to affect a certain law in the dilatation of aeriform fluids by heat. They seem to be dilatable nearly in the proportion of their present dilatation. For if we suppose that the vapours resemble air, in having their elasticity in any given temperature proportional to their density, we must suppose that if steam of the elasticity 60, that is, supporting 60 inches of mercury, were subjected to B pressure of 30 inches, it would expand into twice its present bulkl. The augmentation of elasticity therefore is the measure of the bulk into which it would expand in order to acquire its former elasticity. Taking the increase of clasticity, thereſore, as a measure of the bulk into which it ll would expand under one constant pressure, we see that equal increments of temperature produce nearly equal multiplications of bulkl. Thus, if a certain diminution of temperature diminishes its bulk ;th, another equal diminution of temperature will diminish this new bulk ;th very nearly. Thus, in our experiments, the temperatures l10, 1400, 1700, 2000, 280°, are in arithmetical progression, having equal differences; and we see that the corresponding elasticities, 2.25, 5. 15, 11.05, 22.62, 44.7, are very nearly in the continued proportion of I. to . The elasticity corresponding to the temperature 260, deviates considerably ſrom this law, which would give 88 or 89 instead of 80; and the deviation increases in the higher temperatures. But still we see that there is a considerable approximation to this law; and it will frequently assist us to recollect, that whatever be the present temperature, an increase of S0 degrees doubles the elasticity and the bulk oſ watery vapour. That 4° will increase the elasticity from I to 1; 8 - - - 1to 13 10 - - l1to1 123 - - lto 13 18 - - - 1 101 22 - - Ito 13 24 - - Tto 1ʒ 26 - - - I1to 13 This is sufficiently exact for most practical purposes. Thus an engineer finds that the injection cools the cylinder of a stenm-engine to 192°. It therefore leaves a steam whose elasticity is three-fiſths of its full elasticity, æ 18 inches oſ Mercury. But it is better at all times to have recourse to the table. Observe, too, that in the lower temperatures, i. e. below 110°, this increment of temperature does more than double the elasticity. 2s8. This lav obtains more remarkably in the incoereible vapours, such as vital air, atmospheric air, fixed air, &oall of which have alio their elasticity proportional to their bulk inversely; and perhaps the deviation from the lav in steams is connected with their chemical difference of constitution. If the bulk were always augmented in the same proportion by equal augmentations of temperature, the elasticities would be accurately represented by the ordinates of a logarithmic curve, of which the temperatures are the eorresponding abscissæ; and ve might contrive such a scale for our thermometer, that the temperatures would be the common logarithms of the elasticities, or of the bulks having equal elasticity; or, with our present scale, we may find such a multiplier m for the number æ of degrees of our thermometer (above that temperature where the elasticity is equal to unity), that this multiple shall be the common logarithm oſ the elasticity v; so that m æ æ log. vBut our experiments are not suſficiently accurate for determining the temperature where the elasticity is measured by I inch; because in these temperatures the elasticities vary by exceedingly small quantities. But if we take 11.05 for the unit of elasticity, and number our temperature ſfrom 170, and make m æ 0.010085, we shall find the produet mæ to be very nearly the logarithm of the elasticit The deviations, however, ſrom this law, are too great to make this equation of any use. But it is very practicable to ſrame an equation which shall correspond with the experiments to any degree ofaccuracy; and it has been done ſor air in a translation of General Roys measurement of the Base at Hounslow Heath, into French, by Mr Prony. It is as follows: Let æ be the degrees of Reaumur's thermometer; let 5 be the expansion of 10,000 parts of air; let e be æ 10, m = 2.7979, n  0.01768: then y  è nAn 7mt27.5. Nowe being æ IO, it is plain that e n⸗ is the number, of which mnz is the common logarithm. This formula is very exact as far as the temperature 60; but beyond this it 10 needs a correction, because air, like the vapour of water, does not expand in the exact proportion of its bulk. 210. We observe this law considerably approximated to in the augmentation of the bulk or elasticity of elastic vapours; that is, it is a fact that a given increment of temperature makes very nearly the same proportional augmentation of bulk and elasticity. This gives us some notion of the manner in which the supposed expanding cause produces the effect. When vapour of the bulk 4 is expanded into a bulk 5 by an addition of 10 degrees oſ sensible heat, a certain quantity of fire goes into it, and is accumulated round each particle, in such a manner that the temperature of each, which formerly was m, is now m+ 10. Let it now receive another equal augmentation of temperature. This is now m+ 20, and the bulk ior 65, and the arithmetical increase of bulk is 13. The absolute quantity oſ fire which has entered it is greater than the former, both on account of the greater augmentation of spuce and the greater temperature. Consequently if this vapour be compressed into the bulk 5, there must be heat or fire in it which is not necessary for the temperature m-+2O, far less for the temperature m-- 10. It must therefore emerge, and be disposed to enter a thermometer which has already the temperature m+Q0: that is, the vapour must grow hotter by compression; not by squeezing out the heat like water out of a sponge, but because the lav of attraction ſor heat is deranged. It would be a very valuable acquisition to our Enovledge to learn with precision the quantity of sensible heat produced in this way; but no satisſactory experiments have yet been made. M. Lavoisier, with his chemical friends and colleagues, were busily employed in this inquiry; but the wickedness of their countrymen deprived the world of this and many other important additions which we might have expeeted from this celebrated and unfortunate philosopher. He had made, in conjunction with M. de 5 la Place, a numerous train of accurate and expensive experiments ſor measuring the quantity oſ latent or combined heat in elastic vapours. This is evidently a very important point to the distiller and practical chemist. This heat must all come from the fuel; and it is greatly worth while to know whether any saving may be made of this articlee. Thus we know that distillation ill go on either under the pressure of the air, or in an alembic and receiver from which the air has been expelled by steam; and we Enow that this last may be conducted in a very low temperature, cven not exceeding that of the human body. But it is uncertain whether this may not employ even a greater quantity of fuel, as well as occasion a grent expence of time. We are disposed to think, that when there is no air in the apparatus, and when the condensation can be speedily performed, the proportion of fuel expended to the fluid which comes over, vill diminish continually as the heat, and consequently the density oſ the steam is augmented, hecause in this case the quantity of combined heat must be lesss In the mean time, we earnestly recommend the trial of this mode of distillation in vessels cleared of air. It is undoubtedly of great advantage to be able to work with smaller fires, and it would secure us against all accidents oſ blowing off the head oſ the still, oſten attended with terrible consequences. We must not eonclude this article without taking notice of some natural phenomena which seem to owe their origin to the action of elastic steam. The wonderful appearances oſ the Geyzer spring, in Iceland, are undoubtedly produced by the expansion of steam in ignited caverns. Of these appearances we suppose the whole train to be produced as ſollows. 30. A cavern may be supposed of a shape analogous to CBDEF (ſig. 5.), having a perpendicular ſunnel AB issuing from a depressed part of the roof. The part F may be lower than the rest, remote, and red-hot. Such places we know to be frequent in Iceland. Water may be continually trickling into the part CD. It will fill it up to B, and even up to Ef, and then trickle slowly along into F. As s00n as any gets into contact with an ignited part, it expands into elastic steam, and is partly condensed by the cold sides of the cavern, which it gradually warms, till it condenses no more. This production of steam hinders not in the smallest degree the trickling of more water into F, and the continual production of more steam. This now presses on the surſace of the water in CD, and causes it to rise gradually in the funnel BA; but slowly, because its cold surſace is condensing an immense quantity of steam. We may easily suppose that the water trickles faster into F than it is expended in the production of steam; so that it reaches farther into the ignited part, and may even ſull in a stream into some deeper pit highly ignited. It will now produce steam in vast abundance, and of prodigious elasticity; and at once push up the water through the funnel in a solid jet, and to a great height. This must continue till the surſace of the water sinks to BD. If the Iower end of the funnel have any inequalities or notches, as is most likely, the steam will get admission along with the water, which in this particular place is boiling hot, being superſicial, and will get to the mouth of the ſunnel, while water is still pressed in helow. At last the steam gets in at B on all sides; and as it is converging to B, along the surface of the water, with prodigious velocity, it sweeps along with it much water, and blows it up through the funnel with great force. When this is over, the remaining steam blows out unmixed with water, growing weaker as it is expended, till the bottom of the funnel is again stopped by the water increasing in the cavern CBD. All the phenomena above ground are perſectly conformable Lo the necessary consequences oſ this very probable construction of the cavern. The ſeeling of being liſted up, immediately beſore the jet, in all probability is owing to a real heaving up of the whole roof of the cavern by the first expansion of the great body of steam. We had an accurate description of the phenomena from persons well qualified to judge of these matters, who visited these celebrated springs in 1789. STEAM-ENG INE. SræaM-EncinE, is the name of a machine which derives its moving power from the elasticity and condensibility of the steam of boiling water. It is the most valuable present which the arts of liſe have ever received from the philosopher. The mariners compass, the telescope, gunpowder, and other most useſul servants to human weakness and ingenuity, were the productions of chance, and we do not exactly know to vhom we are indebted ſor them; but the steam-engine was, in the very beginning, the result of reflection, and the produetion of a very ingenious mind; and every improvement it has received, and every alteration in its construction and principles, were also the results of philosophical study. 1. The steam-engine was beyond all doubt first invented by the marquis of Worcester during the reign of Charles II. This nobleman published in 1663 a small book, entitled s A Century of Inventions,” giving some obscure and enigmatical account of an hundred discoveries or contrivances of his own, which he extols as of great importance to the public.* He appears to have been a person of much knowledge and great ingenuity: but his deseription or accounts In Hero of Alexandria's Spiritalia, there are two toys moving by steam, described in propositions 50 and 71. They are both moved on the principle oſ Barkers mill, by steam issuing ſrom an eolopile, moveable round a centre or axis, and not oſ a nature to be oſ any real ue, W, of these inventions seem not 50 much intended to instruet the publie, as to raise wonder; and his encomiums on their utility and importance are to a great degree extravagant, resembling more the puſf of an advertising tradesman than the patriotie communieations oſ a gentleman. The marquii of Worcester was indeed a projector, and very importunate and mysterious withal in his applieations for publie encouragement. Flis account, however, oſ the steam-engine, nlthough by no means ſit to give us any distinet notions of ita strueture and operation, is exact as far as it goes, agreeing precisely with what we now know of the subject. It is No. 68. of his inventionss. His words nre as ſollow è This admirable method whieh I propose oſ raising water by the force oſ fire has no bounds if the vessels be strong enough: for I have tuken a cannon, and having ſilled it three fourths ſull of water, and shut up its muæile and touch-hole, and exposed it to the fire for 24 hours, it burst with a great explosion. Having aterwards discovered a method of fortiſying vessels internally, and combiſied them in such a way thut they filled and acted altemately, I have made the water spout in an uninterrupted stream 40 ſeet high; and one vessèl of rareſied water raised 40 of cold water. The person who condueted the operation had nothing to do but turn two cocks; so that one vessel of water being consumed, another begins to forcę, and then to fll itself with cold water, and 20 on in succession 2. It does not appear that the noble nventor could ever interest the public by these accounts. His eharacter as a projector, and the many ſailures which persons of this turn of mind daily experience, probably prejudiced people agosinst him, and prevented all attention to his projects. It was not till towards the end of the century, when experimental philosophy was prosecuted all over Europe with uncommon ardour, that these notions again engaged attention. Captain Savary, a person also of great ingenuity and ardent mind, saw the reality and practicability of the marquis of Worcester's project. He knew the great expansive power of steam, and had discovered the inconceivable rapidity with which it is reconverted into water by cold; and he soon contrived a machine for raising water, in which both of these properties were employed. He says, that it was entirely his own invention. Dr Desaguliers insists that he only copied the marquis's invention, and charges him with gross plagiarism, and with having bought np and burned the copies of the marquis's book, in order 1o secure the honour of the discovery to himslſ. This is a very grievous charge, and should have been substantiated by very distinet evidence. Desaguliers produces none such; and he was much too late to know what happened at that time. The argument which he gives is a very foolish one, and gave him no title to consider Savarys experiment as a ſalsehood; for it might have happened precisely as Savary relates, and not as it happened to Desaguliers. The ſact is, that Savary obtained his patent of invention aſter a hearing of objections, among which the discovery of the marquis of Worcester was not mentioned; and it is certain that the account given in the è Century of Inventions? could instruct no person who was not suſficiently acquainted with the properties of steam to be able to invent the machine himselſ. 3. Captain Savary obtained his patent aſter having actually erected several machines, of which he gave a description in a book entitled ſ The Miners Friend,” published in 1696, and in another work published in 1699. Much about this time, Dr Papin, a Frenchman and ſellow oſ the Royal Society, invented a method of dissolving bones and other animal solids in water, by confining them in close vessels, which he called DIGESTERS, 50 as to acquire a great degree oſ heat. For it must be observed in this place, that it had been discovered long before (in 1684) by Dr Hooke, the most inquisitive experimental philosopher of that inquisitive age, that woter could not be made to ncquire above æ certain temperature in the open air; and that as soon as it begins to boil, its temperature remains ſixed, and an increase of heat only produces a more violent ebullition, and a more rapid waste. But Pupin's experimonts made the elastic power of steam very familiar to him; and when he leſt England and settled as professor of mathematics at Marpurgh, he made many awkward attempts to employ this force in mechanics, and even ſor raising water. It appears that he had made experiments with &is view in 1G98, by order of Charles, landgrave of Hesse For this renson the French affect to consider him as the inventor of the steam-engine. He indeed published some account of his invention in 1707; but he acknowledges that Captain Savary had also, and without any communication with him, invented the same thingg Whoever vill take the trouble of looking at the deseription which he has given of these inventions, which are to be seen in the Actu Eruditorum Lipsiæ, and in Leupold's Theatrum Machinarum, will see that they are most awhward, absurd, and impracticable. Ilis conceptions of natural operations were always vague and imperſect, and he was neither philosopher nor mechanician. We are thus anxious about the claim of those gentlemen, because a most respectable French author, Mr Bossut, says in bis Hydrodynamique, that the first notion of ihe steamengine was certuinly owing to Dr Papin, who had not only invented the digester, but had, in 1695, published a little perſormance describing a machine for raising water, in which the pistons are moved by the vapour of boiling water alternately dilated and condensed. Now the ſact is, that Papin's first publication was in 1707, and his piston is nothing more than a floater on the surſace oſ the water, to prevent the waste of steam by condensation; and the return of the piston is not produced, as in the steam-engine, by the condensation of the stcam, but by admitting the air and a column of water to press it back into its place. The vOL. II. D whole contrivance is so awkward, and so unlike any distinet notions of the subject, that it cannot do credit to any persOD. 4. We may add, that much about the same time, Mr Amontons contrived a very ingenious but intricate machine, which he called a fſire-wheel. It consisted of a number of close buckets placed in the circumference of a wheel, and communicating with each other by very intricate circuitous passages. One part of this circumſference was exposed to the heat of a ſurnace, and another to a stream or cistern oſ cold water. The communications were so disposed, that the steam produced in the buckets on one side of the wheel drove the water into buckets on the other side, so that one side of the wheel was always much heavier than the other; and it must therefore turn round, and may execute some work. The death of the inventor, and the intricacy of the machine, caused it to be neglectedl. Another member oſ the Parisian academy of sciences (Mr Deflandes) also presented to the academy a project of a stenm-wheel, where the impulsive force of the vapour was employed; but it met with no encouragement. The English engineers had by this time so much improved Savarys first invention, that it supplanted all otherss We have therefore no hesitation in giving the honour of the first and complete invention to the marquis of Worcester; and we are not disposed to refuse Captain Savarys claim to originality as to the construction of the machine, and even think it probable that his own experiments made him see the whole, independent of the marquiss aceount.* Captain Savarys engine, as improved and simplified by himselſ, is as follows. 5. A (ſig. 6.) represents a strong copper boiler properly » æ ſt does not appear that the marquis oſ Worcester knew any thing of the use oſ an injection, as the machine described by him operated only by the expunsive ſorce oſ steam; whereas the injection was used in Savary's engine ſrom the beginning, and is in all probability his invention W, 6 built up in a ſurnace. There proceeds ſrom its top a large steam-pipe B, which enters into the top of another strong vessel R, called the RECEIVER. This pipe has a cock at C, called the sTEAM-cocè. In the bottom of the receiver is a pipe F, which communicates sidewise with the rising pipe EGH. The lower end H of this pipe is immersed in the water of the pit or well, and its upper part K opens into the cistern into which the water is to be delivered. Immediately below the pipe of communication F there is a valve G, opening when pressed from below, and shutting when pressed downwards. A similar valve is placed at I, immediately above the pipe of communication. Lastly, there is a pipe ED, which branches off from the rising pipe, and enters into the top of the receiver. This pipe has a cock D, called the iNECTION- cock. The mouth of the pipe ED has a noæle fſ pierced with small holes, pointing ſfrom a centre in every direction. The keys of the two cocks C and D are united, and the handle g h is called the nEGULATOE. Let the regulator be so placed that the steam-cock C is open and the injection-cock D is shut; put water into the boiler A, and make it boil strongly. The steam coming from it will enter the receiver, and gradually warm it, much steam being condensed in producing this eſfect. When it has been warmed so as to condense no more, the steam proceeds into the rising pipe; the valve G remains shut by its weight; the steam lifts the valve I, and gets into the rising pipe, and gradually warms it. When the workman feels this to be the case, or hears the rattling of the valve I, he immediately turns the steam-cock so as to shut it, the injection-cock still remaining shut (at least we may suppose this ſor the present.). The apparatus must now cool, and the steam in the receiver collapses into water. There is nothing now to balance the pressure of the atmosphere; the valve I remains shut by its weight; but the air incumbent on the water in the pit presses up this water through the suction-pipe HG, and eauses it to liſt the valve G, and ſlow into the receiver R, and fill it to the top, if not more than 20 or 25 feet above the surſace of the pit-water. The steam-cock is now opened. The steam which during the cooling of the receiver has been accumulating in the boiler, and acquiring a great elasticity hy the action of the fire, now rushes in with great violence, and pressing on the surface of the water in the receiver, causes it to shut the valve G and open the valve F by its weight alone, and it now flows into the rising pipe, and would stand on a level if the elasticity of the steam were no more than what would balance the atmospherical pressure. But it is much more than this, and thereſore it preses the water out of the receiver into the rising pipe, and vill cause it to come out at , if the elasticity of the steam is suſficiently great. In order to ensure this, the boiler has another pipe in ils top, covered with a saſety-valve V, which is kept down by a weight W suspended on a steelyard LM. This weight is 50 adjusted that its pressure on the saſety-valve is somewhat greater than the pressure of a column of water V& as high as the point of discharge K. The fire is so regulated that the steam is always issuing a little by the loaded valve V. The workman keeps the steam-valve open till he hears the valve I rattle. This tells him that the water is all forced out of the receiver, and that the steam is now following it. He immediately turns the regulator which shuts the steamcock, and now, for the ſirst time, opens the injection-cock. The cold water trickles at first through the holes of ihe nozle f, and ſalling down through the steam, begins to condense it; and then its elasticity being less than the pressure of the water in the pipe KED f, the cold water spouts in all directions through the nozgle, and, quick as thought, produces a complete condensation. The valve G now opens again by the pressure of the atmosphere on the water of the pit, and the receiver is soon ſilled with cold water. The injection-cock is now shut, and the steamcock opened, and the whole operation is now repeated; and so on continually. This is the simple account of the process, and will serve to give the reader an introductory notion of the operation; but a more minute attention must be paid to many particulars before we can see the properties and defects oſf this ingenious machine. G. The water is driven along the rising pipe by the elasticity of the steam. This must in the boiler, and every part of the machine, exert a pressure on every square inch of the vessels equal to that oſ the upright column of water. Suppose the water to be raised 100 ſeet, about 25 of this may be done in the suction-pipe; that is, the upper part oſ the receiver may be about 25 ſeet above the surſace oſ the pit-water. The remaining 75 must be done by forcing, and every square inch of the boiler will be squeezed out by a pressure of more than 30 pounds. This very moderate height, thereſore, requires very strong vessels; and the marquis of Worcester was well aware of the danger oſ their bursting. By consulting the table of the elasticity of steam deduced from our experiments mentioned in the preceding article, we see that this temperature must be at least 205° of Fahrenheit's thermometer. In this heat soft solder is weak, and spelter solder, or good rivetting, ought only to be used. Accordingly, in a machine erected by Captain Savary, the workman having loaded the saſety-valve a little more than usual to make the engine work more brigkly, the boiler burst with a dreadſul explosion, and blew up the furnace and adjoining parts of the building as if it had been gunpowder. Mr Savary succeeded pretty well in raising moderate quantities of vater to small heights, but could make nothing of deep miness Many attempts were made, on the marquis's principle, to strengthen the vessels from within by radiated bars and by hoops, but in vain. Very small hoilers or evaporators were then tried, kept red-hot, or nenrly s0, and supplied with a slender stream of water trickling into them; but this aſforded no opportunity of making a collection of steam during the refrigeration of the receiver, so as to have a magazine of steam in readiness for the next forcing operation; and the working of such machines was always an employment of great danger and anxiety. 7. The only situation in which this machine could be employed with perfect safety, and with some effect, vas where the whole lift did not exceed 30 or 85 feet. In this case the greatest part of it was perſormed by the suction- pipe, and a very manageable pressure was sufficient for the rest. Several machines of this kind were erected in England about the beginning of the 18th century. A very large one was erected at a salt-work in the south of France Here the water was to be raised no more than I8 ſeet. The receiver was capacious, and it was occasionally supplied with steam from a small salt-pan constructed on purpose with a cover. The entry of the steam into the receiver merely allowed the water to run out of it by a large valve, which was opened by the hand, and the condensation was produced by the help oſ a small forcing pump, also worked by the hand. In s0 particular a situation as this, (and many such may occur in the endless voriety of human wants,) this is a very powerful engine; and having few moving and rubbing parts, it must be of great durability. This circumstance has occosioned much attention to be given to this first form of the engine, even long aſter it was supplanted by those of a much better construction. A very ingenious attempt was made very lately to adapt this construction to the uses of the miners. The whole depth of the pit was divided into liſis of 15 feel, in the same manner as is frequently done in pump-machines. In each of these was a suction-pipe, 14 feet long, having above it a small receiver like R, about a foot high, and its capacity somewhat greater than that oſ the pipe. This receiver had a valve at the hend of the suction- pipe, and another opening outwards into the little cistern,. into which the next suction-pipe above dipped to take in water. Each of these receivers sent up a pipe ſrom its top, which all met in the cover of a large vessel above ground, which was of double the capacity of all the receivers and pipes. This vessel was closc on all sides. Another Vessel of equal capacity was placed immediately above it, with a pipe from ils bottom passing through the cover of the lower vessel and reaching near to its bottom. This upper vessel communicates with the boiler, and constitutes the receiver of the steam-engine. The operation is as folIows: The lower vessel is full of water. Steam is admitted into the upper vessel, which expels the air by a valve, and fills the vessel. It is then condensed by cold water. The pressure of the atmosphere would cause it to enter by all the suctjon-pipes of the different lifts, and press on the surface oſ the water in the lower receiver, and ſorce it into the upper one. But because each suction-pipe dips in a cistern of water, the air presses this water before it, raises it into each of the little receivers which it ſills, and allows the spring of the air (which was formerly in them, but which now passes up into the lower receiver) to force the water out of the lower receiver into the upper onee. When this has been completed, the steam is again admitted into the upper receiver. This allows the water to run back into the lIower receiver, and the air returns into the small receivers in the pit, and allows the water to run out of each into its proper cistern. By this means the water of each pipo has been raised 15 feet. The operation may thus be repeated continually. . The contrivance is ingenious, and similar to those which are to be met with in the hydraulics of Schottus, Sturmius, and other German writers. But the operation must be exceedingly slow; and we imagine that the expence of steam must be great, because it must ſill a very large and very cold vessel, vhich must waste a great portion of it by eondensation. We see hy some late publications of the very ingenious Mr Blackey, that he is still attempting to maintain the reputation oſ this machine by some contrivances oſ this kind; but we imagine that they will be ineſfectual, except in some very particular situations. 8. For the very great deſect of the machine, even when we can secure it against all risk of bursting, is the prodigious waste of stenm, and consequently of fuel. Daily experience shews, that a small zuantity oſ cold water is suſſicient for producing an almost instantaneous condensation of a great quantity of steam. Thereſore when the steam is admitted into the receiver of Savarys engine, and comes into contact with the cold top and cold water, it is condensed with great rapidity; and the water does not begin to subside till its surſace has become so hot that it condenses no more steam. It may now hegin to yield to the pressure of the incumbent steam; but as soon as it descends a little, more of the cold surface of the receiver comes into contact with the steam, and condenses more of it, and the water can descend no farther till this addition of eold surface is heated up to the state of evaporation. This rapid condensation goes on all the while the water is descending. By some experiments made by the writer of this article, it appears that no less than ths of the whole steam are uselessly condensed in this manner, and not more than ææth is employed in allowing the water to descend by its own weight; and he has reason to think that the portion thus wasted will be considerably greater, iſ the steam be employed to ſorce the water out of the receiver to any considerable height. Observe, too, that all this waste must be repeated in every succeeding stroke; ſor the whole receiver must be cooled again in order to fill itselſ with water. 9. Many attempts have been made to diminish this waste; but all to little purpose, becnuse the very ſilling of the receiver with cold water occasions ĩts sides to condense a prodigious quantity oſ steam in the succeeding stroke Mr Blackey has attempted to lessen this by using two receivers. In the first was oil; and into this only the steam was admitted. This oil passed to and fro between the two receivers, and never touched the water except on a small surface.* But this hardly produced a sensible diminution of the waste: for it must now be observed, that there is a necessity for the first cylinder's being cooled to a considerable degree below the boiling point; otherwise, though it will condense much steam, and allow the water to rise into the receiver, there will be a great diminution of the height oſ suction, unless the vessel be much cooled. This appears plainly by inspecting the table of elasticity. Thus, if the vessel be cooled no lower than 180°, we should lose one half oſ the pressure of the atmosphere; if cooled to 120, we should still lose 5th. The inspection of this table is of great use for understanding and improving this noble machine; and without a constant recollection of the elasticity of steam corresponding to its actual heat, we shall never have a notion of the niceties oſ its operation. The reader must now be s0 well acquainted with what passes in the steam-vessel, and with the exterior resulis ſrom it, as readily to comprehend the propriety of the changes which we shall now describe as having been made in the construction and principle of the steam- engine. 10. Of all places in England, the tin- mines oſ Cornwall stood most in need of hydraulic assistance; and Mr Savary was much engaged in projects for draining them by his steamengine. This made its construction and principles well known among the machinists and engineers of that neighbourhood. Among these were a Mr Newcomen, an ironmonger or blacksmith, and Mr Cavley, a glazier at Dartmouth, in Devonshire, who had dabbled much with this machine. Neweomen was a person of some reading, and * u In this case the oil would be decomposed by the solvent power oſ steam W, l i was in particular acquainted with the person, writings, and projects of his countryman Dr Hooke. There are to be found among Hooke's papers, in the possession of the Royal Society, some notes of observations, for the use of Newcomen his countryman, on Papin's boasted method of transmitting to a great distance the action of a mill by means of pipes. Papin's project was to employ the mill to work wo air-pumps of great diameter. The cylinders of these pumps were to communicate by means of pipes with equal cylinders furnished with pistons, in the neighbourhood of a distant mine. These pistons were to be connected, by means of levers, with the piston-rods of the mine. Therefore, when the piston oſ the air-pump at the mill was drawn up by the mill, the corresponding piston at the side of the mine would be pressed down by the atmosphere, and thus would raise the piston-rod in the mine, and draw the water. It would appear ſrom these notes, that Dr Hooke had dissunded Mr Newcomen from erecting a machine on this principle, of which he had exposed the fallacy in several discourses before the Royal Society. One passage is remarkable.  Could he (meaning Papin) make a speedy vacuum under your second piston, your work is done. 1l. It is highly probable that, in the course oſ this speculation, it occurred to Mr Newcomen that the vacuum he so much wanted might be produced by steam, and that this gave rise lo his new principle and construction of the steamengine. The specific desideratum was in Newcomens mind; and thereſore, vhen Savarys engine appeared, and became Eknown in his neighbourhood many years aſter, he would readily catch at the help which it promised. Savary, however, claims the invention as his own; but Switzer, who was personally acquainted with both, is positive that Newcomen was the inventor. By his principles (as a quaker) being averse ſrom contention, he was contented to share the honour and the proſits with Savary, whose acquaintance at court enabled him to procure the patent in 1705, in which all the three were associated. Posterity has done justico to the modest inventor, and the machine is universally called NEWCOMENS EnGINE. Its principle and mode of operation may be clearly conceived as follows. Let A (fig. 7.) represent a great boiler properly built in a furnace. At a small height above it is a cylinder CBBC of metal, bored very truly and smoothly.? The boiler communicates with this cylinder by means of the throat or stenm-pipe NQ. The lower aperture of this pipe is shut by the plate N, which is ground very ſlat, s0 as to apply very accurately to the whole circumſerence of the orifice. This plate is called the regulator or stenm-cock, and it turns horizontally round an axis b a, which passes through the top of the boiler, and is nicely fitted to the socket, like the key of a cock, by grinding. The upper end of this axis is furnished with a handle b T. A piston P iĩs suspended in this cylinder, and made airtight by a packing oſ leather or soſt rope, well filled vith tallow,  and, ſor greater security, a quantity of water is kept above the piston. The piston-rod PD is suspended by a chain which is fixed to the upper extremity F of the arched head FD of the great lever, or voRrREING BEAM HE, which turns on the gudgeon O. There is a similar arched head EG at the other end of the beam. To its upper extremity E is fixed a chain carrying the pump-rod XL, which raises the water from the mine. The load on this end of the beam is made to exceed considerably the weight of the piston P at the other extremity. At some small height above the top of the cylinder is a cistern W, called the in5 ECTION CISTERN. From this descends the 1NECTION PIPE ZSR, Which enters the cyæ This ought to have been the case, but Mr Watt ſound them generally very much otherwise. 1  Tallow, was only used to lessen the ſriction when the packing oſ the piston was renewed, not to keeꝑ the piston tight; ſor that, the water was depended on” W. linder through its bottom, and terminates in a small hole R, or sometimes in a nozzle pierced with many smaller holes diverging from a centre in all directions. This pipe has at S a cock, called the INJECTION cocꝶ, ſitted with a handle V, At the opposite side oſ the cylinder, a little above its hottom, there is a lateral pipe, turning upwards at the extremity, and there covered by a clack-valve f, called the SNIPINGVaLVE, which has a little dish round it to hold water ſor keeping it air-tight. There proceeds also from the bottom oſ the cylinder a pipe d e gh (passing hehind the boiler), of which the lower end is turned upwards, and is covered with a valve h- This part is immersed in a cistern of water Y, called the nor wELL, and the pipe itselſ is called the EDUCTION PIPE. Lastly, the boiler is furnished with a safety-valve, called the PUPPET-CLACK (Which is not represented in this sketch for want of room), in the same manner as Savary's engine. This valve is generally loaded with one or two pounds on the square inch, so that it allows the steam to escape when its elasticity is one-tenth greater than that of common air. Thus all risk of bursting the boiler is avoided, and the pressure outwards is very moderate; so also is the heat. For, by inspecting the table of vaporous elasticity, we see that the heat corresponding to 82 inches of elasticity is only about 2 16° of Fahrenheit's thermometer. These are all the essential parts of the engine, and are here drawn in the most simple form, till our knowledge of their particular oſfices shall shew the propriety of the peculiur forms which are given to them. Let us now see how the machine is put in motion, and what is the nature of its vork. 129. The water in the boiler being supposed to be in a state oſ strong ebullition, and the steam issuing by the saſetyvalve, let us consider the machine in a state oſ rest, having both the steam-cock and injection-cock shut. The resting position or attitude of the machine must be such as appears i 5 in this sketeh, the pump rods preponderating, and the great piston being drawn up to the top oſ the cylinder. Now open the stenm-cock by turning the handle T of the regulator. The stenm from the boiler will immediately rush in, and being lighter than the air, will take the upper purt, and will foree the air to issue by the sniſting-valve: But much of it will be condensed by the cold surſace of the eylinder and piston, and the water produced from it will trickle down the sides, and run off by the eduction-pipe. This condensation and waste of stenm will continue till the whole cylinder and piston are made as hot as boiling water. When this happens, the steam vill also begin to issue through the sniſting-valve, slowly at first, and very cloudy, being mixed with air. The blast at ſ will grow stronger by degrees, and more transparent, having already carried oſf the greatest part oſ the common air which ſilled the cylinder. We supposed that the water was boiling briskly, so that the steam was issuing by the safety-valve which is in the top oſ the boiler, and through every crevice. The opening of the steam-cock puts an end to this at once, and the cold cylinder abstracts the stenm from the boiler with great rapidity. We may here mention an accident of which we were witnesses, which also shows the immense rapidity oſ the condensation. The boiler was in a frail shed at the side of the engine-house; a shoot of snow from the top of the house ſell down and broke through the rooſ of the shed, and was scattered over the head of the boiler, which was of an oblong or oval shape. In an instant the sides of it vere squeezed together by the pressure of the atmosphere. . When the manager of the engine perceives that not only the blast at the sniſting-valve is strong and steady, but that the boiler is now ſully supplied with steam of a proper strength, appearing by the renewal of the discharge at the saſety-valve, he shuts the steam- cock, and opens the injection-cock S by turning its handie V. The pressure of the column of water in the injection-pipe ZS immediately ſorces some water through the spout R. This coming in con- taet with the pure vapour which now fills the cylinder, condenses it, and thus makes a partial void, into which the more distant steam immediately expands, and is also condensed. The water spouts rapidly through the hole R by the joint action of the column ZS, and the pressure of the atmosphere; at the same time the sniſting valve f, and the eduction-valve h, are shut by the unbalanced pressure of the atmosphere. The velocity of the injection water must thereſore rapidly increase, and the jet will dash (if single) against the bottom of the piston, and be scattered through the whole capacity of the cylinder. In a very short space of time, therefore, the condensation of the steam becomes general, and the elasticity of what remains is greatly lesened, probably to only 3, or  of that of the utmosphere. Meanwhile the whole pressure of the atmosphere continues to act upon the upper side of the piston, und not being counterbalanced by that of the weak steam which no fills the cylinder; if the load on the outer end of the working beam is inferior to the difference of these pressures, it must yield to it. The piston P must descend, and the pump piston L must ascend, bringing along vith it the water oſ the mine, and the motion must continue till the great piston reaches the bottom of the cylinder; for it is not like the motion which would take place in a cylinder of air rarefied to the same degree. In this lst case, the impelling force would be continually diminished, because the capacity of the cylinder is diminished by the descent of the piston, and the air in it is continually becoming more dense and elastic. The piston would stop at a certain height, where the elasticity of the included nir, together with the load at E, would balance the atmospherical pressure on the piston. But when the contents of the cylinder are pure vapour, and the continued stream of injected cold water keeps down its temperature to the same pitch as at the beginning, the elasticity of the remaining steam can never increase by the descent oſ the piston, nor exceed what corresponds to this temperature. The impelling or accelerating force thereſore remains the same, and the descent oſ the piston will be uniſormly accelerated, if there is not an increase of resistance arising from the nature of the work performed by the other end of the beam. This circumstance will come under consideration afterwards, and we need not attend to it at present. It is enough for our present purpose to see that if the cylinder has been completely purged of common air before the steam-cock was shut, and if none has entered since, the piston will descend to the very bottom of the cylinder. And this may be frequently observed in a good steam-engine whero every part is air-tight. It sometimes happens, by the pit-pump drawing air, or some part of the communication between the two strains giving way, that the piston comes down with such violence as to knock out the bottom of the cylinder with the blow. 18. The only observation which remains to be made on the motion of the piston in descending is, that it does not begin at the instant the injcction is made. The piston was Eept at the top by the preponderancy of the outer end of the working beam, and it must remain there till the diſference between the elasticity of the stenm below it and the pressure of the atmosphere exceeds this preponderancy. There must, therefore, be a small space of time between the beginning of the condensation and the beginning of the motion. This is very small, not exceeding the third or the ſourth part oſ a second; but it may be very distinctly observed by an attentive spectator. He vill see, that the ĩ nstant the injection-cock is opened, the cylinder will sensibly rise upwards a little by the pressure of the air on its bottom. Its whole weight is not nearly equal to this pressure; and instead of its being necessary to support it by a strong floor, we must heep it down by strong beams londed by heavy walls. It is usual to frame these beams into the posts which carry the axis of the working-beam, and they are thereſore loaded with the whole strain of the machine. This rising oſ the cylinder shows the instantaneous commence- ment oſ the condensation; and it is not till aſier this has been distinetly observed that the piston is seen to start, and begin to descend. When the manager sees the piston as low as he thinks proper, he shuts the injection-coc, and opens the steamcock. The steam has been accumulating above the water in the boiler during the whole time of the piston's descent, and is now the puppet-clack. The moment, thereſore, that the steam-cock is opened, it rushes violently into the cylinder, having an elasticity greater than that of the air. It thereſore immediately blows open the sniſting-valve, and allows (at least) the water which bad come in by the former injection, and what arose ſrom the condensed steam, to descend by its own weight through the eduction pipe de g h, 10 open the valve h, and to run out into the hot wel. 4 portion of the steam is necessarily condensed in heating the surſace of the water in the cylinder, the sides of that vessel and ihe lower surſace of the piston, und allhough these are ulready very warm, yet the quantity of steam condensed is considerable; generally much more than what would be necesary to fill u cylinder which wus already of the heat of boiling water. This first puſf of the entering steam is of great service; it drives out of the cylinder the vapour which it finds there. This is seldom pure watery vapour: all water contains a quantity of air in a state oſ chemical union. The union is but feeble, and a boiling heat is suſſicient for disengaging the greatest part of it by increasing its elusticity. It may also be disengaged by simply removing the external pressure oſ the atmosphere. This is clearly seen when we expose a glass of water in an exhausted receiver. Therefore the small space below the piston contains watery vapour mixed with all the air which had been disengaged from the water in the boiler by cbullition, and all that vas separated ſrom the injeotion water by the diminution of external pressures. All this is blown out of the cylinder by the ſirst puſſ of steam. We may observe in this place, that waters diſſer exeeedingly in the quantity of air which they hold in a state oſ solution. All spring water contains much of it: and vater newly brought up from deep mines contains a great deal more, because the solution was aided in these gituations by great pressuree Such waters sparkle when poured into a glass. It is therefore of consequence to the performance of a steam-engine, to use water containing little air, both in the boiler and in the injection-cistern. The water of running brooks is preferable to all others; and the freer it is from any saline impregnation, it generally contains less air. The air collected below the piston diminishes the accelerating force, and the saline matters contained in such nuters are also extremely hurtful, by encrusting the boilers, and rendering them less pervious to heat. It is therefore adviseable to heep water 1 impregnated, in a large shallow pond for some time before it is used; or rather to cool the water hich has been used in such u pond, and to us it in place of fresh pitwater, as the heat and exhaustion it has undergone cause it to part vith the air it contained, and to deposit the saline or earthy matters. Let us now consider the state of the piston. It is evident that it will start or begin to rise the moment the steamcock is opened; for at that instant the excess oſ atmospherical pressure, by vhich it was kept down in opposition to the preponderancy of the outer end of the beam, is diminished. The piston is therefore pulled upwards, and it will rise even although the steam which is admitted be not 50 elastic as common air. Suppose the mercury in the barometer to stand at S0 inches, and that the preponderancy at the outer end of the beam is th of the pressure oſ the air on the piston, the piston will not rise if the elasticity oſ the steam is not equal to S0u&, that is, to 26.7 inches nearly; but if it is just this quantity, the piston will rise as ſast as this steam can be supplied through the steam-pipe, and the velocity of its ascent depends entirely on the velocity of this supply. This observation is of great importVoL. II. E ance; and it does not seem to have occurred to the mathematicians, vho have paid most attention to the mechanism of the motion oſ this engine. In the mean time, we may clearly see that the entry oſ the steam depends chieſly on the counter weight at E; for suppose there was none, steam no stronger than air would not enter the cylinder at all; and if the steam be stronger, it will enter only by the excess of its strength. Writers on the steam-engine (and even some of great reputation) ſamiliarly speak of the steam giving the piston a push: But this is scarcely possible. During the rise of the piston the sniſting-valve is never observed to blow; and we have not heard any vell- attested accounts of the piston-chains ever being slackened hy the upward pressure of the steam, even at the very beginning oſ the stroke. During the rising oſ the piston, the steam is (according to the common conception and manner of speaking) suched in, in the same way that air is sucked into a common syringe or pump when we draw up the piston; for in the steam-engine the piston is really drawn up by the counter weight. But it is still more sucked in, and requires a more copious supply, ſor another renson. As the piston descended only in consequence of the inside of the cylinders being suſficiently cooled to condense the steam, this cooled surſace must again be presented to the steam during the rise of the piston, and must condense steam a second time. The piston cannot rise another inch till the part of the cylinder which the piston has already quitted, has been warmed up to the boiling point, and steam must be expended in this varming. The inner surſace of the cylinder is not only of the heat of boiling water while the piston rises, but is also perfectly dry; for the film of water leſt on it by the ascending piston must be completely evaporated, otherwise it will be condensing steam. The quantity thus masted is, as we have said, considerable; it varies in different engines according to their load, and other circumstances, from three quarters of one fill to two fills of the cylinder, as we hure STEAM- ENGINE. 67 leurnt from Mr Waitt's experiments. The experiments which Dr Desaguliers relates as made by Mr Beighton upon the consumption of steum by a certain engine, were in themselves erroneous, and the Doctors calculations founded upon them were still more so. From them he made the deduction, that steum was 14,000 times rarer than water; but Mr Watt, whoie experiments have been fully verified by long practice on a great scale, makes it, when under the pressure of the atmosphere and of the heat of 219°, onl from 1800 to 2000 times less heuuy than the same bulk of water. 18. The moving force during the ascent of the piston must be considered as resulting chieſly, if not solely, from the preponderating weight of the pit piston-rods. The oſfice of this is to return the steam-piston to the top of the eylinder, where it may again be pressed down by the air, and make another working stroke by raising the pump-rods. But the counter-weight at E has another service to perform in this use of the engine, namely, to return the pump-pistons into their places at the bottom of their respective working barrels, in order that they may make a workingstroke. This requires force independent of the friction and inertia of the moving parts; for each piston must be pushed down through the water in the barrel, which must rise through the piston with a velocity whose proportion to the velocity of the piston is the same with that of the area of the piston to the àrea of the perforation through which the water rises through the piston. It is enough at present to mention this in general terms: we shall consider it more particularly afterwards, vhen we come to calculate the perſormance oſ the engine, and to deduce from our acquired knowledge maxims of construction and improvement. 19. From this general consideration of the ascent of the piston, we may see that the motion differs greatly ſrom the descent. It can hardly be supposed to accelerate, even if the steam in the cylinder were in a moment annihilated. For tho resistance to the descent of the piston is the same the weight of the column of water, vhich would eause it to flow through the opening of the pump-piston with the velocity with which it really rises through it, and must thereſore increase as the square of that velocity increases; that ĩ is, as the square of the velocity of the piston increases. Independent of friction, thereſore, the velocity of descent through the water must soon become a maximum, and the motion become uniſorm. We shall see by and by, that in such a pump as is generally used this will happen in less than the 10th part of a second. The friction of the pump vill diminish this velocity a little, and retard the time of its attaining uniformity. But, on the other hand, the supply of steam which is necessary for this motion, being susceptible of no acceleration from its previous motion, and depending entirely on the briskness of the ebullition, an almost instantaneous stop is put to acceleration. Accordingly, any person who observes with attention the working of a steam- engine, ill see that the rise of the piston and descent of the pump-rods is extremely uniform, vhereas the working-stroke is very sensibly accelerated. 20. Beſore quitting this part of the subject, and lest it should aſterwards escape our recollection, we may observe, that the counter-weight is different during the two motions of the pump-rods. The machine, when making a working-stroke, is liſting not only the column of water in the pump, but the absolute weight oſ the pump- pistons and pump-rods also: but while the pump-rods are descending, there is a diminution of the counter-weight by the whole weight lost by the immersion of the rod in water. The wooden rods which are generally used, soaked in water, and joined by iron straps, are heavier, and but a little heavier, than water, and they are generally about one- third of the bulk of the water in the pumps. These two motions complete the period of the operation; and the whole may be repeated by shutting the steam-cock and opening the injection-cock whenever the piston has at- tained the proper height. We have been very minute in our attention to the diſferent circumstances, that the reader may have a distinet notion of the state of the moving ſorces in every period of the operation. It is by no means suſficient that we know in general that the injection of cold vater makes a void which allows the air to press down the piston, and that the readmission of the steam allows the piston to rise agnin. This slovenly way of viewing it has long prevented even the philosopher ſrom seeing the deſects of the construction, and the methods of removing them. 21. We now see the great diſference beteen Savarys and Newcomen's engine in respect of principle. Savary's was really an engine which raised water partly by the sorce of steum, and partly by the pressure of the atmosphere; but Newcomen's raises water entirely by the pressure of the atmosphere, and steam is empioyed merely as the most expeditious method of producing a void, into which the atmospherical pressure may impel the ſirst mover oſ his machine. The elasticity of the steam is not the first mover. 2g. We see also ihe great superiority oſ this new machine. We have no need of steam of great and dangerous elasticity; and we operate by means of very moderate heats, and consequently with much smaller quantities of fuel; and the boundaries to the power of this machine are not the strength which we cun give to boilers and cylinders to resist internal presure, but the dimensions to which we may find it practicable or expedient to mahe them, and other purts of the machine, such as the working- beum, or great lever, and its appendages. And, lastly, this form of the machine render it applicable to almost every mechanical purpose; because a skilful mechanic can readily find a method of converting the reciprocating motion of the working-beam into a motion of any kind which may suit his purpore. Savarys engine could hardly admit of such an immediate application, and seems almost restricted to raising ater. 93. Inventions improve by degrees. This engine was ſirst offered to the public in 1705. But many diſficulties occurred in the execution, which were removed one by one; and it was not till 1712 that the engine seemed to give confidence in its efficacy. The most exact and unremitting attention of the manager was required to the precise moment of opening and shutting the cocks; and neglect might frequently be ruinous, by beating out the bottom of the cylinder, or allowing the piston to be wholly drawn out of it. Stops were contrived to prevent both of these accidents; then strings were used to connect the handles of the cocks vith the beam, so that they should be turned whenever it was in certain positions. 24. These strings were gradually changed and improved into detents and catches of different shapes; at last, in 1717, Mr Beighton, a very ingenious and well- informed artist, simplified the whole of these subordinate movements, and brought the machine into the form in which it has continued, without the smallest material change, to the present day. We shall now describe one of these improved engines, copying nearly the drawings and description given by Bossut in his Hydrodynamique; these being by far the most accurate and perspicuous of any that have been published. 25. Fig. 8. No. I. Plate II. is a vertical section of the boiler, cylinder, and all the parts necessary for turning the cocks. Fig. 8. No. 2. is a plan of the apparatus ſor opening and shutting the steam-regulator; and the same pieces of both are marked with the same letters of reſerence. The rod X of the piston P is suspended from the arch of the working-beam, as was represented in the preceding sketch (fig. 7.). An upright bar of timber FG is also seen hanging by a chain. This is suspended from a concentric arch of the beam, as may be seen also in the sketch at  J. The bar is called the plug-beam; and it must rise ànd ſall with the piston, but with a slower motion. The use of this - plug-beam is to give motion to the diſſerent pieces which turn the cocks. The steam-pipe K is of one piece with the bottom of the cylinder, and rises within it three or ſour inches, to prevent any of the cold injection water from ſalling into the boiler. The lower extremity Z of the steam-pipe penetrates the head of the boiler, projecting a little vay. A ſlat plate oſ brass, in shape resembling a racket or battledore, called the regulator, applies itself exactly to the whole circumference oſ the steam-pipe, and compleiely excludes the steam from the cylinder. Being moveable round an upright axis, which is represented at the side oſ the steampipe in the proſile, it may be turned aside by the handle i, No. I. and 2. The proſile shews in the section of this plate a protuberance in the middle. This rests on a strong flat spring, which is fixed below it athwart the mouth of the steam-pipe. This spring presses it strongly towards the steam-pipe, causing it to apply very close; and this knob slides along the spring, while the regulator turns to the right or leſt. We have said that the injection- water is furnished ſrom au cistern placed above the cylinder. When the cistern cannot be supplied by pipes from some more elevated source, its water is raised by the machine ĩtself. A small lifting pump i æ (ſig. 7. Plate I.), called the jack-head or Jaquette, is orked by a rod :,, suspended ſrom a concentrie arch . 5 near the outer end oſ the working-beam. This forces a small portion of the pit-water along the rising pipe i L into the injection cistern. In figure 8. No. I. the letters QM 8 represent the pipe which brings down the water from the injection cistern. This pipe has a cock at R to open or shut the passage of this water. It spouts through the jet 3, and dashing against the bottom of the piston, it is dispersed into drops, and scattered through the whole capacity of the cylinder, 20 as to produce a rapid condensation of the steam. An upright post A supports one end B of a horizontal iron axis BC. The end of C is supported by a similar post, shewn only in the plan No. 2, that the pieces connected with this axis may not be hid by it. A kind of stirrup a b c d hangs from this axis, supported by the hooks a and d. This stirrup is crossed near the bottom by a round bolt or bar e, which passes through the eyes or rings that are at the ends oſ the horizontal fork h f g, whose long tail h is double, receiving between its branches the handle i of the regulator. It is plain from this construction, that when the stirrup is made to vibrate round the horizontal axis BC, on which it hangs freely by its hooks, the bolt  must pull or push the long fork h f g& backwards and forwards horizontally, and by so doing will move the regulator round its axis by means of the handle i. Both the tail of the fork and the handle of the regulator are pierced with several holes, and a pin is put through them which unites them by a joint. The motion of the handle may be inereased or diminished by choosing for the joint a hole near to the axis or remote from it; and the exact position at which the regulator is to stop on both sides is determined by pins stuck in a horizontal bar on which the end of the handle is made to rest. This alternate motion of the regulator to the right and leſt is produced as follows: There is fixed to the axis BC a piece of iron o & I, called the Y, on account of its resemblance to that letter of the alphabet inverted: The stalk o carries a heavy lump p, called the loggerhead, oſ lead or iron; and a long leather strap q pr is ſastened to ꝓ by the middle, and the two ends are ſastened to the beam above it, in such a manner that the lump may be alternately catched and held up to the right and leſt of the perpendicular. By adjusting the length of the two parts of the strap, the Y may be stopped in any desired position. The two claws æ and I spread out from each other, and from the line of the stalk, and they are of such length as to reach the horizontal bolt e, which crosses the stirrup below, but not to reach the bottom of the ſorkh fę. Now suppose the stirrup hanging perpendicularly, and the stalk of the Y also held perpendicular; carry it a little outward from the cylinder, and then let it go. It will tumble farther out by itls weight, without afſecting the stirrup till the claw l strikes on the horizontal bolt e, and then it pushes the stirrup and the fork towards the cylinder, and opens the regulator. It sets it in motion with a smart jerk, which is an effectual way of overcoming the cohesion and ſriction of the regulator with the mouth of the steam-pipe: This push is adjusted to a proper length by the strap ꝗ ꝑ, which stops the Y when it has gone far enough. If we now take hold of the stalk of the Y, and move it up to the perpendicular, the width between its claws is such as to permit this motion, and something more, without affecting the stirrup. But when pushed still nearer to the cylinder, it tumbles towards it by its ovn weight, and then the claw  strikes the holt ę, and drives the stirrup and fork in the opposite diretion, till the lump ꝑ is catched by the strap 7 ꝑ, now stretchæd to its full length, while ꝗ  hangs slack. Thus by the motion of the V the regulator is opened and shut. Let us now see how the motion of the V is produced by the machine itself. To the horizontal axis BC are attached two spanners or handles m and n. The spanner m passes through a long slit in the plug-beam, and is at liberty to move upwards or downwards by its motion round the axis BC. A pin æ which goes through the plug-beam catches hold of m when the beam rises along vith the piston; and the pin is 50 placed, that when the beam is within an inch or two of its highest rise, the pin has lifted m and thrown the stalk of the Y past the perpendicular. It therefore tumbles over with great force, and gives a smart blow to the fork, and immediately shuts the regulator. By this motion the spanner m is removed out of the neighbourhood of the plugbeam. But the spanner n, moving along with it in the same direction, now comes into the way of the pins of the plug-beam, Thereſore, when the piston descends again by the condensation of the steam in the cylinder, a pin marked & in the side oſ the plug-beam, catches hold of the tail of the spanner n, and by pressing it down raises the lump on the stalk of the Y till it passes the perpendicular, and it then ſalls down, outwards from the cylinder, and the clav I again drives the fork in the direction h i, and opens the steamvolve. This opening and shutting of the steam-valve ĩs executed in the precise moment that is proper, by placing the pins æ and & at a proper height of the plug-beàm. For this reason, it is pierced through with a great number of holes, that the places of these pins may be varied at pleasure. This, and a proper curvature of the spanners m and n, make the adjustment as nice as we please. The injection-cock R is managed in a similar manner. On its key may be observed a forked arm s t, like a crabs claw; at a little distance above it is the gudgeon or axis u of a piece 5 u z, called the hammer or the F, from its resemblance to that letter. It has a lump of metal ; ot one end, and a spear u s projects ſfrom its middle, and passes between the claws s and t of the arm of the injection-cock. The hammer y is held up by a notch in the under side of a wooden lever DE, moveable round the centre D, and supported at a proper height by a string r E, made ſast to the joist above it. Suppose the injection-cock hut, and the hammer in the position represented in the figure A pin à of the plugframe rises along with the piston, and catehing hold of the detent DE, raises it, and disengages the hammer y from its notch. This immediately ſulls down, and strikes a board L put in the way. to stop it. The spear u s tukes hold of the claw ?, forces it aside, and opens the injection-cock. The piston immediately descends, and along vith it the plug-frame. During its descent the pin à meets vith the tail u z of the hammer, which is now raised considerably above the level, and brings it down along with it, raising the lump 4, and gradually shutting the inje- tion-cock, because the spear takes hold oſ the claw s of ĩts arm. When the beam has come to its lowest situation, the hammer is again engaged in the notch of the detent DE, and supported by it till the piston again reaches the top of the cylinder. In this manner the motions of the injection-cock are also adjusted to the precise moment that is proper for them. The different pins are so placed in the plug-frame, that the steam-cock may be completely shut before the injectioncock is opened. The inherent motion of the machine will give a small addition to the ascent of the piston without expending steam all the while; and by leaving the steam rather less elastic than beſore, the subsequent descent of the piston is promoted. There was considerable propriety in the gradual shutting of the injection-cock. For aſter the first dash of the cold water against the bottom of the piston, the condensation is nearly complete, and very little more water is needed; but a continual accession of some is absolutely necessary for completing the condensation, as the capacity of the cylinder diminishes, and the water warms which is already injected. In this manner the motion of the machine will be repeated as long as there is a supply of steam from the boiler, and of water ſrom the injection cistern, and a discharge procured for vhat has been injectedl. We proceed to consider how ſar these conditions also are provided by the machine itself. The injection cistern is supplied with water by the jackhead pump, as we have already observed. From this source all the parts of the machine receive their respective supplies. In the first place, a small branch 18, is taken oſf from the injection-pipe immediately below the cistern, and conducted to the top of the cylinder, where it is furnished with a cock. The spout is so adjusted, that no more runs from it than what will keep a constant supply of water above the piston to keep it tight. Every time the piston 2 comes to the top oſ the cylinder, it brings this water along vith it, and the surplus of its evaporation and leakage runs off by a waste-pipe 14. This water necessarily becomes very hot, and it was thought proper to employ its overplus for supplying the waste of the boiler. This was accordingly practised for some time. But Mr Beighton improved this economical thought, by supplying the boiler from the eduction-pipe, 2, 2, the water of which must be still hotter than that above the piston. This contrivance required attention to many circumstances, which the reader will understand by considering the proſile The eduction-pipe comes out of the bottom of the cylinder at 1, with a perpendicular part, which bends sidewise below, and turns up the deep cup 5, holding a metal valve nicely ſitted to it by grinding, like the key of a cock. To secure its being always air-tight, a slender stream oſ water trickles into this cup from a branch  of the waste-pipe from the top of the cylinder. The eduction-pipe branches oſf at 2, and goe down to the hot well, where it turns up, and is covered vith a valve. In the section may be observed an upright pipe 4, 4, which goes through the head oſ the hoiler, and reaches to within a ſew inches of its bottomm This pipe is called the ſeeder, and rises about three or four feet above the boiler. It is open at both ends, and has a branch 38, communicating with the bottom of the cup 5, immediately above the metal valve, and also a few inches below the level oſ the entry 2 of the eduction-pipe. This communicating branch has a cock by which its passage may be diminished at pleasuree Now suppose the steam in the boiler to be very strong, it will cause the boiling water to rise in the feeding-pipe above 3, and coming along this branch, to rise also in the cup 5, and run over. But the height of this cup above the surface of the water in the hoiler is such, that the steam is never strong enough to produce this effect. Thereſore, on the contrary, any water that may be in the 8 cup 5 will run off by the branch 3, and go down into the boiler by the feeding pipe. 26. These things being understood, let us suppose a quantity oſ injected water lyiug at the bottom of the cylinder. It will run into the eduction-pipe, fill the crooked branch, and open the valve in the bottom of the cup, (its weight being supported by a wire hanging from a slender spring,) and it vill fill the cup to the level of the entry 2 of the æduction-pipe, and will then flow along 3, and supply the boiler by the feeder 4, 2 What more water runs in will now go along the eduction-pipe 2, 2, to the hot well. By properly adjusting the cock on the branch S, 3, the boiler may be supplied as fast as the waste in steam requires. This is a most ingenious contrivance, and does great honour to Mr Beighton. It is not, however, of very great importance. The small quantity which the boiler requires may be immediately taken even from a cold cistern, without much diminishing the production of steam; for the quantity of heat necessary for raising the sensible heat of cold water to the boiling temperature is amall, when compared with the quantity of heat which must then be combined vith it in order to convert the water into steam. For the heat expended in boiling off a cubic foot of water is about six times as much as would bring it to a boiling heat from the temperature of 55 It has, however, the advantage oſ being purged of air; and when an engine must derive all its supplies from pit water, the water from the eduction- pipe is vastly preſerable to that from the top of the cylinder. We may here observe, that many writers (among them the Abbè Bossut), in their descriptions oſ the steam-engine, have drawn the branch of communication 3, from the feeding-pipe to a part oſ the crooked pipe I, lying below the valve in the cup 5. But this is quite erroneous; for, in this case, vhen the injection is made into the cylinder, and a vacuum produced, the water from the boiler would immediately rush up through the pipes 4, 8, and spout up into the cylinder: so would the external air coming in at the top of the feeder. 27. This contrivance has also enabled us to - some judgment of the internal state of the engine during the performance. Mr Beighton paid a minute attention to the situation of the water in the feeders and eduction-pipe of an engine, which seems to have been one of the best which had then been erected. It was liſting a column of water hose weight was ſour-sevenths of the pressure of the air on its piston, and made I6 strokes, of six feet ench, in a minute. This is acknowledged by all to be a very great performance of an engine of this ſorm. He concluded that the elasticity of the steam in the cylinder was never more than onetenth greater or less than the elasticity of the air. The water in the ſeeder never rose more than three feet and a half above the surſace of the boiling water, even though it was now lighter by one-twentieth than cold water. The eduction-pipe was only ſour feet and a half long (vertically), and yet it always discharged the injection water completely, and allowed some to pass into the ſeeder. This could not be if the steam was much more than one-tenth veaker than air. By grasping this pipe in his hand during the rise of the piston, he could guess very well whereabouts the surſace of the hot water in it rested during the motion, and he never found it supported so high as four feet. Therefore the steam in the cylinder had at least eight-ninths oſ the elasticity of the air. Mr Buat, in his examination of an engine which is erected at Montrelaix, in France, by an English engineer, and has always been considered as the pattern in that country, finds it necessary to suppose a In s0 ſar as regards the load; but were we furnished with ſacts to judge oſ its consumption oſ steam compared with the work done, we should undoubtedlz ſind ĩt very deſective when compared with others more lightly Ipaded, and in other respecis equally well constructed. W. much greater variation in the strengih of the steam, and Bays, that it must have been one-fiſth stronger and oneſiſth weaker than common air. But this engine has not been nearly so perſect. Its liſt was not more than one- half of the pressure oſ the atmosphere, and it made but nine strokes in a minute.At V is a valve covering the mouth of a small pipe, and surrounded with a cup containing water to keep it air-tight. This allos the air to escape vhich had been extricated ſrom the water oſ last injection. It is driven out by the first strong puſf of steam which is admitted into the cylinder, and makes a noise in its exit. The valve is thereſore called the sniſting-valve. To finish our description, we observe, that besides the naſety-valve 9 (called the PUPFET-CLACK), which is loaded with about threæ pounds on the square inch (though the engine will work very ell with a load of one or to pounds), there is another DISCHARGER I0, having a clack at its extremity supported by a cord. Its use is to discharge the steam without doors, when the machine gives over working. There is also a pipe SI near the bottom of the boiler, by which it may be emptied when it needs repairs or cleansing. There are two small pipes 11, and 12, with cocks, eallel 6AGE-PIPESE. The first descends to within two inches of the surſace of the water in the boiler, and the second goes about two inches below that surface If both cocks emit steam, the water is too low, and requires a recruit. If neither give steam, iĩt is too high, and there is not suſficient room above it for a collection of steam. Lastly, there is a filling pipe Q, by which the boiler may be ſilled when the machine is to be set to work. 28. The engine has continued in this form for many years. The only remarkable change introduced has been the manner of placing the boiler. It is no longer placed below the cylinder, but at one side, and the steam is introduced by a pipe ſrom the top of the boiler into a flat box immediately below the cylinder. The use of this box is merely to lodge the regulator, and give room for its motions. This has been a very considerable improvement. It has greatly reduced the height of the building. This was ſormerly a tower. The wall which supported the beam could hardly be built with sufficient strength for withstanding the violent shocks which were repeated without ceasing; and the buildings seldom lasted more than a very ſew yeurs. But the boiler is now set up in an adjoining shed, and the gudgeons of the main beam rest on the top of upright posts, which are framed into the joists which support the cylinder. Thus the whole moving purts of the machine are contained in one compact frame of carpentry, and have little or no connection with the slight walls of the building, which is merely a case to hold the machine, and protect it from the weather. 90. It is now time to enquire what is to be expected from this machine, and to ascertain the most advantageous proportion between the moving power and the load that is to be laid on the machine. It may be considered as a great pulley, and is indeed sometimes 50 constructed, the arches at the enda of the working-beam being completed to a circle It must be unequally loaded that it may move. It is londed, during the working-stroke, by the pressure of the atmosphere on the side of the cylinder, and by the column of water to be raised and the pump-gear on the pump side.During the returning stroke it is loaded, on the side of the cylinder, by a small part of the atmospheric pressure, and on the pump side by the pump-gear acting as a counter weight. The load during the working stroke must therefore consist of the column of water to be raised and this counter-weight. The performance of the machine is to be measured only by the quantity of water raised in a given time to a given height. It varies, thereſore, in the joint proportion of the veight of the column of water in the pumps, and the num- ber of strokes made by the machine in a minute. Each stroke consisis oſ two parts, vhich we have called the working and the returning-stroke. It does not, thereſore, depend simply on the velocity of the working-stroke and the quantity of water raised by it. If this were all that is to be attended to, ve know that the weight of the column of water should be nearly ſths of the pressure of the atmosphere, this being the proportion which gives the maximum in the common pulley. But the time of the returning- stroke is a necessary part oſ the whole time elapsed, and thereſore the velocity of the returning-stroke equally merits attention. This is regulated by the counter-weight. The number of strokes per minute does not give an immediate proof of the goodness of the engine. A small load of water and a great counter-weight will ensure this, because these conditions will produce a brisk motion in both directions.The proper adjustment of the pressure of the atmosphere on the piston, the column oſ water to be raised, and the counter-weight, is a problem of very great diſficulty; and mathematicians have not turned much of their attention to the subject, although it is certainly a very interesting question. 30. Mr Bossut has solved it very shortly and simply, upon this supposition, that the working and returning stroke should be made in equal times. This, indeed, is generally aimed at in the erection oſ these machines, and they are not reckoned to be well arranged iſ it be otherwise. We doubt ofſ the propriety oſ the maxim. Supposing, however, this o æ I ſeel myselſ perſectly at a loss how to correct articles 30, 31, 52, 339, 54, 35, 56, and 57, as they involve algebraic calculations which eem in a great degree unnecessary, as is acknowledged in art. 43, being founded on principles not suſficiently known to be subjected to rule; but as theJ contain much ingenious reasoning, and may lead to the ſormation oſ more correct ſormulæ, I have not considered myselſ at liberty to alter them, but have addud notes, currecting some oſ the ſacts and s)me purt oſ the rensoning. W. VOL. II. F condition ſor the present, we may compute the loadings of the two ends of the beam as follows: Let  be the length of the inner arm of the working-beam, or that by which the great piston is supported. Let b be the outer arm carrying the pump-rods, and let W be a weight equivalent to all the load which is laid on the machine. Let c be the area of the piston; let H be the height of a column of water, having  for its buse, and being equal in weight to the pressure exerted by the steam on the under side of the piston; and let h be the pressure of the atmosphere on the same aren, or the height of a column of water of equal weight. It is evident that both strokes will be performed in equal times, iſh c? aW ĩ be equal to AH) c a+W b. The fſirst of these quantities is the energy of the machine during the working-stroke, and the second expresses the similar energy during the returning-stroke. This equaQhdA- iH /* aſ©ehH) c a If we 2b u%q55 suppose the arms of the lever equal and H=n€, we have tion give us W v=L, that is, the whole weight oſ the outer end of the beam should be halſ the pressure of the air on the great piston. This is nearly the usual practice, and the engineers express it by saying, that the engine is loaded with seven or eight pounds on the square inch. This has been found to be nearly the most advantageous load. 31. This way of expressing the matter would do well enough, if the maxim were not founded on erroneous notions which hinder us from seeing the state oſ the machine, and the circumstances on which its improvement depends. The piston bears a pressure of I5 pounds, it is said, on the square inch, if the vacuum below it be perſectt But o produce a perfect cacuum, it will appear by the tables of elusticities we have given (see STEAM, art. 22, 23), that the cylinder and its contents must be cooled down below 32° each stroke, und were this practicable, the consumption of steum in re-heating the cylinder would be enormous; it has therefore been found advisable in practice to throw in no more injection water than will produce a cacuum sufficient to enable the engine to raise au load of from sir to seven pounds on the square inch, besides all friction, and other ineffective burthens; and it has been found that, under the lesser load above stated, the engines consumed less steum in proportion to the worl done, than under the greater one. 32. This equation by Mr Bossut is moreover essentially faulty in another respect. The W in the first member is not the suame with the W in the second. In the first, it is the column of water to be raised, together with the counterweight. In the second, ĩt is the counter-weight only. Nor is the quantity H the same in both cases, as is most evident. The proper equation ſor ensuring the equal duration of the two strokes may be had in the ſollowing manner: Let it be determined by experiment what portion of the atmospheric pressure is exerted on the great piston during its descent. This depends on the remuining elasticity of the stenm. Suppose it 4ths: this we may express by a h, a being ææ5ths. Let it also be determined by experiment vhat portion of the atmospherie pressure on the piston remains unbalanced by the steam below it during its ascent. Suppose this æ5th, we may express this by b h. Then let W be the weight of the column of water to be raised, and c the counter-weight. Then, if the arms of the beam are equal, we have the energy during the workingstroke / a W—c, and during the returning-stroke it is / c2& h. Therefore cb hæ=au WV—/c; and ænſa+ſW ix : which, on the above supposition of the values of a and b, gives us J . We shall make some use oſ this equation aſterwards; but it aſfords us no inform- ation concerning the most advantageous proportion oſ à and W, which is the material point.* 33. We must consider this matter in another way: And that we may not involve ourselves in unnecessary diſſiculties, let us make the case as simple as possible, and suppose the arms of the working-beam to be of equal length. We shall first consider the adjustment oſ things at the outer end of the beam. 34. Since the sole use oſ the steam is to give room ſor the nction of the atmospheric pressure by its rapid condensibility, it is admitted into the cylinder only to allow the piston to rise again, but without giving it any impulse. The pump- rods must thereſore be returned to the bottom of the working-barrels by means of a preponderancy at the outer end of the beam. It may be the weight of the pump-rods themselves, or may be considered as making part of this weight. A weight at the end of the beam will not operate on the rods which are suspended there by chains, and it must thereſore be attached to the rods themselves, but above their respective pump- barrels, so that it may not lose part oſ its eſſicacy by immersion in the waterr. We may consider the whole under the notion of the pump-gear, and call it 7. Its oſſice is to depress the pump-rods with suſſi» Both in this equation and in that preceding it, which are taken ſrom the Abbè Bossut, an error oſ great consequence has been committed; ſor it is well known ſhat iſ the working and returning strokes ure to be perſormed in equal times, the energy or accelerative ſorce in the first must be to that in the second, as the inertia oſ the matter to be moved in the ſormer case is ſo that in the latter. It is said that the energy in the first is a W—e, and in the latter b h. The inertia in the ſormer case is us W;c, in the latter ms c only (ſor the inertia oſ ithe working- beam, piston, &e. ĩs leſt entirely out oſ the question; thereſore the proportion is a W—: cb h=W4-c: c; and the equation to answer the problem vill thereſore be a iW c V F h- which letting d = yr d, zives e Vt 3 W-pa* +4, according as d is ſound to be a plus or minus quantity. I. S. cient velocity, by overcoming the resistances arising from the following causes. l. From the inertia oſ the beams and all the parts of the npparatus which are in motion during the descent of the pump-rods. 2. From the loss of weight sustained by the immersion of the pump- rods in water. 8. From the friction of all the pistons, and the weight of the plug-frame. 4. From the resistance to the piston's motion, arising from the velocity which must be generated in the water in passing through the descending pistons, or buckets of the pumps. The sum of all these resistances is equal to the pressure of some weight (as yet unknown), which we may call m. When the pump-rods are brought up again, they bring along with them a column of water, whose weight we may e-ll u. It is evident that the load which must be overcome by the pressure of the atmosphere on the steam-piston consists of w and . Let this load be called L, and the pressure oſ the air be called P. If p be æ L, no water vill be raised; if ꝑ be æ o, the rods vill not descend: thereſore there is some intermediate value of p which will produce the greatest effect. In order to discover this, let g be the ſall of a heavy body in a second. The descending mass is p: but it does not descend with its ſull weight; because it is overcoming a set of resistances which are equivalent o a weight m, and the moving ſorce is 9m. In order io discover the space through which the rods will descend in a second, vhen urged by the fore pnm (supposed constant, notwithstanding the increase of velocity, and consequently of m), we must institute this m) proportion ꝓ: pm=g: A The fourth term of this analogy is the space required. Let t be the whole time of the descent in seconds. Then gſr—m) tęſ r: ræ  g(p—m) This last term is the whole descent or length of the stroke accomplished in the time ſ. The weight of the column of water, which has now got above the piston, or bucket, is vu,  Lp. This must be liſted inthe nexi working-stroke through the space ? æ (0-m). Thereſore the perſormance of the engine must be v g (p/m) (L/p) P That this may be the greatest possible, we must consider p as the variable quantity, and make the fluxion oſ the fraction s-. This will be ſound to give us p=V Tm; that is, the counter- weight or preponderancy oſ the outer end oſ the beam is =VTH. This gives us a method of determining m experimentally. We can discover by actual measurement the quantity L in any engine, it being equal to the unbalanced weights on the beam and the weight of the water in the pumps. Then r m=ær Also we have the weight oſ the column of water  Lp, =LLLm When, thereſore, we have determined the lond which is to be on the outer end of the beam during the working-stroke, it must be distributed into two parts, which have the proportion of VTũ to LTm. The first is the counterweight, and the second is the weight of the column oſ water. IF m is a fraction oſ L, such as an aliquot part of it; that is, iſ L L L LL  ,  &. I 2 3 5 The circumstance which is commonly obtruded on us by local considerations is the quantity of water, and the depth from which it is to be raised; that is, w; and iĩt will be convenient to determine every thing in conformity to this. We saw that v / LVT m This gives us / m m LæDV un+ q +75 + u, and the counter-weight / m m 35. Having thus ascertained that distribution oſ the load on the outer end of the beam which produces the greatest eſfect, ve come now to consider what proportion of moving force we must apply, so that it may be employed to the best advantage, or so that any expence of power may produce the greatest performance. It will be 50 much the greater as the work done is greater, and the power empPloyed is less  and will thereſore be properly measured by the quotient of the work done divided by the power employed. The work immediately done is the lifting up the weight L. In order to accomplish this, we must employ a pressure P, which is greater than L. Let it beæLtv; also Iet s be the length of the stroke. If the mass L were urged along the space s by the ſorce L45, it would acquire a certain velocity, which we may express by V5; but it is impelled only by the force 4, the rest of P being employed in balancing L. The velocities which diſferent forces generate by impelling a body along the sume spuce are as the square roots oſ the ſorces. There—nx 5 ſore VL55: V y 5 V 5: Vv5 The ſourth term oſ this i analogy expresses the velocity oſ the piston at the ond of the stroke. The quantity of motion produced will be had by multiplying this velocity by the mass L. This gives LxV V L+24, gives us the measure of the perſormance; namely, LV5ꝶ : T}VT⸗ That this may be a maximum, consider 5 as the variable quantity, and make the ſluxion of this formula o. This and this divided by the power expended, or by L will give us y=7Now PL+, L+Læi L. Thereſore the whole load on the outer end of the beam, consisting of the water and the counter-weight, must be two-thirds oſ the pressure of the atmosphere on the steam- piston. We have here supposed that the expenditure is the atmospheric pressure; und so it is iſ we consider it mechanically. But the expenditure of which we are sensible, and which we are anxious to employ to the best advantage, is fuel. Supposing this to be employed with the same judgement in all cases, we ore almost entitled, by what we know of the production of steam, to say that the stenm produced is proportional to the ſuel expended. But the steam requisite for merely filling the cylinder is proportional to the area oſ the piston, and therefore to the atmospheric pressure. The result of our investigation thereſore is still just; but the steam wasted by condensation on the sides of the eylinder does not follow this ratio, and this is more than vhat is necessary ſor merely filling it. This deranges our calculations, and is in ſavour of large cylinders; but the degree in which this circumstance affects the working of the engine has not heen accurately determined. It must be remarked, that in the preceding investigation we introduced a quantity m to express the resistances to the motion of the engine. This was done in order to avoid a very troublesome investigation. The resistances are oſ such a nature as to vary with the velocity, and most of them as the square of the velocity. This is the case with the resistance arising from the motion of the water through the pistons of the pumps, and that arising from the ſrietion in the long liſt during the working-stroke Had we taken the direct method, which is similar to the determination of the motion through a medium which resists in the duplicate ratio oſ the velocity, ve must have used a very intricate exponential calculus, which few of our readers would have the patience to look at. But the greatest part oſ the quantity m supposes a motion already known, and its determination depends on this motion. We must now show how its different component parts may be computed. 3G. First, What arises from the inertia of the moving parts is by far the most considerable portion of it. To obtain it, ve must find a quantity of matter which, when placed at the end of the beam, ill have the same momentum of inertia with that of the whole moving parts in their natural placess. Therefore (in the returning-stroke) add together the weight of the great piston with its rod and chains; the pit pump-rods, chains, and any weight that is attached to them; the arch-heads and iron-work at the ends of the beam, and ths of the weight of the beam it-  u In practice, it is a pretty general maxim, a: has been said, to load thy ongines with a column oſ water equal to about oue halſ oſ the atmospheric pressure; but by puying attention to the temperature which would produce a degree oſ vacoum equal to that load and the necessary counter- weight, it will appear that lighter loads will prove more advantageous in point of saring of ſuel, W. - self; also the plug-beam with its arch-head and chain, multiplied by the square of its distance from the axis, and divided by the square of half the length of the beam; also the jack-head pump-rod, chain, and arch-head, multiplied by the square of its distance from the axis, and divided by the square of the half length of the beam. These articles added into one sum may be called M, and may be supposed to move with the velocity oſ the end of the beam. Suppose this beam to have made a six-foot stroke in two seconds, vith an uniformly accelerated motion. In one second it would have moved 13 feet, and would have acquired the velocity of three feet per second. But in one second gravity would have produced a velocity oſ 52 feet in the same mass. Thereſore the accelerating force, which has produced the velocity of three ſeet, is nearly 44th of the weight. Thereſore M is the first constituent of m in the above investigation. If the observed velocity is greater or lesa than three feet per second, this value must be inereased or diminished in the same proportion. The second cause of resistance, viz. the immersion oſ the pump-rods in water, is easily computed, being the weight of the water which they displace. The third causo, the friction of the pistons, &eæ. is almost insignificant, and must be discovered by experiment. The fourth cause depends on the strueture of the pumps These pumps, when made of a proper strength, can hardly have the perforation of the piston or bucket more than a fourth part of the area of the working-barrel; and the velocity with which the water passes through it is increased at least ſour times by the contraction. The velocity of the water is therefore five times greater than that of the piston. A piston I2 inches diameter, and moving one foot per second, meets with a resistance equal to 20 pounds; and this increases as the square of the dinmeter and as the square oſ the velocity. If the whole depth oſ the pit be 6 . divided into several liſts, this resistance must be multiplied by the number of liſts, because it obtains in each pump. Thus we make up the value of m; and we must acknowledge that the method is still indirect, because it supposes the velocity to be known. We may obtain it more easily in another way, but still with this circumstance of being indirect We found that p was equal to V L m, and consequently mæ Nov in any engine L and ꝓ can always be had; and unless » deviates greatly from the proportion which we determined to be the best, the value of m thus obtained will not be very erroneous. 37. It was farther presumed in this investigation, that the motions both up and down were uniſormly accelerated; but this cannot be the case when the resistances increase with the velocity. This circumstance makes very little change in the working-stroke, and thereſore the theorem which determines the best relation of P to L may be conſided in. The resistances which vary with the velocity in this case are a mere trifle when ecompared with the moving power y. These resistances are, Ist, The strangling of the water at the entry and at the standing valve of each pump: This is about 37 pounds for a pump 12 inches dinmeter, and the velocity of one foot per secoud, inereasing in the duplieate ratio of the diameter and velocity. And, 2d, The ſriction of the water along the whole liſt: This for a pump of the same size and with the same velocity, liſting 20 fathoms, is only about 23 pounds, and varies in the simple proportion of the diameter and the depth, and in the duplicate proportion of the velocity. The resistance arising from inertia is greater than in the returning-stroke, because the M in this case must contain the momentum of the water both of the pit-pumps and the jackhead-pump: but this part of the resistance does not affect the uniſorm acceleration. We may thereſore conſide in the propriety of the ſormula y= E And we may obtain the velocity oſ thia stroke at the end of a sccond, with great accuracy, as ſollows. Let 2 g2 be the velocity communicated by gravity in a second, and :he velocity at the end oſ the first second of the steam-piston's descent will be somewhat less than 0e g; where M expresses the inertia of all the parts which are in motion during the descent of the steam-piston, and thereſore includes L. Compute the two resistances just mentioned ſor this velocity. Call this r. Then q2 vill give another velocity infinitely near the truth. But the case is very diſſerent in the returning-stroke, and the proper ratio of ꝑ to L is not ascertained with the same certainty; for the moving force p is not so great in proportion to the resistance m; and thereſore the acceleration of the motion is considerably affected by it, and the motion itself is considerably retarded, and in a very moderate time it becomes sensibly uniſorm; for it is precisely similar to the motion of a heavy body falling through the air, and may be determined in the manner laid dovn in the article  Resistance of Fluids, viz. by an exponential calculus. We shall content ourselves here with saying, that the resistances in the present case are so great that the motion would be to all sense uniform before the pistons have descended one-third of their stroke, even although there were no other circumstance to affect it. 38. But this motion is aſfeeted by a circumstance quite unconnected with any thing yet considered, depending on conditions not mechanical, and so uncertain, that we are not yet able to ascertain them with any precision; yet they are of the utmost importance to the good performance and improvement of the engine, and thereſore deserve a partieular consideration. The counter- weight has not only to push down the pump-  —u—_— rods, but also to drag up the great piston. This it cannot do unless the steam be admitted into the eylinder. If the steam be no stronger than common air, it cannot enter the cylinder except in consequence oſ the piston's being dragged up. If common air were admitted into the cylinder, some force would be required to drag up the piston, in the same manner as it is required to draw up the piston of a common syringe; ſor the air would rush through the small entry oſ the cylinder in the same manner as through the small noæzle of the syringe. Some part of the atmospheric pressure is employed in driving in the air with suſſicient velocity to fill the syringe, and it is only with the remainder that the admitted air presses on the under surſace of the syringe. Thereſore some of the atmospheric pressure on its upper surface is not balanced. This is ſelt by the hand which draws it up. The same thing must happen in the steamengine, and some part oſ the counter-weight is expended in dravwing up the steam-piston. We could tell how much is thus expended if we knew the density of the steam; for this would tell us the velocity with which its elasticity would cause it to fill the cylinder. But all this is on the supposition that there is an unbounded supply of steam of undiminishod elasticity. This is by no means the case. Immediately before opening the steam-cock, the steam was issuing through the saſety-valve and all the crevices in the top oſ the boiler, and (in good engines) was about &th stronger or more elastic than air. This had been gathering during something more than the descent oſ the piston, viz. in about three seconds. The piston rises to the top in about two seconds; therefore about twice and a half as much steam as fills the dome of the boiler is now shared between the boiler and cylinder. The dome is commonly ahout six times more capacious than the cylinder. If thereſore no steam is condensed in the cylinder, the density of the steam, when the piston has reached the top, must be about 75ths of its ſormer density, and still more elustic than air. But as much steam is condensed by the cold eylinder, its elasticity must be less than thiss We cannot tell how much less, both because we do not know how much is thus condensed, and because, by this diminution of its pressure on the surſace of the hoiling water, ĩt must be more copiously produced in the boiler; but an uttentive observation of the engine will give us some information. The moment the steam-cock is opencd we have a strong puſſ of steam through the snifiin⸗valve. At this time, thereſore, it is still more elastic thun air; but aſter this, the sniſting-valve remains shut during the whole rise of the piston, and no steam any longer iscues throu-h the safety-valve or crevices; nay, the whole dome of the boiler may be observed to sink. 39. These ſacts give abundant prooſ that the elasticity of the steam during the ascent of the piston is greatly diminished, and thereſore much of the counter-weight is expended in dragging up the steam-piston in opposition to the unbalanced part of the atmospheric pressuree The motion of the returning-stroke is thereſore so much deranged by this ſoreign and inappreciated circumstance, that it would have been quite useless to engage in the intricatæe exponential investigation, and we must sit down contented with a less perfect adjustment of the counterweight and weight of waterAny person who attends to the motion of a steam-engine will perceive that the descent of the pump-rods is so ſar from being accelerated, that it is nearly uniſorm, and frequently it is sensibly retarded towards the end. We learn by the way, that it is of the utmost importance not only to have a quick production of stenm, but also a very capacious dome, or empty space nbove the water in the boiler. In engines where this space was but four or five times the capacity of the cylinder, we have always observed a very sensible check given to the descent of the pump-rods after having made half their stroke. This obliges us to employ a greater counter-weight, which diminishes the column of water, or retards the working-stroke; it also obliges us to employ a stronger steam; at the risk of bursting the boiler, and increases the expence of fuel 40. It would be a most desirable thing to get an exact Enovledge of the elasticity of the steam in the cylinder; and this is by no means diſficult. Take a long glass tube exactly calibered, and close at the ſarther endd Put a small drop of some coloured fluid into it, so as to stand at the middle nearlyDLet it be placed in a long box filled with water to keep it of a constant temperature. Let the open end communicate with the cylinder, with a cock between. The moment the steam-cock is opened, open the cock of this instrument. The drop will be pushed towards the close end of the tube, while the steam in the cylinder is more elastic than the air, and ĩt will be drawn the other way vhile it is less elastic, and, by a scale properly adapted to it, the elusticity of the steam corresponding to every position of the piston may be discoveredl. The same thing may be done more accurately by a barometer properly constructed, so as to prevent the oscillations of the mercury. 41. It is equally necessary to know the state of the cylinder during the descent of the steam-pistonn. We have hitherto supposed P to be the full pressure of the atmosphere on the area of the piston, supposing the vacuum below it to be complete. But the inspection of our table of elasticity shews that this can never be the case, because the cylinder is always of a temperature far above 32. We have made many attempts to discover its temperaturee We have employed a thermometer in close contact with the side of the cylinder, which soon acquired a steady temperature: this was never less than 145. We have kept a thermometer in the water which lies on the piston: this never sunk below 1350. It is probable that the cylinder within may be cooled somewhat lower; but for this opinion we cannot give any very satisſactory reason. Suppose it cooled down to 120, this will leave an elasticity which would support three inches of mercury. We cannot think, thereſore, that the unbalanced pressure of the atmosphere exceeds that oſ 27 inches of mercury, which is about 13] pounds on a square inch, or 103 on a circular inch. Aud this is the value which we should employ in the equation PL+4. This question may be decided in the same way as the other, by a barometer connected with the inside of the cylinder.* And thus we shall learn the state of the moving forces in every moment of the perſormance, and the machine will then be as open to our examination as any water or horse mill; and till this be done, or something equivalent, we can only guess at what the machine is actually perſorming, and we cannot tell in what particulars we can lend it a helping handl. We are inſormed that Messrs Watt and Boulton have maie this addition to some oſ their engines; and ve are persunded that, from the information which they have derived from it, they have been enabled to make the curious improvements from which they have acquired so much reputation and profit. 42. There is a circumstance of which we have as yet taken no notice, viz. the quantity of cold water injected. Here we conſess ourselves unable to give any precise instructions. It is clear at first sight that no more than iĩs absolutely necessary should be injected. It must generally be supplied by the engine, and this expends part of its power. An excess is much more hurtſul by cooling the cylinder and piston too much, and therefore wasting steam during the next rise of the piston. But the determination of the proper quantity requires a knowledge, which we By exumining the hot water which issues ſfrom the eduction-pipe oſ several oſf Newcomen's engines, its heat was ſound to vary ſrom 142 to 1740, according to the load and other circumstances oſ the engine; and the hieat of the vater discharged at that pipe may be taken as ꝑ ſuir indication oſ the internal heat oſ the cylinder.” W. have not yet acquired, of the quantity oſ heat contained in the steam in a latent form. As much water must he injected as will absorb all this without rising near to the boiling temperature. But it is of much more importance to know how far we may cool the cylinder with advantage; that is, when vill the loss of steam, during the next rise oſ the piston, compensate for the diminution of its elasticity during its present descent? Our table of elasticities shows us, that by cooling the cylinder to 1209, e still leave an elasticity equal to one-tenth of the whole power of the engine; if we cool ĩt only to 140, we leave an elasticity of one-fiſth; if we cool it to a blood-heat, we leave an elasticity of onetwentieth. It is extremely diſficult to choose among these varieties. Experience, however, informs us, that the best engines are those which use the smallest quantities of injection-water. Mr Watt's observations, by means of the barometer, must have given him much valuable information in this particular, and we hope that he will not withhold them from the public. 43. We have gone thus ſor in the examination, in order seemingly to ascertain the motion of the engine when loaded and balanced in any known manner, and in order to discover that proportion between the moving power and the load which will produce the greatest quantity of work. The result has been very unsatisſactory, because the computation of the returning-stroke is acknowledged to be beyond our abilities. But it has given us the opportunity of directing the readers attention to the leading circumstances in this enquiry. By knowing the internal state of the cylinder in machines of very diſſerent goodness, we learn the connection between the state of the steam and the performance of the machine; and it is very possible that the result of a full examination may be, that in situations where fuel is expensive, it may be proper to employ a weak steam which vill expend less fuel, although less work is perſormvoL. II. c ed by it. We shall see this conſirmed in the clearest manner in some particular employments of the new engines invented by Watt and Boulton. In the mean time, we see that the equation which we gove ſrom the celebrated Abbẽ Bossut (art. 30), is in every respect erroneous, even for the purpose which he had in viev. We also see that the equation which we substituted in its place (art. 32), and which was intended for determining that proportion between the counter-weight and the moving force, and the load which would render the working-stroke and returning-stroke of equal duration, is also erroneous, because these two motions are extremely different in kind, the one being nearly uniſorm, and the other nearly uniformly aceelerated. This being supposed true, it should follow that the counter-weight should be reduced to one half; and we have ſound this to be very nearly true in some good engines which we have examined. 44. We shall add but one observation more on this head. The practical engineers have almost made it a maxim, that the two motions are of equal duration. But the only reas0m which we have henrd for the maxim is, that it is awkward to see an engine go otherwise. But we doubt exceedingly the truth of this maxim, and, without being nble to give any accurate determination, we think that the engine ill do more work iſ the working-stroke be made slower than the retuming-stroke. Suppose the engine s construeted that they are made in equal times; an addition to the counter-weight will accelerate the returningstroke and retard the working- stroke. But as the counterweight is but small in proportion to the unbalanced portion oſ the atmospheric pressure, which is the moving ſorce of the machine, it is evident that this addition to the counterweight must bear a much greater proportion to the counterweight than it does to the moving ſorce, and must therefore accelerate the returning-stroke much more than it retards the working-stroke, and the time oſ both strokes taken togethor must be diminished by this addition and the performance oſ the machine improved; and this must be the case as long as the machine is not extravagantly loaded. It is needless to engage more decply in scientiſic calculations in a subject where so many of the data are so very imperſectly understood. 45. Beſore quitting this machine, it will not be amiss to give some enasy rules, sanctioned by successſul practice, for computing its performance. These will enable any artist, who can go through simple calculations, to suit the size of his engine to the task which it is to perſorm. The circumstance on which the whole computation must be founded is the quantity of water which must be dravn in a minute, and the depth of the mine; and the performaunce which may be expected from a good engine, is at least 12 strokes per minute of six feet each, working against a column of water whose weight is equal to half of the atmospheric pressure on the steam-piston, or rather to 7.54 pounds on every square inch of its surface. It is most convenient to estimate the quantity of water in cubic ſfeet, or its weight in pounds, recollecting that a cubic foot oſ water weighs 621 pounds. The depth oſ the pit is usually reckoned in fathoms of six ſeet, and the diameter of the cylinder and pump is usually reckoned in inches.  æ ſt is now generally agreed, that an engine to work well should make the acting stroke in less time than the returning one, or, in the engine-mans term, should go out slower than it comes in; ſor, iſ the buckets oſ the pumps are deſective, as is oſten the case, the quicker the stroke is taken, the les water vill he lost, and the sloer the returning-stroke is, the throttling caused by the smallness oſ the apertures in the bucket oſ the pump ill cause the less resistance to its descent, Let Q be the quantity of water to be drawn per minute in cubical feet, and f the depth of the mine in fathoms; let c be the diameter of the cylinder, and p that of the pump; and let us suppose the arms of the beam to be of equal length. Ist, To find the diameter of the pump, the area of the QI:The length of the column drawn in one minute is 12 times õ, or 72 feet, and 72 30.7854 _ cubical feet, or p* 0.3997 cubical feet. This must be equal to Q3 piston in square feet is p* x thereſore. its solid contents is  x thereſore 2- must be or nearly Q x 2l. Hence Q ũ.3097 3997 this practical rule: Multiply the cubio feet of water which must be drawn in a minute by 2 , and extract the square root of the product: this will be the diameter of the pump in inches. Thus suppose that 58 cubic feet must be drawn every minute; 58 multiplied by 23 gives 145, of which the square root is 12, which is the required diameter oſ the pump. 2. To ſind the proper diameter of the cylinder. The piston is to be loaded with 7.64 pounds on every square inch. This is equivalent to six pounds on a cicular inch very nearly. The weight of a cylinder of water an inch in diameter and a fathom in height is 2⸗ Pounds, or nearly two pounds. Hence it ſollows that 6 c must be made equal to 2 fp?, and that  i oſ?. 23 Hence the following rule: Multiply the square of the diameter of the pump-piston (ſound as above) by the fathoms of liſi, and divide the product by 3; the square root oſ the quotient is the diameter of the cylinder. Suppose the pit to which the foregoing pump is to be Q/ x 144 3 which the square root is 34 inches very nearly. This engine constructed with care will certainly do the work. Whatever is the load of water proposed for the engine, let 10 be the pounds on every circular inch of the steamapplied is 24 fathoms deep; then gives 1152, of . 2 : iston, and make c? /p* X sf and the square root will be P P m q the diameter of the steam-piston in inches. To free the practical engineer as much as possible ſfrom all trouble of caleulation, we subjoin the following Table of the Dimensions and Power of the Steum- Engine, drawn up Mr Beighton in 1717, and fully verified by practice since that time. The measure is in English ale gallons of 282 cubic inches. 46. The ſirst part of the table gives the size oſ the pump suited to the growth of water. The second gives the size oſ the cylinder suited to the lond of water. If the depth is greater than ony in this table, tuke its ſourth part, and double the diameter of the cylinder. Thus, if 150 hogsheads are to be dravn in an hour ſrom ihe depth of 100 ſathoms, the last column of part first gives ſor 149.40 a pump oſ seven inches bore. In a line with this, under the depth of 50 yards, which is one-fourth of 100 ſathoms, we ſind 204, the double of which is 41 inches for the diameter oſ the cylinder. It is almost impossible to give a general rule for strokes of diſſerent lengths, &e., but one who proſesses the ability to erect an engine, should surely know as much arithmetic as vill accommodate the rule now given to any length of stroke. We venture to sny, that no ordinary engineer can tell à priori the number per minute which an engine will give. We took twelve strokes oſ six feet ench ſor a standard, which a careſul engineer may easily accomplish, and which an employer has a right to expect, the engine being londed with water to half the pressure oſ the atmosphere: if the the load be less, there is some ſault; an improper counterweight, or too little boiler, or leaks, &c. &e. . Such is the state in which Newcomens stenm-engine had continued in use ſor GO years, neglected by the philosopher, although it is the most curious object which human ingenuity has yet offered to his contemplation, and abandoned to the efforts of the unlettered artist. Its use has been entirely confined to the raising of water. Mr Keane Fitzgerald, indeed, published, in the Philosophical Transactions in 1758, a method of converting its reciprocating motion into a continued rotatory motion by employing a combination of large-toothed wheels, and of maller rutchetuheels, worked by teeth upon the arch or sector of the great beum. One of these ratchet-wheels being put in motion by the ascent of the heam, and stunding still during its descent, when another ratchet-wheel is moved by an intervening heel in the same direction as the first, and thus the two communicate a continued rotative motion to the axis on which they are placed, vhich is thence transmitted by a large-toothed wheel to a smaller wheel or pinion, on the shaſt of which is a siy, to accumulate momentum, and a crank proposed to be applied to work ventilators, and to many other useful purposes. The fty, by accumulating in ilselſ the power of the machine during the time it was acted upon, would continue in motion, and urge forward the machinery whilst the steam-engine was going through its inactive returning-stroke. This will be the case, provided that the resistance exerted by the working-machine during the whole period of the working and returning-stroke of the steam- engine, together with the ſriction of both, does not exceed the whole pressure exerted by the steam-engine during its working-stroke; and provided that the momentum of the ſly, arising ſrom its great weight and velocity, be very great, so that the resistance of the work during one returningstroke of the steam-engine do not make any very sensible diminution of the velocity of the fly. This is evidently possible and easy. The fly may be made of any magnitude; and being exactly balanced round its axis, it will soon acquire any velocity consistent with the motion of the steam- engine. During the working- stroke of the engine it is uniformly accelerated, and by its acquired momentum it produces in the beam the movement of the returning-stroke; but in doing this, its momentum is shared with the inert matter of the steam-engine, and consequently its velocity diminished, but not entirely taken away. The next working-stroke, therefore, by pressing on it afresh, increases its remaining velocity by a quantity nearly equal to the whole that it acquired during the first strokee. We say nearly, but not quite equal, because the time of the second working-stroke must be shorter than that of the first, on account of the velocity already in the machine. In this manner the fly will be more and more accelerated every succeeding stroke, bocause the pressure of the engine during the working- stroke does more than restore to the fly the momentum which it lost in producing the returning movement of the steam-engine. Now suppose the working part of the machine to he added. The acceleration of the fly during ench working-stroke of the steam-engine vill be less than it was before, because the impelling pressure is now partly employed in driving the working-machine, and because the ſly ill lose more of its momentum during the returning-stroke of the steam- engine, part of it being expended in driving the working-machine. It is evident, thereſore, that a time will come when the successive augmentation of the ſly's velocity will cease; ſor, on the one hand, the continual acceleration diminishes the time of the next working-stroke, and therefore the time of action of the accelerating power. The acceleration must diminish in the same proportion; and, on the other hand, the resistance of the working-machine generally, though not always, increnses with its velocity. The acceleration ceases whenever the addition made to the momentum of the fly during a working-stroke of the stenm-engine is just equal to what it loses by driving the machine, and by producing the returning movement of the stenm-engine. 8. This must be acknowledged to be a very important addition to the engine, and though suſficiently obvious, it is ingenious, and requires considerable skill and address to make it effective.*  We do not recollect at present the date oſ this proposal oſ Mr Fitzgerald; but in 1781 the Abbẽ Arnal, cunon of Alais, in Langue doc, entertained a thought of the same kind, and proposed it ſor working lighters in the inland navigations; a scheme which has been successſully practised (we are told) in America. His brother, a major of engineers in the Austrian service, has curried the thing much ſarther, and applied it to manuſactures; and the Aulic Chamber oſ Mines at Vienna has patronised the project. (See Journal Encyclopedique, 1781.) But these schemes are long posterior to Mr Fitzgeralds putent, and are even later than the erection oſ several machines driven The movement of the working-machine, or mill of whatever kind, must be in some degree hobbling or unequal. But this may be made quite insensible, by making the fly exceedingly large, and disposing the greatest purt of its weight in the rim. By these means its nomentum may be made so great, that the whole force required ſor driving the mill and producing the returning movement oſ the engine, may bear a very small proportion to it. The diminution of its velocity will then be very trifling. No counter-weight is absolutely necessary here, because the returning movement is produced by the inertia of the fly. A counter-weight may, however, be employed, and should be employed, viz. as much as will produce the returning movement of the steam-engine. It will do this better than the same force accumulated in the fly; ſor this force must be accumulated in the ſly by the intervention of rubbing parts, by which some of it is lost; and it must be aſterwards returned to the engine with a similar loss. But, for the same renson, it would be improper to make the counter-weight also able to drive the mill during the returning stroke. 49. By this contrivance Mr Fitzgerald hoped to render the steom-engine of most extensive use; and he, or others associated with him, obtained a patent excluding all others from employing his invention. They also published proposuls for erecting mills of all kinds driven by steam-engines, and stated very ſairly their powers and their advantages. But their proposals do not scem to have acquired the confidence of the publie; for we do not know of any mill ever having been erected under this patent.* by steam-engines which have been erected by Messrs Watt and Boulton. We think it our duty to state these particulors, because it is very usual ſor our neighbours un ihe continent to assume the eredit oſ British inventions. Dr R. s  ſt would seem, ſrom Mr Fitzgerald's own account in the Philosophical Tronsactions, that he had made a model oſ it, but he doss not say it had been in actual use; nor is it likely, ſrom its extreme complexity and other deſects, 50. The great obstacle to this extensive use oſ the steamengine, is the prodigious expense oſ fuel. An engine having a cylinder of four ſeet diumeter, working night and day, consumes about 3400 chaldron (London) of good coals in a year. 51. This circumstance limits the use of steam-engines exceedingly. To draw water from coal-pits where they can be stocked with unsaleable emall coal, they are of universal employment: also for valuable mines, for supplying a great and vealthy city with water, and a few other purposes, where a great expense can be borne, they are very proper engines; but in a thousand cases, where their unlimited powers might be vastly serviceable, the enormous expense of fuel completely excludes them. We cannot doubt but that the attention of engineers was much directed to every thing that could promire a diminution of this expense. Every one had his particular nostrum for the construction of his ſfurnace, and some were undoubtedly more successſul than others. But science was not yet suſficiently advanced: It was not till Dr Black had made his beautiſul discovery of Intent heat, that we could know the intimate relation between the heat expended in boiling oſf a quantity of water and the quantity oſ stenm that is produced. Much about the time of this discovery, viz. 1763-4, Mr that, had it ever been curried into practice, the use oſ ĩit would have been persevered in. Upon an accurate seurch at the diſſerent oſfices, it does not appear that any patent was taken out by Fitzgerald, nor huve I any knowledge oſ the proposals mentioned in the text.  On the application oſ the crank to produce rotalive motions from the 2team-engine, I shall treat more ut length in describing the new engine.  Some imperſect and unsuccessſul attempts were made in the years 1767 and 1769, by Mr John Stewart, and Mr Dugæld Clarke, to derive a continued miative motion ſrom Newcomen's engine, to be æpplied to sugar- mills in Jamaica; and something oſ the kind was attempted at Hortley colliery, near Neweastle. The appuratus oſ all of them æppeam to lave been complex, liable to brealnges and derangements, and nòt suscentible oſ regulurity; in consequence oſ which these schemes vere, I believe, soon abandoned.? W: James Watt, established in Glasgow as a mathematical instrument maker, was emploed to repair a working model of the steam- engine which belonged to the philosophical apparatus of the university. Mr Watt was a person of a truly philosophical mind, eminently conversant in all branches of natural knowledge, and the friend of Dr Black. 50. In the course oſ these repairs, many curious facts in the production and condensation of steam occurred to him; and, among others, that remarkable fact which is always appealed to by Dr Black as the proof of the immense quantity of heat which is contained in a very minute quantity of water in the ſorm of elastic steam. When a quantity of water is heated several degrees above the boiling point in a close digester, if a hole be opened, the steam rushes out vith prodigious violence, and the heat of the remaining water is reduced, in the course of three or ſour seconds, to the boiling temperaturee. The water of the steam which has issued amounts only to a very fow ounces; and yet these have carried off with them the whole excess of heat from the water in the digester.* 53. Since then a certain quantity of steam contains so great a quantity of heat, it must expend a great quantity of When the digester was set upon a steady ſire ſor a given time, half an hour ſor instance, the steam being allowed to issue ſreely hy heeping the saſety-valve quite open, and the quantity oſ water evaporated in that timo being ascertained; iſ the digester was again placed on the ſire, and continued ſor an equal tſime with the saſety-valve shut, upon opening that valve a quantity oſ steam would issue with violence; and when the elasticity oſ the stcam issuing was reduced to that oſ the atmosphere, I ſound the quantity oſ water evaporated in these circumstances was apparently the same as had evaporated in an equal time when the valve was constantly open: From whence I concluded, that the quantities oſ water evaporated in any given time, were proportional to the quautity oſ heat which entered it et ca teris poribus lo the surſaces exposed to the ſire, and not io the surſaces exposed to the uir, as had been supposed, and as is the case where the air is the sole agent oſ evaporation in heats below boiling. (S8ee Dr Black's Lectures, articles Lutent Heat, and Improvements on ihe Steam- Engine, ꝑ. 100, et seq. W. fuel; and no construction of furnace can prevent this. Mr Watt, thereſore, set his invention to work to discover methods of husbanding this heat. The cylinder oſ his litile model was heated almost in an instant, s0 that it could not be touched by the hand. It could not be otherwise, because it condensed the vapour by abstracting its heat. But all the heat thus communicated to the cylinder, and wasted by it on surrounding bodies, contributed nothing to the performance of the engine, and must be taken away at every injection, and again communicated and wasted. Mr Waitt quickly understood the whole process which was going on vithin the cylinder, and which we have considered so minutely, and saw that a very considerable portion of the steam must be wasted in warming the cylinder. His firat attempts were made to ascertain how much was thus wasted, and he ſound that it was many times as much as would fill the cylinder and work the engine. He attempted to diminish this waste by using wooden cylinders. But though this produced a sensible diminution of the waste, other reasons forced him to give them up. He then surrounded. thin metal cylinders with a wooden case. By this, and using no more injection than was absolutely necessary for the condensation, he reduced the waste considerably; and there consequently remained in it a steam of very considerable elasticity, which robbed the engine of a proportional purt of the atmospherical pressuree He saw that this was unavoidable as long as the condensation was performed in the cylinder. 54. The thought struck him to attempt the condensation in another place. His first experiment was made in the simplest manner. A globular vessel communicated hy æ The globular vessel only existed iu Mr W.s mind, and was never executed. The tin cylinder is a mistake; there never was any used in this model, the cylinder being oſ brass:. The crushing relates to another experiment on the thickness oſ cylinders necessary to resist the pressure oſ the atmoꝶ phere. W. 10 means of a long pipe of one inch diameter, with the bottom of his little cylinder of ſour inches diameter and S0 inches long. This pipe had a stop-cock, and the globe vas immersed in a vessel of cold waterr. When the piston was at the top, and the cylinder ſilled with strong stenm, he turned the cock. It was scarcely turned, nay he did not think it completely turned, when the sides of his eylinder (only strong tin-plate) were srushed together like an empty bladder. This surprised and delighted him. A new eylinder was immediately made of brass, suſſiciently thick, and nicely boredl. When the experiment was repeated with this cylinder, the condensation was so rapid, that he eould not say that any time was expended in it. But the most valuable discovery was, that the vacuum in the cylinder was, as he hoped, almost perfeet. Mr Watt found, that when he used water in the boiler purged of air by long boiling, nothing that was vry sensibly inſerior to the pressure of the atmosphere on the piston could hinder it ſrom coming quite down to the bottom of the cylinder. This alone was gaining a great deal, for in most engines the remaining clasticity of the steam was not less than one-eighth oſ the atmospherical pressure, and thereſore took away one- eighth of the power oſ the engine. 55. Having gaincd this capital point, Mr Watt ſound many diſiculties to struggle with before he could get the machine to continue its motion. The water produeed ſrom the condensed steam, and the air which was extricated from it, or which penetrated through unavoidable leaks, behoved to nccumulate in the condensing vessel, and could not be avoided in any way similar to that adopted in Newcomen's engine. He took another method: He applied pumps to extract both, which were worked by the great beam. The contrivance is casy to any good mechanic; only ve must observe, that the niston of the water-pump must be under the surſace oſ the water in the condenser, that the water maoy enter the pump by its own weight, beeause there is no atmospherical pressure there to ſoree it in. We must also observe, that a considerable ſoree is nccessarily expended here, because, as there is but one stroke for rareſying the air, and this roreſaction must be neorly eomplete, the airpump must be of large dimensions, ond its piston must aet against the whole pressure of the atmosphere Mr Watt, however, found that this ſorce could be easily spared from his machine, already so much improved in respect of power. 56. Thus has the steam-engine received a very considerable improvement. The cylinder may bo allowed to remain very hot; nay, boiling hot, and yet the condensation be completely performed. The only elastic steam that now remains is the small quantity in the pipe of communication. Even this small quantity Mr Watt at last got rid oſ, by admitting a small jet of cold water up this pipe to meet the steam in its passage to the condenser. This both cooled this part of the apparatus in a situation where it was not necessary to warm it again, and it quickened the condensation. He ſound at last that the small pipe of communication was of itself suſficiently large for the condensation, and that no separate vessel, under the name of condenser, was necessary. This circumstance shows the prodigions r apidity of the condensation. We may add, that unless this had been the case, his improvement would have been vastly diminished; for a large condenser would have required a much larger air-pump, which would have expended much of the power of the engine. By these means the vacuum below the piston is greatly improved: For it will appear * i This is not correet; ſor though the same sized pump would be longer in exhausting a larger condenser, (vere it employed ſor that purpose) yet the same degree oſ exhaustion would be maintained were it regularly at work, however lurge the condenser might be; and a larger condenser causes the commencement of the exhaustion to be more speedy than a smaller one does. The :ize oſ the air-pump has relution properly to the quantity of air leaknge, and not to the capacity oſ the condenser.” W. clear to any person who understands the subject, that as long as any part of the condenser is kept of a low temperature, it will abstract and condense the vapour from the warmer puarts, till the whole acquires the elasticity corresponding to the coldest part. By the same means much of the waste is prevented, because the cylinder is never cooled much below the boiling temperaturee Many engines have been erected by Mr Watt in this form, and their performance gave universal satisſaction. We have contented ourselves with giving a very slight description without a figure of this improved engine, because we imagine it to be of very easy comprehension, and because it is only a preparation for still greater improvements, vhich, when understood, will at the same time leavo no part of this more simple form unexplained. 57. During the progress of these improvements, Mr Watt made many experiments on the quantity and density of the steam of boiling water. These fully convinced him, that although he had greatly diminished the waste of steam, a great deal yet remained, and that the steam expended during the rise of the piston was at least three times more than what would fill the cylinder. The cause of this was very apparent. In the subsequent descent of the piston, covered vith water much below the boiling temperature, the whole cylinder was necessarily cooled and exposed to the air. Mr Watts fertile genius immediately suggested to him the expedient of employing the elasticity of the steam from the boiler to impel the piston down the cylinder, in place of the pressure of the atmosphere; and thus he restored the engine to its first principles, making it an enThis is a mistake. From the ſirst, I proposed to act upon the piston vith steam instead oſ the atmosphere, and my model as 0 constructed, v. gine really moved by steam As this is a new epoch in its history, we shall be more particular in the description; The account oſ this Invention in ſhe text not being perſectly correct, I subjoin the ſollowing short history of it:W. u My attention was ſirst direcied in ſhe year 1759 to the subject oſ steamengines, by the late Dr Robison himselſ, then a student in the University oſ Glasgow, and nearly of my own nge. He at thut time threw out an idea oſ applying the power oſ ſhe steam-engine to the moving of wheel-carriages, and to other purposes, but the scheme was not matured, and was soon abandoned on his going abroad.  About the year 1761, or 1762, I tried some experiments on ſhe force oſ steam, in a Papin's digester, and formed a species oſ steam-engine by ſixing upon it a syringe one-third oſ an inch diameter, with a solid piston, and ſurnished also with a cock to admit the steam ſrom the digester, or shut it oſſ at pleasure, as well as to open a communication ſrom the inside oſ the syringe to the open air, by which the steam contained in the syringe might escape. When the communication between the digester and syringe was opened, he steam entered the sy ringe, and by its action upon the piston raised a considerable weight (I5 Ib.) with which it was loaded. When this was raised as high as was thought proper, the communication with the digester was shut, und that with the atmosphere opened; the steam ſhen made its escape, and the weight descended. The operations were tepeated, and though in this experiment the cock was turned by hand, it was easy to see how ĩt could bo done by the machine itselſ, and to make it work with perſect regularity. But I s00n relinquished the idea oſ constructing an engine upon this principle, ſrom being seusible it would be liable to some oſ the objections against Savatys engine, viz. the dunger oſ bursting the boiler, and the diſiculty oſ maEing the joini tight, and also that a great part oſ the power oſ the steam would be lost, because no vacuum was ſormed to assist the descent oſ the piston. t  The aſtention necessary Io the avocations oſ busiuess prevented me ſrom then prosecuting the subject ſarther; but in the wiuter oſ 1763-4, having occasion to repair a model oſf Newcomen's engine belonging to the natural philosophy cluss oſ ithe University oſ Glusgow, my mind was again directed to it. At ihat period, my knowledge was derived principally ſrom Desagulien, and purily from Belidor. I set about repairing it as a mere mechanician, t æ I, however, described this engine in the ſourth article oſ he speciſication oſ my patent oſ 1769; and again in the speciſication oſ another patent in the year 1784, together with a mode oſ applying it to the moving oſ wheelcarriages W., VOL. II. H at the same time still restricting ourselves to the essential circumstances, and avoiding every peculiarity which is to .nd uhen that was done and it was set to work, I was surgrised to ſind that its boiler could not supply it with steam, though appurently quite large enough; (the cylinder oſ the model being two inches in diameter, and six inches stroke, and the boiler about nine inches diameter.) By blowing the fire it wos made to take a ſew strukes, but required an enormous quantity of injection water, though it was very lightly loaded by the column oſ water in the pump: It 300n occurred that this was caused by the little cylinder exposing a greater surſace to condense the steam than the cylinders oſ larger engines did in proportion to their respective contents. It was ſound that by shortening the column oſ water in the pump, the hoiler could supply the cylinder with steam, and that the engine would work regularly with a moderate quantity oſ injection. It now appeared that the cylinder oſ the model being oſ brass, would conduot heat much better than the cast-iron cylinders oſ Iurger engines, (generally covered on the inside ith a stony crust) and that considerable advantage could be gained by making the cylinders oſ some substance that would receive and give ont heat slouly: Oſ these, wood seemed to be the most likely, provided it should prove suſiciently durable. A small engine was thereſore constructed with a cylinder six inches diameter, and twelve inches stroke, made of wood, soahed in linseed oil, and buked to dryness. With this engine many oxperiments were made; but it was soon ſound that the wooden ey linder was not likely to prove durahle, and that the steam condensed in 6lling it still exceeded the proportion oſ ſhat required ſor large engines according to the statements oſ Desaguliers. It was also ſound, that all attempts to produce a better exhaustion by throwing in more injection, causer a disproportionate waste oſ steam. On reſlection, the cause oſ this eemed to be the boiling of water in vacuo at low heats, a discovery lately made by Dr Cullen, and some other philosophers, (below I009, as I was then inſormed) and, consequently, at greater heats, the water in the ey linder would produce a steam which would, in part, resist the presure oſ the atmorphere. By experiments which I then tried upon the heats at which water boils under several pressures greater than ſhat oſ the atmosphere, it appeored, that when the heais proceeded in an arithmetical, the elasticities proceeded in some geometrical ratio; and by laying down a curve from my data, I ascertuined the particular one near enough ſor my purpose. It also appeared, that any approach to a vacuum could only be obtained by throwing in large quantities oſ injection, which would cool the cylinder so much as to require quantities oſ steam to heat it again, out oſ proportion to the power gained by the more perſect vacuum; and that the old engineers hud acted wisely in contenting themselves with loading the engine with only six or seven pounds on each square inch of the area oſ ithe piston. It being evident be found in the prodigious varieties which Mr Watt has introduced into the machines which he has erected, every that there was a great error in Dr Desaguliers' calculations oſ Mr Beightons experiments on the bulk oſ steam, a Fiorence flask, capable oſ containing about a pound oſ water, had about one ounce oſ distilled water put into it; a glass tube was ſitted into its moulh, and the joining made tight by lapping that part oſ the tube with packthread covered with glaziers putty. When the flask was set upright, the tube reached down near to the surſace of the water, and in that position the whole was placed in a tin reſlecting oven before a ſire, until the water was wholly evaporated, which happened in about an hour, and might have been done sooner had I not wished the heat not much to exceed that of boiling water. As the air in the ſlask was heavier than the steam, the latter ascended to tho top, and expelled the air through the tube. When the water was all evaporated, the oven and ſlask were removed ſrom the ſire, and a blust of cold air was directed against one side oſ the ſlask, to collect the condensed steam in one place. When all was cold, the tube was removed, the ſlask and its contents were weighed with care; and the flask being made hot, it was dried by blowing into it by bellows, and when weighed aguin, was ſound to hove lost rather more than ſour grains, estimated at 43 grains. When the ſlask was ſillod with water, it was ſound to contain about 17́ ounces avoirdupois oſ that ſluid, which gave about 1800 for the expansion of water converted into steam oſ the heat oſ boiling water. i This experiment was repeated with nearly the same result; and in order to ascertain whether the ſlask had been wholly ſilled with steam, a similar quantity oſ water was for the third time evaporated; and, while the ſlask was atill cold, it was pluced inverted, with its mouth (contracted by the tube) immersed in a vessel oſ water, which it sucked in as it cooled, until in the temperature oſ the atmosphere it was ſilled to within half an ounce measure oſ water.  In repetitions oſ this experiment at a later date, I simpliſied the apparatus hy omitting the tube, and laying the ſlask upon its side in the oven, thus, partly closing its mouth by a cork, having a notch on one side, thus, and otherwise proceeding as has been mentioned. &  I do not consider these experiments as extremely accurate, the only scalet In the contrivance oſ this experiment I was anisted by Dr Black.  In Dr Robison's edition oſ Dr Black's Lectures, vol. I. page 147, the Intter hints at some experiments npon this subject as made by him; but I have n0 knowledge oſ any except those which I made myselſ.” individual of which has been adapted to local circumstances, or diversiſied by the progress of Mr Watt's improvements. beam oſ a proper size which I had then at my command, not heing very sensible, and the bulk oſ the steam being liable to be influenced by the heat to which it is exposed, which, in the way described, ĩs not easily regulated or ascertained; hut, ſfrom my experience in actual practice, Iesteem the expansion to be rather more than I have computed.  A hoiler was construeted which showed, hy inspection, the quantity of water evaporated in any given ſime, and thereby ascertained the quantity oſ steam used in every stroke by the engine, which I found to be several times the ſull of the eylinder. Astonished at the quantity of water required ſor the injection, and the great heat it had acquired ſrom the small quantity oſ water in the ſorm oſ steam which had been used in ſilling the cylinder, and thinking I had made some mistuke, the ſollowing experiment was tried: —A glass tube was bent at right angles, one end was inserted horizontally into the spout oſ a tea etle, and the other part was immersed perpendicularly in well-water contained in a cylindiic glass vessel, and steam was made to pass through it until it ceased to be condensed, and the water in the glass vesel was become nearly boiling hot. The water in the glass vessel was then ſound to have gained an addition oſ about one-sixth part ſrom the condensed steam. Consequently, water converted into steam can heat about six times its oWn weight oſ well-water to 2129, or till it can condense no more steam. Being struck with this remarkuble ſact, and not understanding the reason oſ it, I mentioned iĩt to my ſriend Dr Black, who then explained to me bis doctrine of latent heat, which he had taught ſor some time beſore this period, (summer 1764,) but having myself been occupied vith the pursuits oſ business, iſ I had heard of it, I had not attended to it, when I thus stumbled upon one oſ the material ſacts by which that beautiſul theory is supported.  On reſlecting ſurther, I perceived, that in order to muke the best use oſ steam, it was necessary, First, that the cylinder should be maintained always us hot as the steam which entered ĩt; and, Secondly, that when the steam was condensed, the water of which it was composed, and the injection itselſ, should be cooled down to 1007, or lower, where that was possible. The means oſ accomplishing these points did nol immediately present themselves; but early in 1765 it occurred to me, that i a communication were opened between a cylinder containing steam, and another vessel which was exhausted oſ air and olher ſluids, the steam, as an elastic ſluid, would immediately rush into the ompty vessel, and continue so to do until it had established an equilibrium; and iſ that vessel were kept very cool hy an injection, or otherwisæ, more stenm would continue to enter until the whole was condensed. Lut both the vessels being exhausted, or uearly so, how was he injection. 58. Let A (Plate I. ſig. 9.) represent the boiler. This has received great improvements ſrom his complete acquaintance water, the air which would enter with it, and the condensed steam, to be got out? This I proposed, in my own mind, to perſorm in two ways. One was by adupting to the second vessel a pipe reaching downwards more than 54 feet, by which the water would descend, (a columm of that length overbalancing the atmosphere) and hy extracting the air by means of a pump.  The second method was by employing a pump, or pumps, o exſract both the air and the water, which would be applicable in all places, and essential in those cases where there was no well or pit.  This lutter method was the one I then preſerred, and is the only one I aſterwords continued to use.  In Newcomen's engine, the piston is kept tight by water, which could not be applicable in this new method; as, if any of it entered ino a purtiallyexhausted and hot cylinder, it would boil and prevent the production oſ a vacuum, and would also cool the oylinder hy its evaporation during the descent of the piston. I proposed to remedy this deſect by employing wax, tallow, or other grease, to lubricate and keep the piston tight. It next occurred to me, ſhat the mouth oſ the cylinder being open, the air which entered to act on the piston would cool the cylinder, and condense some steam on again filling it, I thereſore proposed to put an air-tight cover upon the cyliuder, with a hole and stuſſing- box ſor the piston-rod to slide through,  and to admit steam above the piston to act upon it instead oſ the atmosphere. There atill remained another source oſ the destruction oſ steam, the cooling oſ the cylinder by the external air, which would produce an internul condensation ?henever steam entered it, and which would be repeated every stroke; this I proposed to remedy by an external c; linder containing steam, surrounded by another oſ wood, or of some other substance which would conduct heat slowly.  When once the idea oſ the separate condensation was started, all these improvements ſollowed as corollaries in quick succession, 50 that in the course oſ one or two days, the invention was thus ſar complete in my mind, and I immediately set about an experiment to veriſy it practically. I took a large brass syringe, 13 inches diameter, and I0 inches long, made a cover and bot+N. B.  The piston-rod sliding ihrough a stuſing-box was new in steamengines; it was not necessary in Newcomens engine, as the mouth oſ the cylinder was open, and the piston stem was square and very clumsy. The fitting the piston-rod to the piston by a cone was an aſter improvement oſf mine (about 1774.) / with the procedure of nature in the production of steam. tom to it of tin plate, with a pipe to convey steam to both ends of the cylinder from the boiler; another pipe to convey steam from the upper end to the condenser (ſor, to save apparatus,  inverted the cylinder.) I drilled a hole longitudinally through the axis of the stem oſ the piston, and fixed a valve at its lower end, to permit the water which was produced by the condensed steam on first filling the cylinder, to issue. The condenser used upon this occasion consisted of two pipes oſ thin tin-plate, ten or twelve inches long, and about one-sixth inch diameter, standing perpendicular, and communicating at top with a short horizontal pipe of large diameter, having an aperture on its upper side which was shut by a valve opening upwards. These pipes were joined at bottom to another perpendicular pipe of about an inch diameter, which served for the air and vaterpump; and both the condensing pipes and the air-pump were placed in a small cistern filled with cold water.; s The steam-pipe was adjusted to a small boiler. When steam was produced, it was admitted into the cylinder, and soon issued through the perforation of the rod, and at the valve of the condenser. When it was judged that the air was expelled, the steam-cock was shut, and the air-pump piston-rod was drawn up, which leaving the small pipes oſ the condenser in a state of vacuum, the steam entered them and was condensed. The piston of the cylinder immediately rose and liſted a weight o about I8 Ibs., which was hung to the lower end of the piston-rod. The exhaustion-cock was ghut, the steam was readmitted into the cylinder, and the operation was repeated, the quantity of steam consumed, and the weights it could raise were observed, and, excepting the non- application oſ the steam-case and external covering. the inve tion was complete, in so ſar as regarded the savings oſ steam and fuel. A large model. with an outer cylinder and wooden case, was immediately constructed, and the experiments made with it served to veriſy the expectations I had formed, and to place the advantage oſ the invention beyond the reach oſ doubt. It was found convenient aſterwards to change the pipe-condenser ſor an empty vessel, generally oſ a cylindrical form, into which an injection played, and in consequence of there being more water and air to extract, to enlarge the air-pump.  The change was made, because, in order to procure a surſace suſſiciently extensive to condense the steam of a large engine, the pipe-condenser would 1⸗ N. B. This construction o the condenser was employed ſfrom knowing that heat penetrated thin plates of metal very quickly, and considering tha; if no injection was thrown into an exhausted vessel, there would be only the water oſ which the steam had been composed, and the air which entered with the steam, or through the leaks, to extract.” W. In some of his engines the fuel has been placed in the midat require to be very voluminous, and because the bad water with which engines are ſrequently supplied, would crust over the thin plates, and prevent their conveying the heat suſficiently quick The eylinders were also placed with their mouths upwards, and furnished with a working-beam, and other apparatus, as was usual in the ancient engines; the inversion ſ the cylinder, or rather oſ the pistonrod, in the model, being only an expedient to try more easily the new invention, and being subject to many objections in large engines.  In 1768 I applied ſor letters patent ſor my* Methods of Lessening the Consumption oſ Steam, and consequently oſ Fuel, in Fire-Engines, which passed the seals in January 1769, and my Speciſication was enrolled in Chancery in April following, and was as ſollows:  My method of lessening the consumption oſ steam, and consequently ſuel, in ſire-engines, consists oſ the ſollowing principles:  First, That vessel in which the powers oſ steam are to be employed to work the engine, which is called the eylinder in common fire-engines, and which I æall the steam-vemel, must, during the whole time the engine is at work, be kent as hot as the steam that enters it; first, by enclosing it in a case of wood, or any other materials that transmit heat slowly; secondly; by surrounding it with steam, or other heated hodies; and, thirdly, by suſſering neither water, or any other substance colder than the steam, to enter or touch it during that time.  Secondly, In engines that are to be worked wholly or partially by condensation oſ steam, the steam is to be condensed in vessels distinet ſrom the steam vessels or cylinders, although occasionally communicating with them; these venels I call condensers; and, whilst the engines are working, these condenters ought at least to be kept as cold as the air in the neighbourhood oſ the engines, by application oſ water, or other cold bodies.  Thirdly, Whatever air or other elastic vapour is not condensed by the cold oſ the condenser, and may impede the working oſ the engine, is to be drawn out oſ the steam-vessels or condensers by means oſ pumps, wrought by the engines themelves, or otherwise. s Fourthly, I intend in many cases to employ the expansive force oſ steam 10 press on the pistons, or whatever may be used instead oſ them, in the ;mme manner as the pressure of the atmospherẽ is now employed in common fire-engines: In cases where cold water cannot be had in plenty, the engines may be wrought by this ſorce oſ steam only, by discharging the steam into the open air aſter it has done its oſfice.  Fiſthly, where motions round an axis are required, I make the steamvenels in ſorm of hollow rings, or circular channels, with proper inlets and outlets ſor the steam, mounted on horizontal axles, like the wheels oſ a water-mill; within them are pſaced a number oſ valves, that suſfer any body of the water, surrounded by an iron or copper vessel, while the exterior boiler was made of wood, which transmits, and thereſore wastes the heat very slowly.? In others, the ſlame 10 go round the channel in one direetion only; in these steam-vessels arę placed weights, so ſitted to them as entirely to ſill up a part or portion oſ their channels, yet rendered capable oſ moving ſreely in them, by the means hereinaſtermentioned or specified: When the steam is admitted in these engines, between these weights and the valves, it acts equally on both, 0 as to raise the weight to one side oſ the wheel, and by the reaction on the valves, suecessively to give a circular motion to the wheel, the valves opening in the direction in which the weights are pressed, but not in the contrary; as the rteam-vessel moves round, it is supplied with steam ſrom the boiler, and that which has perſormeq its oſice may either be discharged by means oſ condensers, or intò the open air. u Sixthly, I intend, in some cases, to apply a degree of cold, not capable of reducing the steam to water, but oſ contracting it considerably, so that the engines shall be worked by the alternate expansion and contraction oſ the steam.  Lustly, Instead oſ using water to render the piston or other parts oſ the engines air and steam-tight, I employ oils, wax, resinous bodies, ſat oſ animals, quicksilver, and other metals, in their ſluid state.  And the said James Watt, by a memorandum added to the said speciſication, declured, ſhat he did not intend that any thing in the ſourth article should be understood to extend to any eugine where the water to he raised enters the steam-vessel itselſ, or any vessel having an open communicalion with it.. W. The exterior part oſ large boilers was never executed in wood by me; this relates only to some oſ my models, and one or two very small engines which I made of Nowcomen's kind. Wood is improper, because it soſtens by the steam, and ſinally gives way. The conveying the Rame through ſlues in the insido oſ the water had been practised by others beſore my time, and was common in the Cornish engines. The inventor is unknown, but a person oſ the name oſ Swaine was a great propagator oſ the practicę; however, I somewhat improved the ſorm and adjusted the proporſions. The property oſ consuming the smoke was not derived ſrom the contruction oſ the ſiues, nor ſtom the extensive surſace to which the ſire was applied, but ſrom another contrivance oſ mine, called the smoke less ſurnace, which proceeds some what upon the principle of Argand's lamps. The grate and dead-plates are laid sloping downwards ſrom the ſire door, at un angle oſ about 25 to 509 to the horizon. The ſire is lighted us usual, and a small quantity oſ air is admitted through one or two openings in the fire door, s0 as to blow directly on the blazing part oſ the ſire. The ſire is made at ſirst principally near the deadplate, and the ſreab coals with which it is to be supplied, are laid upon that not only plays round the whole outside, as in common boilers, but also runs along several flues which are conducted through the midst of the water. By such contrivances the fire is applied to the water in a most extensive surſace, and ſor a long time, s50 as to impart to ĩt the greatest part of its heat. So skilfully was it applied in the Albion Mills, that although it was a large engine, its unconsumed smoke was inferior to that of a very small browhouse.* In this second engine of Mr Watt, the top of the cylinder is shut up by a strong metal plate gh, fig. 9. in the middle of which is a collar or box /, containing a collar of hemp, surrounding the piston-rod PD, which being nicely turned and polished, can move up and down, without allowing any air to pass by its sides. From the dome of the boiler proceeds a large pipe BCIOq, which, aſter reaching the cylinder with its horizontal part BC, dercends parallel to its side, sending oſf two branches, viz. IM to the top of the cylinder, and ON to jts bottom. At I is a puppetvalve opening from below upwards. At L, immediately plate, cluse to the burning ſuel, but not upon itl. When it needs mending, the burning coals and those upon the dead-plate are pushed ſurther down without being mixed, and more coals are laid upon the dead- plate, but never should be thrown on the top oſ those already on ſire, as that would instantly send out a volume oſ smoke. In ſhis situation they are grodually dried, and any smoke which issues from them is consumed by the current oſ air ſrom ihe ſire door in passing over the bright burning ſuel. The opening, or openings, to admit the air, are regulated, so as just lo admit the quantity which consumes the smoke; more would be prejudicial. I originally constructed these ſurnaces in a somevhat diſferent ma nner; but the above method has been ſound the most convenient, and, when properly attended to, answers the purpose perſectly with ſree- burning coal, but is more diſficult to manage with coal which cakes W. »  The engine here described is one applicable to the working ou the expansive principle, in which the piston ascends in an axhausted cylinder; a vacuum both above and below the piston. To make it ascend in steam, the place oſ the injection must he altered, so as not i0 spout s0 high; and there must be a regulaling valve at U, to prevent ſhe steam going into the edueſion- pipe until the piston has ascended to the top oſ the cylinder.” W. below this branch, there is a similar valve, also opening from below upwards. The pipe descends to Q, near the bottom oſ a large cistern e d e ſ, filled with cold water constantly renewed. The pipe is then continued nearly horizontally along this cistern, and terminates at R in a pump T. The piston S has clack- valves opening upwards, and its rod S s, passing through a collar of hemp at T, is supended by a chain to a small arch-head on the outer arm of the beam. There is a valve R in the bottom of this pump, as usual, vhich opens when pressed in the direction QR, and shuts against a contrary pressure. This pump delivers its contents iuto another pump XY, by means of the flat pipe t X, which proceeds from its top. This second pump has a valve at X, and a clack in its piston Z, as usual, and the piston-rod Z z is suspended from another arch-head on the outer arm of the beam. The two valves I and L are opened and shut by means of spanners and handles, which are put in motign by a plug-frame, in the same manner as in Newcomens engine. Lastly, there moy be observed a crooked pipe a b o, which enters the upright pipe laterally a little above Q. This has a small jet hole at o; and the other end u, which is considerably under the surſace of the water of the condensing cistern, is covered with a puppet-valve v;, vhose long stalk  u rises above the water, and may be raised or lowered by hand or by the plug-beam. The valves R and X, and the clacks in the pistons S and Z, are opened or shut by the pressures to which they are immediately exposed. This figure is not an exact copy of any of Mr Watts engines, but has its parts so disposed that all may come distinetly into view, and exactly perſorm their various ſunctions. It ĩs drawn in its quiescent position, the outer end of the beam preponderating by the counter-weight, and the piston P at the top of the cylinder, and the pistons S and Z in their lowest situations. In this situation let us suppose that a vacuum is (by any means) produced in all the space below the piston, the valve I being shut. It is evident that the valve R will also be shut, as also the valve . Nov let the valve I be opened. The steam from the boiler, as elastic as common air, vill rush into the space above the piston, and will exert on it a pressure as great as that of the atmosphere. It will thereſore press it down, raise the outer end of the heam, and cause iL to perſorm the same work as an ordinary engine. When the piston P has reached the bottom of the cylinder, the plug- frame shuts the valve I, and opens L. By so doing, the communication is open between the and bottom of the eylinder, and nothing hinders the steam which is above the piston from going along the passage MLON. The piston is now equally aſfected on both sides by the steam, even though a part of it is condensed in the pipe IOQR. Nothing thereſfore hinders the piston from being dragged up by the counter-weight, which acis with its whole ſorce, undiminished by any remaining unbalanced elasticity of steam. Here therefore this ſorm of the engine has an advantage (and by no means a small one) over the common engines, in which a great part oſ the counterweight is expended in overeoming unbalunced atmospheric pressure. . Whenever the piston P arrives at the top oſ the cylinder, ihe valve L is shut by the plug-ſrame, and the valves I and v are opened. All the space helow the piston is at this time occupied by the steam which came from the upper part of the cylinder, by this time of greatly diminished elusticity, and not near a balance ſor the pressure of the atmosphere. Thereſore, during the ascent of the piston, the valve R was shut, and it remains 5o. When, therefore, the valve v ĩs opened, the cold water of the cistern must spout up through the hole o, and condense the remaining steam. To this must be added the coldness of the whole pipe OQS. As ſast as it is condensed, its place is supplied by steam ſrom the lower part of the cylinder. We have alrendy remarked, that this successive condensation is accomplished with astonishing rapidity. In the mean time, steam from the boiler presses on the upper surface of the piston. It must therefore descend as before, and the engine must perform a second working-stroke. But, in the mean time, the injection-water lies in the hottom of the pipe OQR, heated to a considerable degree by the condensation of the steam; also a quantity of air has been disengaged from it, and from the water in the boiler. How is this to be discharged ? This is the office of the pumps ST and XY. The capacity of ST is great in proportion to the space in which the air and water are lodged. When, thereſore, the piston S has got to the top of its course, there must be a vacuum in the barrel of this pump, and the water and air must open the valve R and come into it. When the piston S comes down again in the next returning-stroke, this water and air get through the valve of the piston; and next, in the working-stroke, they are discharged by the piston into the pump XY, and raised by jts piston in the following stroke. The air escapes at Y, and as much of the water as is necessary is delivered into the boiler by a small pipe Y g to supply its waste. It is a matter of indiſference whether the pistons S and Z rise with the outer or inner end ofthe beam, but it is rather better that they rise with the inner end. They are otherwise drawn here in order to detach them from the rest, and show them more distinctly. The steam-case is omitted in this drawing, but one method of applying it is represented in plate III. Such is Mr Watt's second engine. Let us examine its principles, that we may see the causes of its avowed and great superiority over the common engines. 59. We have already seen one ground of superiority, the ſull operation of the counter-weightt. We are authorised, by careſul examination, to say, that in the common ængines, at least one- half of the counter-weight is expended in counteracting an unbalanced pressure of the air on the piston during its ascent. In many engines, which are not the worst, this extends to one-fiſth of the whole pressure. This is evident from the examination of the engine at Montrelaix, by Bossut. This makes a very great counterweight necessary, which exhausts a proportional part of the moving force. 60. But the great advantage of Mr Watt's ſorm is the almost total annihilation of the waste of steam by condensation in the cylinder. The cylinder is always boiling hot, and thereſore perfectly dry. This must be evident to any person who understands the subject. By the time that Mr Watt had completed these improvements, his experiments on the production of steam had given him a pretty accurate knowledge of its density; and he found himselſ authorised to say, that the quantity oſ steam employed did not much ercecd what would fill the cylinder, so that very little was unavoidably wasted. But before he could bring the engine to this degree of perfection, he had many diſſiculties to overcome: He inclosed the eylinder in another contuining steam, and that in a wooden case at a small distance from it, which eſfectually prevents all condensation in the inner vylinder ſrom external influence; and the condensation by the outer cyliuder ilself, which was very smull, had no other bad consequence than the loss of so much steum as formed the condensed water. (See Mr W.s short history of the invention, p. 117.) The greatest diſſiculty was to make the great piston tight. The old and eſſectual method, by water lying on it, was inadmissible. He was thereſore obliged to have his oylinders most nicely bored, perfectly cylindrical, and finely polished; and he made numberless trials of diſferent soſt substances for packing his piston, which should be tight without enormous ſriction, and which should long remain so, in a situation perſcelly dry and very hot. Aſier all that Mr Watt has done in this respect, Le 9 thinks that the greatest part of the waste of steam which he still pereeives in his engines, arises from the unavoidable eseape by the sides of the piston during its descent. But the fact is, that an engine of this construction, of the same dimensions with a common engine, making the same number of strokes of the same extent, does not consume above one-fourth or one-third purt oſ the fuel that is consumed by the best engines of the common form. It is also a very ſortunate circumstance, that the performance of the engine is not immediately destroyed, nor indeed sensibly diminished, by a small want of tightness in the piston. In the common engine, if air get in in this way, it immediately puts a stop to the work; but although even a considerable quantity of steam get past the piston during its descent, the rapidity of condensation is such, that hardly any diminution of pressure ean be observed. 61. When Newcomen's engines are working under loads inSerior to their whole power, they are reguluted to prevent shocks which would be prejudicial, by lessening the quantity of injection, or by shutting the injection-cock sooner: These new engines may, in some degree, be reguluted in the sume munner; but it is done more effectually und economically, first, by limiting the opening of the regulatingvalve which udmits the steam above the piston, and letting it continue so open during the whole length of the stroke; secondly, by letting it open fully at ſsirst, and shutting it completely when the piston has proceeded downmards only part of ils stroke; or, lastly, by the use of a throttle-valve, which, acting in the same manner as the floodgate of a mill, admils no more steam than gives the desired pomer. (See description of throtile-valve, p. 15) 62. The second of these methods of regulating the power of the engine, forms the busis of what is called the Expansive Engine, which renders available the greater part of the power uith which the steam would rush into empty space, ere ihe piston acted upon by the whole force of the steaum, from the bottom to the top of the stroke, through the whole length of the cyIl -_ M STEAM- ENGINE. 27 linder, a principle which had first occurred to Mr Watt in 1769, aud was adopted in an engine at Soho monufactory, and some others, about 1776, and in 1778 at Shaduell woterworks, and afterwards particularly described in his specification of a patent for severul new improvements upon steam-engines, in 1782. The construction of this engine is what has heon described. The steamvalve I is aluays allowed to open fully; the pins of the plug-frume are regulated so that that valve shall shut the moment that the piston has descended a certain portion, suppose one-fourth, one- third, or one-half of the length of the cvlinder. So ſar the eylinder was occupied by steam as elastic as common air. In pressing the piston ſarther down, it behoved the steam to expand, and its elasticity to diminish. It is plain that this can be done in any degree we please, and that the adjustment can he varied in a minute, according to the exigency oſ the ease, by moving the plug-pins. In the mean time, it must be observed, that the pressure on the piston is continually changing, and consequently the accelerating force The motion, thereſore, will no longer be uniformly accelerated: It will approach much faster to miſormity; nay, it may be retarded, because although the pressure on the piston at the beginning of the stroke may exceed the resistance of the load, yet when the pision is near the bottom, the resistance may exceed the pressure. Whatever may be the law by which the pressure on the piston varies, an ingenious mechanic may contrive the connecting machinery in such a way that the chains or rods at the outer end of the beam shall continually exert the same pressure, or shall vary their pressure according to any law he finds most convenient. It is in this manner that the watchmaker, by the form of the fuzee, produces an equal pressure on the wheel-work by means of a very unequal action of the main-spring. In like manner, by making the outer arch-heads portions of a proper spiral instead of a circle, we can regulate the force oſ the beam at pleasure. Thus we see how much more managenble an engine is in this form than Newcomen's was, and also more easily investigated in respect of its power in ĩits various positions. The Enowledge of this last circumstance was of mighty consequence, and vithout it no notion could be formed of what it could perform, which may be called a discovery of great importance in the theory of the engine. We shall give here Mr Watts theory of the expansive engine which we have just described. 63. Let ABCD (Plate II. fig. 10.) represent a section of the cylinder oſ a steam-engine, and EF the surſace of its piston. Let us suppose that the steam vas admitted while EF was in contact with AB, and that as soon as it had pressed it down to the situation EF, the steam-cock is shut. The steam vill continue to press it down, and as the steam expands, its pressure diminishes. We may express its pressure (exerted all the while the piston moves from the situation ABto the situation EF) by the line EF. If we suppose the elasticity of the steam proportional to its density, as is nearly the case with air, vo may express the pressure on the piston in any other position, such as KL or DC, by KI and Dec, the ordinates of a rectangular hyperbola F lc, of which AE, AB are the assymptotes, and A the centree The accumulated pressure during the motion oſ the piston from EF to DC, will be expressed by the aren EF c DE, and the pressure during the whole motion by the area ABF c D A Now it is well known that the area EF c DE is equal to ABFE multiplied by the liyperbolic logarithm of i ,  L. a and the whole aren ABF c DA is 2 ABFE x AD (+LT5) Thus let the diameter oſ the piston be 24 inches, and the pressure of the atmosphere on a square inch be 14 pounds; the pressure on ſhe piston is 6333 pounds. Let the whole stroke be õ feet, and let the steam be stopped vhen the piston has descended I8 inches, or 1.5 feet. The hyperbolic logarithm of 0 is 1.3862943. Thereſore the accumulated pressure ABF c DA is = 6333 x 2.3682043, = 15114 pounds. As few proſessional engineers are possessed of a table of hyperbolic logarithms, while tables of common logarithms are, or should be, in the hands of every person who is much engaged in mechanical calculations, let the following method be practised. Take the common logarithm of a and multiply it by 2.3026; the product is the hyperAD AE The accumulated pressure while the piston moves from AB to EF is 6338 X I, or simply 6333 pounds. Thereſore the steam while it expands into the whole cylinder adds a pressure of 878] pounds. Suppose that the steam had got free admission during the whole descent oſ the piston, the accumulated pressure would have been 6333 x 4, or 25552 pounds. Here Mr Watt observed a remarkable result. The steam expended in this case would have been ſour times greater than when it was stopped at one-fourth, and yet the accumulated pressure is not twice as great, being nearly five-thirds. One-fourth of the steam perſorms nearly threefifths of the work, and an equal quantity perſorms more than twice as much work when thus admitted during onefourth oſ the motion. This is curious and important information, and the advantage of this method of working a stean-engine increases in proportion as the steam is sooner stopped; but the increase is not great aſter the steam is rarefied ſour times. The curve approaches near to the axis, and small additions are made to the area. The expense of such great VOL. 1I. I bolic logarithm of cylinders is considerable, and may sometimes compensate this advantage. * Let the steam be stopped at Its perſommance is mult. - - - - . -  i . . . . 2. - - L 2.4 . . . 2. - - - 2.8 . . . S. : : . 3.2 &c.  -- - - It is very pleasing to observe so many unlooked-ſor advantages resulting from an improvement made with the sole view of lessening the waste oſ stcam by condensation. While this purpose is gained, we learn how to husband the steam which is not thus wastedl. The engine becomes more manageable, and is more easily adapted to every variation in its task, and all its powers are more easily computed. The active mind of its ingenious inventor did not stop here: It had always been matter of regret that one- half of the motion was unaccompanied by any work. It was a very obvious thing to Mr Waitt, that as the steam admitted above the piston pressed it down, s0 steam admitted below the piston would press it up with the same ſorce, provided that a vacuum were made on its upper side. This was easily done, by connecting the lower end oſ the cylinder vith the boiler and the upper end with the condenser. G8. Desription of Mr Watt's Steam- Engine in its most improved State, called the Double EnginePlate III. fig. 11, is a representation of this construction exactly copied a æ All these calculations, however, proceed upon tho supposition that stegm contracis and expands by variations of presure, n the same ratios that uir would do. . from Mr Watts figure accompanying his speciſication. Here BB is a section of the cylinder, surrounded at a small distance by the steam- case 1111. The section of the piston A, and the collar which embraces the piston-rod, gives a distinet notion of its construction, of the manner in which it is connected with the piston-rod, and how the packing of the piston and collar contributes to make all tight. From the top of the cylinder proceeds the horizontal pipe. Above the letter D is observed the seat of the steamvalve, communicating with the box above it. In the middle of this may be observed a durk-shaded circlee. This is the mouth of the upper branch of the steam-pipe coming from the boiler. Beyond D, below the letter N, is the seat of the upper condensing-valve. The bottom of the eylinder is made spherical, ſitting the piston, so that they may come nearly into entire contact. Another horizontal pipe proceeds from this bottom. Above the letter E is the seat of the lover stenm-valve, opening into the valve-box. This box is at the extremity of another steam- pipe marked C, which branches off from the upper horizontal part, and descends obliquely, coming forward to the eye. (See the ſront view, Plate III. fig. 12.) The lower part is represented as cut open, to shew its interior conformation. Beyond this steam-valve, and below the letter F, may be observed the seat oſ the Iower condensing-valvee A pipe descends from henee, and at a small distance below unites with another pipe GG, which comes down from the upper condensing valve N. These two eduction-pipes thus united go downwards, and open at L into a rectangular box, of which the end is seen at L. This box goes backward ſrom the eye, and at its farther extremity communicates with the air-pump K, whose piston is here represented in section with its butterſly valves. The piston delivers the water and air laterally into another rectangular box M, darkly shaded, which box communicates with the pump I. The pistonrods oſ this and of the air-pump are suspended by chains ſfrom a small arch-head on the inner arm of the great beam. The lower part of the eduction-pipe, the horizontal box L, the air-pump , with the communicating box M between it and the pump I, are all immersed in the cold water of the condensing cistern. The box L is made flat, broad, and shallow, in order to increase its surface and acceleralc the condensation. But that this may be performed with the greatest expedition, a small pipe H, open below (but oceasionally stopped by a plug-valve,) is inserted laterally into the eduction- pipe G, and then divides into two branches, one of which reaches within a ſoot or two oſ the upper valve N, and the other approaches as near to the valve F. As it is intended by this construction to give the piston a strong impulse in both directions, it will not be proper to suspend its rod by a chain ſrom the great beam; for it must not only pull down that end of the beam, but also push it upwards. It may indeed be suspended by double chains, like the pistons of the engines for extinguishing fires; and Mr Watt has accordingly done so in some of his engines. But in his drawing, ſrom which this figure is copied, he has communicated the force oſ the piston to the beam by means oſ a tooſhed rack OO, which engages or works in the toothed sector QQ on the end of the beam. The reader will understand, without any farther explanation, how the impulse given to the piston in either direction is thus transmitted to the beam without diminution. The fly XX, with its pinion Y, which also works in the toothed arch QQ, may be supposed to be removed ſor the present, and vill be considered aſterwards. We shall take the present opportunity of describing Mr Watts method of communicating the force oſ the steamengine to any machine of the rotatory kind. VV repr-  æ These racks and sectors were very soon laid aside, and a better method, called the parallel motion (hereinaſter deseribed) employed instead oſ them.” v. sents the rim and arms of a very large and heavy metalline fly. On its axis is the concentric-toothed wheel U. There is attached to the end of the great beam a strong and stiſſ rod TT, to the lower end of which a toothed wheel W is firmly fixed by two bolts, so that it cannot turn round. This wheel is of the same size and in the same vertical plane with the wheel U; and an iron link or strap (which cannot be seen here, because it is on the other side of the two wheels) connects the centres of the two wheels, so that the one cannot quit the other. The engine being in the position represented in the figure, suppose the fly to be turned once round by any external force in the direction of the darts. It is plain, that since the toothed wheels cannot quit each other, being kept together by the link, the inner half (that is, the half next the cylinder) of the wheel U will work on the inner half of the wheel W, s0 that at the end of the revolution of the fly the wheel W must have got to the top of the wheel U, and the outer end of the beam must be raised to its highest position. The next revolution of the fy will bring the wheel W and the beam connected with it to their first positions; and thus every two revolutions oſ the ſly will make a complete period of the beam's reciprocating movementss Now, instead of supposing the ſly to drive the beam, let the beam drive the ſfly. The motions must be perſectly the same, and the ascent or descent of the piston will produce one revolution of the fly..  æ Jt is proper here to give the history oſ this invention. I had væry early turned my mind t0 the producing continued motions round an axis, and it will be seen by reſerence to my ſirst speciſication, in 1769, that ſ there described a steam-wheel, moved by the ſorce oſ steam acting in a circular channel against a valve on one iide, and againsi a column oſ mercury or some other ſluid metal on the other side. This was executed upon a scale oſ about six ſeet diameter at Soho, and worked repeatedly, but was given up, as several practical objections were ſound to operate against it. Similar objections l3y against other rotative engines which had heen contrived by myselſ and others, as well as 1o the engines producing rotatory motions by means oſ A ſront view of this double engine is given in fig. 12. marked by the same letters of reſerence This shows the mtchet-wheels, mentioned § 47. Having made my reciprocating engines very regular in their movements, I considered how to produce rotative motions from them in the best manner; and amongst various schemes which were subjected io trial, or which passed through my mind, none appeared s likely to answer the purpose as the application of the crank in the manner of the common turming lathe, (an invention oſ great merit, oſ which the humble inventor, and even its æra, are unknown). But, as the rotative motion is produced in that machine by the impulse given to the crank in the descent oſ the ſoot only, and behoves to be continued in ĩts ascent by the momentum of the wheel which acts as a ſly, and being unwilling to load my engine with a ſly heavy enough to continue the motion during the ascent oſ rhe piston, (and even were a counter-weight employed to act during that ascent, oſ a fly heavy enough to equalize the motion), I proposed to employ two engines acting upon two cranks fixed on the same axis |t an angle of 120 degrees to one another, and a weight placed upon the circumſerence of the ſly at the same angle to eãch of the cranks, by which means the motion might be rendered nearly equal, and a very light ſly would only be requisite. This had occurred to me very early, but my attention being fully employed in making and eretting engines ſor raising water, it remained in petto until about the year 1778 or 9, when Mr Wasbrough erected one oſ his ratchet-wheel engines at Birmingham, the ſrequent breakages and irregularities oſ which recalled the subject to my mind, and I proceeded to make a model of my method, which answered my expectations; but having neglected to take out a patent, the invention was communicated by a workman employed to make the model to some of the people about Mr Wasbrough's engine, and a patent was taken out by them ſor the application of the erank to steam-engines. This fact the said workman conſessed, and the engineer who directed the works acknowledged it, but said, nevertheless, the same idea had occurred to him prior to his hearing oſ mine, and that he had even made a model oſ it before that time, which might be a fact, as the application to a single crank was sufficiently obvious. In these circumstances I thought it better to endeavour to accomplish the same end by other means, than to enter into litigation, and, iſ successſul, by demolishing the patent, to lay the matter open to every body. Accordingly, in I781, I invented and took sut a patent ſor several methods of producing rotative motions ſrom reciprocating ones, amongst which was the method of the sun and planet wheels described in the text.  This contrivance was applied to many engines, and possesses the great advantage oſ giving a double velocity to the ſly; but is perhaps more subject to wear, and to be broken under great strains, than the crank, which is . situation of parts which were ſore-shortened in fig. 11,, particularly the descending branch C of the steam-pipe, and the situation and communications of the two pumps K and I. 8, 8 is the horizontal part of the steam-pipe. 9 ĩs a part of it, vhose hox is represented by the dark cirele of ſfig. 1. D is the box of the steam-clack; and the little circle at its corner represents the end of the axis which turns it, as will be described aſterwards. N is the place oſ the upper eduction-valve. A part only of the upper eduetion-pipe G is represented, the rest being cut off, because it would have covered the descending steam- pipe CC. When eontinued down, it comes between the eye and the box E of the lower steam-valve, and the box F of the lower eduetionvalve. Let us now trace the operation oſ this machine through nll its steps. Recurring to fig. Il. let us suppose that the lower part of the cylinder BB is exhausted of all elastic fluids; that the upper steam-valve D and the lower eduetionvalve F are open, and that the lower steam-valve E and upper eductionvalve N are shut. It is evident that the piston must be pressed toward the bottom of the eylinder, and must pull down the end of the working-beam by means of the toothed rack OO and sector QQ, causing the other end of the beam to urge forward the machinery with which it is connectedl. When the piston arrives at the bottom of the cylinder, the valves D and F are shut by the plug-frame, and E and N are opened. By this last passage the steam gets into the eduction-pipe, where it meets with the injection vater, and is rapidly condensed. The steam now more commonly used, although it requires a ſly-wheel oſ four times the weight, iſ fixed upon the first axiss. My application of the double engine IO these rotative machines rendered unnecemary the counter- weight, and produced a more regular motion; so that, in most of our great manufoctories, these engines now supply the place of water, wind, and horse mills; and instead of carrying the work to the poucr, the prime ogent is placed wherever it is most convenient to the monufacturer. W. from the boiler enters at the same time by E, and pressing on the lover side of the piston, forces it upwards, and by means of the toothed rack OO and toothed sector QQ forces up that end of the working beam, and causes the other end to urge forward the machinery with which it is connected: and in this manner the operation of the engine may be continued for ever. The injection water is continually running into the eduetion-pipe, because condensation is continually going on, and therefore there is a continual atmospheric pressure to produce a jet. The air which is disengaged from the water, or enters by leaks, is evacuated only during the rise of the piston of the air-pump . It is evident that this form of the engine, by maintaining an almost constant and uninterrupted impulsion, is much fitter ſor driving any machinery of continued motion than any of the former engines, which were inactive during half of their motion. It does not, however, seem to have this superiority when employed to draw water; but it is also ſitted for this task. Let the engine be loaded with twice as much as would be proper for it if a single-stroke engine, and let a fly be connected with it. Then it is plain that the power of the engine during the rise of the steam- piston will be accumulated in the fly; and this, in conjunction with the power of the engine during the descent of the steam-piston, will be equal to the whole load of water. »  The engraving here reſorred to is copied ſrom the drawing oſ the double engine in the above patent oſ 1782, and is that oſ an experimental engine, no others having ever been made exacily similar. I have now added engravings ſ one oſ the Albion- Mill engines, be ing one of the earliest double engines erected ſor sule. I do not exactly recollect the date oſ the invention of the double engine, but a drawing oſ it is still in my possession, which was produced in the House oſf Commons when I was soliciting the act oſ parliament ſor the prolongation of my patent in 1774-5. Having encountered nuch diſiculty in teaching others the conatruction and use oſ the single en- In speaking of the steam and eduction-valves, we said that they were all puppet-valves. Mr Wait at first employgine, and in overcoming prejudices, I proceeded no ſarther in ĩt at that time, nor until, ſinding myselſ beset with an host oſ plagiaries and pirates in 1782, I thought it proper to insert it, and some other things, in the patent abovementioned. . The mention of the Albion mills induces mo to ay a ſew words respecting an establishment 0 unjustly calumniated in its day, and the premature destruction oſ which by ſire, in 1791, was not improbably imputed to design. So ſur ſfrom being, as misrepresented, a monopoly injurious to the public, it was the means oſ considerably reducing the price of flour while it continued at vork.  It consisted oſ two engines, each oſ fiſty horses power, and 20 puirs of millstones, of which twelve or more pairs, with the requisite machinery ſor dressing the ſlour and ſor other purposes, were generally kept at work. In place oſ wooden wheels, always subject to ſrequent derangement, wheels oſ cast- iron, nith the teeth truly ſormed and finished, and properly proportionæd to the work, were here employed, and other machinery, which used to be made oſ wood, was made oſ cast-iron, in improved ſorms; and I believe the work executed here may be said to ſorm the commencement oſ that system oſ mill- work which has proved 0 useſul to this country.  In the construction oſ that mill- work and machinery, Boulton and Watt derived most valuable assistance ſrom that able mechanician and engineer, Mr John Rennie, then just entering into business, who assisted in planning them, and under whose direction they were executed. # The engines and mill-work were contained in a commodious and elegant building, designed and executed under the direction oſ the late Mr Samuel Wjyatt, architect.  Though the double engines have been principally applied to rotative motions, yet where mines are very deep, they are advantageously applied to the working oſ pumps by a reciprocating motion; one et or half oſ the pump-rods being suspended by means oſ a sloping rod from the working-beam Dear the cylinder, ani the other halſ oſ these rods being suspended directly ſrom the outer end oſ thal beam, 0 that the ascending motion oſ the piston pulis up one halſ of these rods, and works the pumps belonging to them, and the deicending motion oſ the piston pulls up the other halſ oſ the rods, and works their pumps. æ n engine of this construction was erected at Wheal Maid Mine, in Cornwall, in the year 1787, or beginning oſ 1788, having a cylinder oſ iixtythree inches diameter, and nine ſeet stroke; but the stroke in the pumps, ?hich were eighteen inches diameter, was only seven ſeet.  This engine, which at the time it was made, was the most powerſul in the Q ed cocks, and also sliding-valves, such as the regulator or stenm-valves in the old engines. But he found them always Iose their tightness aſter a short time. This is not surprising, when we consider that they are always perfectly dry, and very hot. He was thereſore obliged to change them all for the puppet-clacks, which, when truly ground and nicely fitted in their motions at first, are not found to go soon out of order. Other engineers now universally use them in the old form of the steam-engine, without the same reasons, and merely by servile and ignorant imitation. The vay in which Mr Watt opens and shuts these valves is as ſollows. Fig. 3 represents a elack with ils seat and box. Suppose it one of the eduction-valves. HH is part oſ the pipe which introduces the steam, and GG is the upper part of the pipe which communicates with the condenser. At EE may be observed a piece more deeply shaded than the surrounding parts. This is the seat of the valve, and is a brass or bell- metal ring turned conical on the outside, so as to fit exactly into a conical part of the pipe GG. These two pieces are ſitted by grinding; and the cone being oſ a long taper, the ring sticks firmly in it, especially aſter having been there for some time and united by rust. The clack itselfis a strong brass plate D, turned conical on the edge, so as to ſit the conical or sloping inner edge oſf the seat. These are very nicely ground on each other with emery. This conical joining is much more obtuse than the outer side oſ the ring; so that although the joint is airtight, the two pieces do not stick strongly together. The clack has a round tail DL, which is freely moveable up and world, worked remarkably well, though, like many others in Cornwall, it was loaded with an enormous weight of dry pump-rods.  In other cases, when it has not been convenient to divide the pump-rods mto two sets, the ascending motion oſ the piston has been employed to raisè à weight equal to one- halſ the column oſ water in the pumps, which wuight came in aid oſ the power oſ the engine in the descending stroke oſ the piston; but the ſormer method is preſerable, wherever it can be adopted. W. down in the hole of a cross pieco FF. On the upper side of the valve is a strong piece of metal DC, firmly joined to it, one side of which is formed into a toothed rack. A ĩs the section of an iron axle which turns in holes in the opposite sides of the valve-box, where it is nicely fitted by grinding, so as to be air-tight. One end of this axis projects a good way without the box, and carries a spanner or handle, which is moved by the plug-frame. To this axis is fixed a strong piece of metal B, the edge of which is formed into an arch of a circle having the axis A in its centre, and is cut into teeth, which work in the teeth of the rack DC. K is a cover which is fixed by scrows to the top of the box HIJH, and may be taken off in order to get at the valve when it needs ropairs. From this description it is easy to see, that by turning the handle which is on the axis A, the sector B must liſt up the valve by means of its toothed rack DC, tiill the upper end of the rack touch the knob or button K. Turning the handle in the opposite direction brings the valve down again to is seat. This valve is extremely tight. But in order to open it ſor the passage of the steam, we must exert a force equal to the pressure of the atmosphere. This, in a large engine, is a very great weight. A valve oſ six inches diameter sustains a pressure not less than 400 pounds. But this foree is quite momentary, and hardly impedes the motion of the engine; ſor the instant the valve is detached from its seat, and has moved through a very small space, the great force of the presure is over. Even this little inconvenience has heen removed by a thought of Mr Watt. He has put the spanner in such a position when ĩt begins to raise the valve, that its mechanieal energy is almost inſinitely great. Let QR (fig. 14.) be part of the plug-frame descending, and P one of its pins just going to lay hold of the spanmer NO, moveable round the axis N. On the same axis is another arm NM, connected by a joint with the leader ML, which is connected also by a joint with the spanner LA that is on the axis A oſ the sector within the valve-box. Thereſore, when the pin P pushes down the spanner NO, the arm NM moves sidewise and pulls down the spanner AL by means of the connecting rod. Things are so disposed, that when the cock is shut, LM and MN are in one straight line. The intelligent mechanic will perceive that, in this position, the force of the lever ONM is insuperable. It has this further advantage, that if any thing should tend to force open the valve, it would be ineffectual; for no force exerted at A, and transmitted by the rod LM, can possibly push the joint M out of its position. Of such importance is it to practical mechanics, that its professors should be persons of penetration as well as knowledge. Ye this circumstance is unheeded by hundreds who have servilely copied from Mr Watt, as may be seen in every engine that is puffed on the public as a discovery and an improvement. When these puppet-valves have been introduced into the common engine, ve have not seen one instance where this has been attended to; certainly because its utility has not been observed. (See also the description of the workinggeur of the Albion-mill engines, and Plate VI.)  & This was the construction oſ the regulator boxes or noæles which wa: generally employed by Boulton and Watt about the time when this esay was written; but upon the introduction oſ the double engines, it was somewhat changed, the regulator or valve, which admitted the steam to the cylinder, was placed directly over the exhaustion-valve, which admitted the steam to the condenser, as may be een in the drawing oſ one oſ the Albion- Mill engines, represented in Plate B.  At a later period, my ſriend Mr Murdock contrived another arrangement, which is now generally followed in steam engines applied to the working pumps, or other reciprocating motions: The regulating-valves are placed one over another, as has just been mentioned; the stems of the steamregulators are hollow cylinders, through which, and a collar oſ hemp, the stems oſ the exhaustion-valves pass upwards airtight, and these hollow stems oſ the steam. regulators also pass through stuſfing- boxes in the covers of. the regulator boxes. In this arrangement the regulators or valves ar” We postponed any account of the oſfice of the ſfly XX ſig. 11.), as it is not of use in an engine regulated by the fly VV. The ſly XX is only for regulating the reciprocating motion of the beam when the steam is not admitted during the whole descent of the piston. This it evidently must render more uniſorm, accumulating a momentum equal to the whole pressure of the ſull supply of steam, and then sharing it with the beam during the rest oſ the descent of the piston.+ 69. When a person properly skilled in mechanics and chemistry reviews these diſſerent ſorms of Mr Watt's steamengine, he vill ensily perceive them susceptible of many intermediate forms, in which any one or more of the distinguishing improvements may be employed. The first great improvement was the condensation in a separate vessel. This increased the original powers of the engine, giving to the atmospheric pressure and to the counterweight their full energy; at the same time the vaste of steam is greatly diminished. The next improvement, by employing the pressure of the steam instead of that oſ the atmosphere, aimed not only at a still farther diminution of the waste; but was also fertile in advantages, rendering raised and depressed by means o machinery ſixed upon the outside (in place oſ that described in the imside), and are preferable from their being more eaiily accessible in case oſ derangement.  Mr Murdock has also contrived an excellent iliding valve ſor the admisnion of steam into, and its exit from, the cylinder (now very generally used, ith some improvements, by Boulton, Watt, and Co. in their rotative engines), for which, along with several other articles, he obtained his majesty's patent in 1799, (the specification oſ which has been published in the Repertory oſ Arts, vol. xiii.) To the ingenuity of Mr Murdock are also due many improvements in the manuſacture oſ the engines, and in the machines and tools used for that purpose. + This has been found to be unnecessary; for even in pumping engines, the momentum oſ the great beam pump-rods, water, &e. is found to afford suſficient regulation for the inequality of the itroke, and in rotaiive engines the great ſly perſorms that oſice W. the machine more manageable, and particularly enabling us at all times, and without trouble, to suit the power of the engine to its load oſ work, however variable and increasing; and brought into view a very interesting proposition in the mechanical theory oſ the engine, viz. that the whole perſormance of a given quantity of steam may be augmented by admitting it into the cylinder only during a part of the piston's motion. Mr Watt has varied the application of this proposition in many ways; and there is nothing about the machine which gives more employment to the sagacity and judgment of the engineer. The third improvement of the double impulse may be considered as the finishing touch given to the engine, and renders it as uniſorm in its action as any water-wheel. In the engine in its most perfect ſorm there does not seem to be above one-ſourth of the steam wasted; so that it is not poible to make it onefourth part more powerſul than it is at present. 70. The only thing that seems susceptible of considersble improvement is the great beam. The enormous strains exerted on its arms require a proportional strength. This requires a vast mass of matter, not less indeed in an engine vith a cylinder oſ 54 inches than three tons and a half; moving with the velocity of three feet in a second, which must be communicated in about half a second. This mass must be brought into motion from a state of rest, must again be brought to rest, again into motion, and again to rest, to complete the period of a stroke. This consumes much power; and Mr Watt has not been able io load an engine with more than IO or 11 pounds on the inch and preserve a suſſficient quantity oſ motion, s0 as to make I2 or 15 8-ſeet strokes in a minute.* a  There is no lois of power except the ſriction, as the power employed to give motion in the beginning oſ the stroke is returned in tho latter part of it, by continuing the motion aſter the steam-regulating valve is shut. W. m The difficulty of obtaining timber of ufficient dimensions to form the working-beam of a very powerful engine in one log, early suggested to the constructors of steam-engines the forming them of six or more logs laid flat upon one another, und side to side, (asshewn in this cros section,) A and screwed logether upon douells or joggles to Wo prevent them from sliding upon one unother; but M howerer well working-beams s0 constructed have & a been put iogether, it has heen found that after they have heen s0me time in use the strups and bolts by which the logs were connected have gradually got loose, and several bad consequences have ensued. Beams in one solid log ere therefore preſerred wherever they could be obtuined. In imall engines Mr Watt sometimes used cast-iron wheels, or large pulleys in place of working-beams, and occasionally other contrivances. T1. We presume that our thinking readers will not be displeased with this rational history of the progress of this engine in the hands of its ingenious and worthy inventor, We owe it to the communications of a friend, well acquainted vith him, and able to judge of his merits. The v a  To prevent this, whenever timber could not be got large enough to jorm the beams in one piece, I latterly resorted to simple beams, braced with iron in this manner: But ſor soveral years past, workingbeams oſ timber ſor engines of every si2æ have been entirely laid aside, and those made oſ cust-ron have been employed in place oſ them, whereby the bending, aplitting, twisting, dry-rot, &e. to which wood is subject, are completely avoided.? W. public see him always associated with the no less celebrated mechanic and philosopher Mr Boulion, of Soho, near Birmingham. They have shared the royal patent from the beginning; and the alliance is equally honourable to both. * 72. The advantages derived ſrom the patent-right show both the superiority of the engine and the liberal minds of the proprietors. They erect the engines at the expence of the employers, or give working draſts of all the paris, with instructions, by which any resident engineer may execute the work. The employers select the best engine of the ordinary hind in the neighbourhood using the same sort of coals, compare the quantities of fuel expended by each, and poy to Messrs Watt and Boulton one-third of the annual savings for a certain term of years. By this the patentees are excited to do their utmost to make the engine perfect; and the employer pays in proportion to the advantage he derives ſrom it.f It may not be here improper to state the actual porformance of some of these engines. The late Dr Roebuck oſ Borrowstoness, a gentleman oſ much ingenuity and enterprise, was originally associated with me in the proſits which might accrue from the patent, but in or about 1775 he disposed of his interest in it to Mr Boulton, and both oſ them, in 1774-5, assisted me in procuring an act oſ parliament ſor the prolongation of the patent ſor 25 yeum from that time; and I then commenced a partuership with the latter, which terminated with the exclusive privilege in the year 1800, when I retired ſrom business, but our ſriendship continued undiminished to the close oſ his liſe. As n memorial due to that ſriendship, I avail myselſ oſ this, probably a last public opportunity, oſ stating, that to his ſriendly encouragement, to his partiality for scientiſic improvements, and his ready a pplication oſ them to the Jrocesses oſ art; to his intimate knowledge oſ business and manuſactures, und to his extended views and liberal spirit oſ enterprise, must in a great measure be ascribed whatever success may have attended my exertions. W. 1  This was originally their method of agreeing, but aſterwards, to avoid disputes and trouble, they fixed ceritain rates ſor each sized engine, according to the value and quality oſ coals in the neighbourhood.” W. 78. The burning of one bushel of good Neucastle or Swansea coals in Mr Wait's reciprocating engines, working more or less expunsively, was found, by the uccounis hept at the Cornish mines, to raise from 2à  32 millions of pounds of water one soot high: the greuter or less effect depending upon the state of the engine, its size, and rate of working, und upon the quality of the coal In engines upon the rotative double construction, one having a cylinder of 31) inches diumeter, and making 17} strokes of 7 feet long per minute, called 40 horse power, meaning the constant erertion of 40 horses (for which purpose, supposing the work to go on night and day, 3 reluys, or ut least 120 horses, must be kept,) consumed ubout 4 bushels of good Neucastle coal per hour, or 400 weight of good Wedneshury coul. A rotative double engine, with a cylinder of 283 inches in diameter, muking 211 strokes of 5 fſeet long per minute, was called 20 horses power; and an engme, with a cylinder of 17} inches diameter, making 2b strokes of 4 feet long per minute, was called 10 horse power; and the consumption of coals by these wus nearly proportional to that of the 40 horseé pouver. æ When Boulton and Watt set about the introduction oſ the rotative steam-engines, to give motion to mill-work, they ſelt the necessity oſ adopting some mode oſ deseribing the power, which should be eusily understood by the persons who were likely to use them. Horses being the power then generally employed to move the machinery in the great breneries and distilleries of the metropolis, vhere these engines came ſirst into demand, the power oſ a mill-horse was considered by them to aſſord an obvious and concise standard oſ comparison, and one suſiciently deſinite ſor the purpose in view.  A horse going at the rate oſ 23 miles an hour raises u weight oſ I50 Ibs. by a rope passing over a pulley, which is equal to the raising 33,000 pounds one ſoot high in a minute. This was considered the horse's power; but in calculating the size oſ the engines, it was judged advisuble to make a very ample allowance ſor the probable case oſ their not being kept in the best order, and thereſore the load was only assnmed at about 7 Ibs. on the square inch of the piston, although the engines work well to IO Ibs. on the inch, exclusive oſ their own ſriction. W. VOL. II. E A bushel of Neurastle coals, hich thus appears to be the consumption of a 10-horse engine for one hour, grinds and dresses about 10 bushels, Winchester measure, of wheat. The quantity of water necessary for injection may be determined on principle for engines having a separate condenser. Having found the contents of the cylinder in cubic feet (that is, the areu of the piston multiplied by the length of the stroke +ſ5 to allow for the vacuities ut top and bottom Ihrough which the piston does not puss), it is to be considered that every cubic foot oſ steam produces ubout a cubic inch oſ water when condensed, and contains about as much latent heut as would raise 960 cubic inuches oſ water one degreee This steam must not only be condensed, but must be cooled down to the temperature of the hot well: therefore as many inches of cold water must be employed us will require all this heat to raise it to the temperature of the hot well. Dherefore let c be the quuntity of steam to be condensed in cubic feet; a= the temperature of the cold water (per Fohrenheit); bætne propvied temperature of the warm water, or hot well; 1172=the sensible und lati nt heaot of steam; 7æ=the culic inches uf cold water required to condense c. Then c x 17ub=a x b+a: 775 Therefore c X =I. Thus, if the proposei temperature of the hot well be 100 (and it should not be higher to obtain a tolerable vacuum in the cylinder), and that of the injection be 500, we have a =50, 117|,I00 ſ bæ100; hence=29 l.a491. That is, for every foot of the capacity of the stroke in the cylinder +5, calculuted as has heen directed, or for every cubic inch of water evaporated from the boiler, about Q13 ubic inches of water at 50° will be required to condense the steam But as the injection water muy not be obtained so cold as 50, and other circumstances muy require an allowance, a vine pint of ater for every inch boiled off, or for every cubic foot of the contents of the stroke in the ylinder, may be hept in mind as amply sufficient. This greatly exceeds the quantity necessary in a good Newcomen's engine, und by showing the more perfect condensation, points out the superiority of the new engine; for the Newcomen's engine, if working to the greatest advantage, should not be loaded to more thanl pounds upon the inch, whereus Watt's engine bears a load not much less than 11 pounds, erclusive of ſriction, when maing 12 8-feet strokes per minute. What has been now said is not a matter of mere curiosity: it affords an eract rule ſor judging of the good working order of the engine. We can measure with accuracy the ater admitted into the boiler during an hour without allowing its surface to rise or fall, and also the water employed for injection. If the lust be above the proportion now given (adupted to the temperatures 500 and 100), we are certain that steam is wasted by leaks, or by condensation in some improper place. TIt is evident that it is of great importance to have the temperature of the hot well as lo as posible, hecause there aluays remains steum in the cylinder of the same or ruther higher temperature, possessing an elusticity which balances purt of the pressure on the other side of the piston, and thus diminishes the pouer of the engine. This is clearly seen by the burometer which Mr Watt applies to his engines, and is a most useful addition to the proprietor. It shows him the state of the vacuum, and, ith the height of the mercury in the steam-guage, points out the real power of the engine. Mr Watt finds that, with the must judiciously constructed furnaces, it requires 8 feet of surface of the boiler to be exposed to the action of the fire und flume to boil off a cubic foot of water in an hour, and that a bushel of Newcastle coals 0 applied will boil off from 8 to 12 cubic feet, and that it requires about a cut. of Wednesbury coals to do the same. W. In consequence of the great superiority of Mr Watts engines, both ith respect to economy and manageable- ness, they have become of most extensive use; and in every demand of manuſacture on a great scale, they offer us an indeſatigable servant, whose strength has no bounds. 74. The greatest mechanical project that ever engaged the attention oſ man was on the point of being executed by this machinee. The States of Holland were treating with Messrs Watt and Boulton for draining the Haerlem Meer, and even reducing the Zuyder Zee: and ve doubt not but that it will be accomplished whenever that unhappy nation has suſſiciently ſelt the difference between liberty and foreign tyranny. Indeed such unlimited powers are aſforded by this engine, that the engineer now thinks that no task can be proposed to him which he cannot execute with proſit to his employer. 75. No wonder then that all classes of engineers have turned much of their attention to this engine; and, seeing that it has done so much, that they try to make it do still more. Numberless attiempts have been made to improve Mr Watt's engine; and it would occupy a volume to give an account oſ them, whilst that account would do no more than indulge curiosity. Our engineers by proſession are in general miserably deficient in that accurate knowledge oſ mechanics and oſ chemistry, which is necessary ſor understanding this machine; and we have not heard oſ one in this kingdom who can be put on a par with the present patentces in this respect. Most of the attempts of engineers have been made with the humbler view of availing themsclves oſ Mr Watts discoveries, so as to construct a steamengine superior to Newcomen's, and yet of a ſorm suſſiciently diſſerent ſfrom Watt's to keep it without the reach of his patent. This they have in general accomplished by perſorming the condensation in a place which, with a little “ Sueh things were in agitation, but did not come :o ſar as treating. A considerable engine was, however, erected hy them at Mydrecht ſor draining -  lorge extent of country, in which it was successſul. V. , lllEuuuil,-Su-1  L Eilllllil stretch oſ ſancy, not unſrequent in a court of law, may be called part of the cylinder. 76. The success oſ most oſ these attempts has interſered s0 little with the interest of the patentees, that they have not hindered the erection of many engines which the law would have deemed encroachments. We think it our duty to give our opinion on this subject without reserve. These are most expensive undertakings, and ſew employers are able to judge accurately oſ the merits oſ a project presented to them by an ingenious artist. They may see the practicability of the scheme, by having a general notion of the expansion and condensation of steam, and they may be misled by the ingenuity apparent in the construction. The engineer himselſ is frequently the dupe of his own ingenuity; and it is not alvays dishonesty, but frequently ignorance, which makes him preſer his own invention or (as he thinks it) improvement. It is a most delicate engine, and requires much knowledge to see what does and what does not improve its perſormance. We have gone into the preceding minute investigation of Mr Watts progress, with the express purpose of making our readers ſully masters of jts principles, and have more than once pointed out the real improvements, that they may be ſirmly fixed and always ready in the mind. By having recourse to them, the reader may pronounce vith confidence on the meriis of any new construction, and will not be deceived by the puſſs of an ignorant or dishonest engineer.* +  Dr Robisons account oſ Hornblower's engine has been omitted by the Editor, as unsuitable to the present work. Notwithstanding the great ingenuity evinced by Mr Hornblower in the coustruction oſ his engine, yet it was ſound by a court oſ law to be a plagiarism oſ Mr Watts invention, and on this account Mr Watt could not have made any commentary upon it, even it it had appeared deserving oſ insertion. Enrron. t uSeveral oſ my improvements mentioned in the course oſ this esay were, uith other contrivances which I have not ſhought it necesary to enter int ſuu—————; il  —;; 77. We shall conclude our account of this noble engine vith observing, that Mr Watts ſorm suggests the conthe detail oſ, made the objects oſ distinct patents subsequent to that oſ 1769, oſ which the ſollowing notice may here suffice: Parenr, 25th October 1781.  For certain new Methods oſ applying the Vibrating or Reciprocating Motion oſ Steam or Fire- Engines to produce a continued Rotative or Circular Motion round un Axis or Centre, and thereby to give Motion to the Wheels oſ Mills or other Machines.” The specification dated 13th February, 1782, contains a description of ſive diſferent contrivances of rotative motions. ParenT, 12th March 178 For certain new Improvements upon Steam or Fire- Engine- ſor raising Water, and other Mechanical Purposes, and certain neW Pieces oſ Mechunism applicable to the sume The speciſication, dated the Sd July, 1782, contains, first, The expansive steam-engine, with six different contrivances ſor equalizing the poner; second, the double-power steam-engine, in which the steam is alternately applieò to press on euch side oſ the piston, while a vacuum is ſormed on ſhe other; third, a new compound engine, or method oſ connecting together ſhe cyliners and condensers oſ two or more distinct engines, so as to make the steam which has been employed to press on the piston of the ſirst, act expansively upon the piston oſ the second, &e., and thus derive an additional power to act either alternately or conjointly with that oſ the ſirst cylinder; ſourth, the npplication oſ touthed racks and sectors to the ends oſ ihe piston or pump-rods, and to the arches oſ the working-beams, instead oſ chains; fiſfth, n new reciprocating semi-rotative engine, and a new rotative engine or stenm-wheel. Parenv, 28h April, 1784.  For certain new Improvements upon Fire and Steam Engines, and upon Machines worked or moved by the sume.” The speciſication, dated the è4th August, 1784, describes, ſirst, A new rotative engme, in which the steam- vessel turns upon a pivot, and is placed in a dense ſluid, the resistance of which to the action oſ the steam causes the rotative motion; second, Methods of causing the piston-rods, pump-rods, and other purts oſ engines, to move in perpendicular or other straight lines, and to enable the engine to act upon the working-beams both in pushing and pulling: This is now called the Paorallel-Motion, und three varieties are described; third, Improved methods oſ applying the steam. engine to work pumps, or other alternating machinery, by making the rods balance each other; ſourth, A new method oſ applying the power oſ steam-engines to move mills which have many wheels required to move ronnd in concert; fiſfth, A simplified method oſ applying the power oſ stenm-engines to ſhe working oſ heavy hummers or stampers; sixth, A new construction and mode oſ opening the valves, and an improved working-gear; seventh, A portable stcam-engine and machinery ſor moving wheel- carringes. struction of an excellent air-pump:. A large vessel may be made to communicate with a boiler at one side, and with the pump- receiver on the other, and also with a condenser. Suppose this vessel of ten times the capacity of the receiver; fſill it with steam from the boiler, and drive out the air from it; then open its communication with the receiver and the condenser. This ill rarefy the air of the receiver ten times. Repeating the operation will rareſy it 100 times; the third operation will rareſy it 1000 times; the ſourth, 10,000 times, &c. All this may be done in half a minute. Parent in 1785. For certain newly improved Methods oſ constructing Furnace,, or Fire Places for Heating, Boiling, or Evaporating oſ Water, and other Liquids, which are applicable to Steam- Engines and other purposes; and also for Heating, Melting, and Smelting oſ Metals and their Ores, whereby grearer eſfects are produced ſrom the Fuel, and the Smoke is in great measure prevented or consumed. The specification is dated the I4th June, 1785. W. BY MR WATT. De RoBISONS aceount of Mr Watts engines terminates here; but it seems necessary to describe and explain certain additions to them which he has either very slightly noticed, or not at all, though they existed before he composed the preceding dissertation; probably they were omitted from his not having had an opportunity of observing them closely. The ſirst is the Parallel Motion, which, in the single engines, serves in place of chains, and in the double engines, supplies the place of the rack and sector, which has been described in art. 68. It has been mentioned, that the racks and sectors were very subject to wear, and that, when perſect, they did not move with that smoothness that was wished; and to chains there were many objections. It occurred to Mr Watt, that if some mechanism could be devised moving upon centres, which would keep the piston-rods perpendicular, both in pushing and pulling, that a smoother motion would be attained; and, in all probability, that the parts would be less subject to wear. Aſter some consideration, it occurred, that if two levers of equal lengths were placed in the same vertical plane, nearly as shown in the following diagram, movenble on the centres B and C, and connected by a rod A D, the point E, in the middle of that rod, would describe nearly a straight and perpendicular line, when the ends A and D of the levers, and of that rod, moved in the segments of circles FG, and IH, provided the arch FG did not much exceed 40 degrees, and consequently that if the top of the piston-rod were attached to that point E, it would be guided perpendicularly, or nearly so. 5 ] I u: It necessarily ſollowed, that if for convenience the lever CD hich represents what he called the regulating- radius) were made only half the length of the lever AB, (which represents the half length or radius of the working-beam) æ point situated at one-third of the length of the rod AD, from the joint A, would then move in a perpendicular line. These were first ideas, but the parallel motion soon was moulded into the form in which it appears in all Boulton and Watt's engines, and in which it is seen in the annexed plate oſ the second engine at the Albion Mill. A patent ſor the protection of this, and some other of Mr Watts inventions, passed the seals in April 1784, but the invention was made in the latter end of 1783. A second article omitted to be described, is the method of regulating the speed oſ the rotative engines, a matter essential to their application to cotton-spinning, and many other manufactories. It is perſormed by admitting the steam into the cylinder more or less freely, by means of what is called a Throttlevalve, which is commonly a circular plate of metal A, having a spindle B fixed across its diameter. This plate is accurately fitted to an aperture in a metal ring CC, of some thickness, through the edgeway oſ which the spindle is fitted steam- tight, and the ring is fixed between the two flanches of the joint of the steam-pipe which is next to the cylinder. One end of the spindle, which has a square upon it, comes through the ring, and has a spanner fixed upon it, by which it can be turned in either direction. When the valve is parallel to the outsides of the ring, it shuts the opening nearly perſectly; but when its plane lies at an angle to the ring, it admits more or less steam according to the degree it has opened; consequently the piston is acted upon with more or less forcee. For many purposes engines are thus regulated by hand at the pleasure oſ the attendant; but where a regular velocity is required, other means must be applicd to open and shut it, without any attention on the part oſ those who have the care of it. For this purpose Mr Watt had various methods, but at last ſixll ed upon what he calls the Governor, (shewn at W. Plate IV. and VII.) consisting of a perpendicular axis, turned by the engine: To a joint near the top of this axis are suspended two iron rods carrying heavy balls of metal at their lower ends, in the nature of pendulums. When this axis is put in motion by the engine, the balls recede from the perpendicular by the centrifugal force, and by means of a combination of levers ſixed to their upper end, raise the end of a lever which acts upon the spanner of the throttle-valve, and shuts it more or less according to the speed of the engine, s0 that as the velocity augments, the valve is shut, until the speed of the engine and the opening of the valve come to a maximum and balance each other. The applicatiãn of the centrifugal principle was not a new invention, but had been applied by others to the regulation of water and wind- mills, and other things; but Mr Watt improved the mechanism by which it acted upon the mochines, and adapted it to his engines. From the beginning, Mr Watt applied a gage to she the height oſ the water in his little boiler, which consisted, of a glass tube communicating at the lower end with the water in the boiler, and at the upper end with the steam contained in it. This gnge was of great use in his experiments, but in practice other methods are adopted. He has always used a barometer to indicate the degree of exhaustion in his engines. Sometimes that instrument is, as usual, a glass tube 35 or 34 inches long, immersed at bottom in a cistern of mercury, and at top communicating by means of a small pipe and cock with the condenser. The oscillations are in a great degree prevented by throttling the passage ſor the stenm by means of the cock. But as glass tubes were liable to be broken by the workmen, barometers were made of iron tubes, in the ſorm of inverted syphons, one leg about half the length of the other, to the upper end of the long leg a pipe and cock were joined, which communicated with the condenser; a proper quantity oſ mercury was poured into the short leg of the syphon, which naturally stood level in the two legs: A light float with a slender stem was placed in the short leg, and a scale divided into half inches applied to it, which (as by the exhaustion the mercury rose as much in the long leg as it fell in the short one) represented inches on the common barometer. The steam-gnge is a short glass tube with its lower end immersed in a cistern oſ mercury, which is placed within an iron box screwed to the boiler steam-pipe, or to some other part communicating freely with the steam, which, pressing on the surface of the mercury in the cistern, raises the mercury in the tube, (which is open to the air at the upper end) and its altitude serves to show the elãtic power of the steam over that of the atmosphere. These instruments are of great use where they are kept in order, in shewing the superintendent the state of the engine; but slovenly engine-tenders are hut too apt to put them out of order, or to suſfer them to be so. It is the interest, however, of every owner of an engine to see that they, as mell as all other parts of the engine, are hept in order. The barometer being adapted only to ascertain the deee of exhaustion in the condenser where its variations were small, the vibrations of the mercury rendered it very diſſicult, if not impracticable, to ascertain the state of the exhaustion of the eylinder at the diſſerent periods oſ the stroke oſ the engine; it became thereſore necessary to contrive an instrument ſor that purpose that should be less subject to vibration, and should show nearly the degree oſ exhaustion in the cylinder at all periods. The ſollowing instrument, called the Indicator, is ſound to answer the end suſficiently. A cylinder about an inch diameter, and six inches long, exceedingly truly bored, has a solid piston accurately ſitted to it, so as to slide easy by ihe help of some oil; the stem oſ the piston is guided in the direction oſ the axis of the cylinder, so that it may not be subject to jum or cause friction in any part oſ its motion. The bottom of this cylinder has a cock and small pipe joined to it, which, having a conical end, may be inserted in a hole drilled in the cylinder of the engine near one of the ends, so that by opening the small cock, a communication may be eſfected between the inside oſ the cylinder and the indicator. The cylinder oſ the indicator is ſastened upon a wooden or metal ſrame, more than twice its own length; one end of a spiral steel spring, like that of a spring steclyard, is attached to the upper part of the frame, and the other end oſf the spring is attached to the upper end of the piston-rod of the indicator. The spring is made oſ such a strength, that when the eylinder of the indieator is perſectly exhausted, the pressure of the atmosphere may ſorce its piston down within an inch of its bottom. An index being ſixed to the top of its piston- rod, the point where it stands, when quite exhausted, is marked from an observation of a barometer communicating with the same exhausted vessel, and the scale divided accordingly. Mr Watt very early found that, although most kinds of grease would answer when employed to keep the piston tight, yet that beeſ or mutton tallow were the most proper, and the least liable to decompose; but when cylinders were new and imperfectly bored, the grease soon disappeared, ond the piston was leſt dry ; he therefore endeavoured to detain it by thickening it with some substance which would lubrieate the eylinder, and not prove decomposable by heat and exhaustion. Black- lead dust seemed a proper substance, and was thereſore employed, especially when a cylinder or the packing of the piston was new; but it was found in the sequel that tlhie black-lead wore the cylinder, though slowly; and by more perfect vorkmanship, cylinders are made so true as not to require it, or at leust only ſor a very short time at first using. The joints of the cylinder, and other parts of Neweomens engines, were generally made tight by being screwed together upon rings oſ lead covered with gliziers putty, 3 which method was suſficient, as the entry of small quantities of air did not materially affect the working of these engines where only a very imperſect exhaustion was required. But the contrary being the case in the improved engines, this method would not answer Mr Watt's purpose. He at first made his joints very true, and screwed them together upon pasteboard, soſtened by soaking in water, which answered tolerably well ſor a time, but was not suſficiently durable. He thereſore endeavoured to find out some more lasting substance; and observing that at the iron founderies they filled up flaws by iron borings or filings, moistened by urine, which in time became hard, he improved upon this by mixing the iron borings or filings with a small quantity of sulphur, and a little salammoniac, to which he aſterwards added some fine sand from the grindstone troughs. This mixture, being moistened with water and spread upon the joint, heats soon after it is screwed together, becomes hard, and remains good and tight ſor years, which has contributed in no small degree to the perſection of the engines. Mr Murdock, much about the same time, without communication with Mr Watt, made a cement ol iron borings and salammoniac, without the sulphur. But the latter gives the valuable property of making the cement set immedintely. The act of parliament extending Mr Watt's exclusive privilege for the improvements secured to him hy his first patent, expired in 1800, at which period he retired from business, having for some 3ears before ceased to take an active part. Previous to that time, Messrs Boulton and Watt, juniors, had been received into the partnership, and had erected extensive works, with improved machinery, for the manuſacture of steam-engines; and, since the death of Mr Boulton, the concern has been carried on by them, in conjunction with Mr Southern and Mr Murdock. Under their management, considerable improvenents have been made in the execution of the engines, and some advanta- APPENDIX. 159 geous alterations have been adopted in the subordinate mechanism and general construction; the use of wood has been discontinued, and iron, or, in the fixed parts, stone, or brick-work, substituted in its place; and numbers of expert workmen have been trained, so that the engines are now executed with a degree of perſection equalling, if not surpassing, the improvements which the increased wealth and commerce of the country have called forth in almost every other art and manuſacture. FROM MR SOUTHERN TO MR WATT.* DEAR Sin, Tuz experiments, of which the particular circumstances are hereaſter related, vere made in 1803, with the view of ascertaining, chieſly, the density of steam raised from water under diſferent pressures above that of the atmosphere, an appuratus having then been made ſfor a different purpose, which seemed pretty well adapted to this object, as it did equally so to that of ascertaining the latent heat of stenm. It may be premised, that the thermometers employed in all the experiments which will be now related, were made and graduated with the greatest care, the tubes having been accurately measured as to the proportional capacity of their different parts, the boiling point of each ascertained, * In all the experiments oſ which an account is given in this letter, Mr Southern was as iated by Mr William Creighton. according to the rules preseribed by a committee of the Royal Society, in 177, (viæ. the bulbs and tubes being in steam when the barometer stood at 29.8 inches, this degree of temperature being called 2129°,) and in all cases the bulb and the tube, as high as the mercury ascended in it, were kept in the steam or the water whose temperature was to be noted. This latter circumstance was effected in the case of steam, by sliding the tube of the thermometer through a stuffing-box, or collar, made tight, till the mercury in it could just be seen above it. The tube had known marks on it, ſfrom which measurements were taken to the mereury, and thence the temperature known. The quantity of steam was measured by filling a cylinder vith it; (inclosed in the steam, ) whose diameter was about S. I6 inches, and driving it out by the motion of æ piston, vhich had 18 inches stroke regulated by the rotation of a crank. The solid contents of the piston-rod, which was O.86 inches diameter, diminished the contents oſ the cylinder, leaving the quantity discharged each stroke by the motion of the piston, very nearly 130.7 cubic inches; but as the piston did not rise high enough to touch the top that closed the cylinder, and there was also unavoidably a space between the valve and the cylinder, these spaces together vere computed to equal I.7 cubic inches. Of course, had the elasticity of the steam been just equal to that of the atmosphere, no addition to the 130.7 cubic inches would need to be made; but as in the three successive experiments it was about , j, and à greater, these proportions oſ the spaces would eseape when the valve was open that allowed the discharge of the steam to be made into the atmosphere, and must thereſore be added respectively to the contenſs discharged by the motion of the piston. These additional quantities are 1.7X 3557; I.TX j5 2.83; and 1.7X 3=b5.1; which, added to 130.7, gives 131.97 in the first experiment; 133.53 in the second, and 135.8 in the third, for the quantity of steam discharged at VOL. iI. L each stroke oſ the piston; and thereſore the number oſ strokes which would discharge one cubie foot in each oſ the three experiments, would be 18. 164, 12.941, and 12.724, respectively. The steam was conducted from the cylinder, after passing the valve, by means of an iron pipe attached to a small copper one, having its end hent down, and immersed a short depth into a cistern of water. The cistern was made of fir-wood, and painted inside and outside with white paint; was about 30 inches square, and 206 inches deep; and the quantity of water in it was ascertained by weighing it, as was also the accession to it by the condensed steam. The elasticity of the steam was ascertained by measuring an actual column of mercury which it supported; and the number of strokes was ascertained by a machine called a counter. The ſollowing table contains the principal facts of these experiments. IF the whole number of strokes in each experiment be divided by the number, ſound as above, that were required to discharge one cubie ſoot of steam, the whole number bf cubic feet of steam discharged in ench experiment will be given; viz. 5154  18.164  881.58; 2434  12.941 188.09; and 1599  12.724 æ 125.66; the quantity of steam formed and discharged in the first, second, and third experiments respectively, in cubie feet. If the weight of water gained by the condensation of steam in each experiment, be multiplied by 27.65, the number of cubic inches of water in a pound weight, and divided by the number of cubic feet of stenm which were condensed, the quotient will give the portion of water, in cubic inches, required by each cubie foot of steam ſor its ſormation; and hence also the comparative density. Thus 20.25 x 27.65391.58æ1.4350] inches of water to 20.00 x 27.65  188.0-0 92.940 form each cubic 19.45 x à7.65 / 195.66 4.279] ſoot oſ steam; 40.00 and these numbers are proportional -3 82.24 } the rela119.70 40 tive densities, while the elasticities were as s æ respee120) tively. These results appenr to support the conclusion that the deniity of steam is nearly, if not accurately, proportional to its elusticity; at least this may be aſfirmed of it within the limits of these experiments. FnoM the above experiments may be calculated the latent heal of steam developed in the three cases; ſor if the weight of the water which received the augment of heat, be multiplied by the number of degrees oſ temperature communicated to it, and if this product be divided by the accossion of weight to the water, (which only could have communicated the accession of temperature) it is evident that the quotient will give the temperature which the steam lost; and if to this be added the temperature which it retained, (viæ. that of the water in the cistern at the conclusion of the experiment) a number vill be obtained shewing the æhole heat, or the sum of the latent and sensible heat of the steam. Hence, by substracting the sensible heat oſ the steam ſrom this sum, the latent heat will be found. That is, col. 5 x col. — col. 7 sensible heat; or, i? W æ weight of cold water, T æ its temperature u æ accession of water by the condensed steam, t æ the temperature of warm water, and a æ the sum oſ the latent and sensible heat of the steam condensed. VFæ. W T. + col. 8 æ the sum oſ the latent and u Either of these equations will he found to give in the three experiments 1157°, 1244°, and 1256°, from which substract the numbers, col. xi. 2299, 270°, and 2059, and there remain --- - 95J', ꝗ7a, and õ6ſ°, the latent heat. Three other experiments were instituted with the intention of ascertaining the latent heat of steam under the three sume degrees oſ elasticity, viz. oqual to the support of 40, 80, and 120 inches of mercury. The steam was raised or generated in the same boiler used in the previous experiments, and from the end of a cast-iron pipe of 13 inch diameter which united with it, a small copper pipe was taken (its diameter about à inch) and bent down s0 that its end could conveniently be immersed an inch or two under the surſace of water. The end of this pipe was closed by a thin disk of eopper, in which a circular hole was made; ĩ 3⸗ of an inch diameter, through which the steam from the boiler was blown into the cold water. The water which received the heat was contained in a tinned iron vessel that weighed 3.77 Ibs., and its capacity for heat may therefore be called equivalent to ;lb. of water. In each of the experiments, the water employed to receive the steam weighed 4 5ãb., to which, in the ſollowing table, recording the principal ſacts, is added this ; lb., in lieu oſ the vessel. ESEEES i EBEEE i : 3 E:3 PEEEEECEE E | ſ5] . : E u B i jæl 58158  EF E 5 il 5 Eæ M ;⸗ i E g 5: g t P l5 V E& EIE : B F I5 u ſ Ibs. o ; ° Ibs. Inches. 1245 280 483 BO : 32 ,78 40 550 2835] 8 8I; B835  ,857 80 a00) 288] 413 81 883 ],896 120 Iſ either of the equations above be applied here to the facts noted in this table, the sum oſ the latent and sensible heat will come out I1Iò°, 1150° and 1295°; and the latent heat 890, 990°, and 935°. It was observed, however, that the tin vessel lost heat to the surrounding air very sensibly, and an experiment was made to determine the amount of this efſect; and it was found when the contained water was at 80°, 1° was lost in five minutes; vhen at 60, I° was lost in 103 minutes; it would therefore probably lose 1° in 8 minutes during the time of an experiment, the mean temperature being about 65; and as the excess of temperature at the beginning and end of an experiment above that of the air was nearly the same in all three, the loss would be nearly proportional to the duration of each. Hence, to the acquired heat should be added, in the ãirst experiment, 13°; in the second, ; and, in the third, ; being severally proportional to the said duration. These being respectively added to the temperatures in columns V. and VI., give in the former 815, 82° and 813; and, in the latter, 335, 34° and 383; and iſ either of these sots of numbers be used in the calculation, aceording as one or the other of the equations is adopted to develope the results, they will be found to be 1171°, 1212° and 1245° for the sums oſ the latent and sensible heat; and consequently the Iatent heat in each experiment will be 9429, 942°9 and 9500. It may be remarked, that no allowance was made, in ealculating from the former experiments, ſor the heat which would be taken by the cistern, but which in the first of them, lasting two hours, would probably be very sensible, and may account for the principal part of the deficiency of latent heat brought out by the calculation ſrom that experiment, in comparison with that from the two succeeding ones. The opinion which I entertain from these experiments as to the latent heat of steam is, that it is a constant quantity, and perhaps this opinion obtains support from the modern discoveries of definite proportions. But it is necessary, however, to explain the limitation with which I here use this term,  constant quantity? It is ell known that if common air be expanded, cold is produced;* and it must thereſore happen, that if a given quantity of it at a given temperature, could be gradually expanded, and as it was 50 expanded, gradually supplicd with heat, so as to keep the  An opportunity occurred to me :ome years back, which enabled me to determine, with tolerable precision, the degree oſ cold produced by the expansion of common air from the bulk bo iue, vbien Linuut a bo 1 or 200. temperature unaltered, this supply of heat would become latent; the thermometer would not shew it. It is probable, both from analogy and experiment, that this effect takes place in the expansion of steam. It is not of this purt of itu heat, thongh latent, and, in the experiments above related, undistinguishable, that I would be understood to speak when I state my opinion to be as just mentioned; but it is of that which, vhen water àlters its state to that of an elastic fluid, becomes essential to ĩt in every degree of elasticity, besides that which belongs to its expanded state. This latter may be called the latent heat of erpunsion, while the other may perhaps properly be called constitutional. Allow me: here to illustrate hypothetically this matter: If this essential or constitutional part of latent heat be added to water having the necessary portion oſ sensible heat, and perfectly confined in a close vessel, I conceive the water would be in the state of an elastic ſluid; would in fact be stenm, as dense as water; (possibly compressible, and capable of greater density) and would then require no latent heat of expansion; but if the containing vessel be now conceived to expand, for instance into double the space, I then imagine it would require some addition of heat during this expansion to maintain its proportional elasticity. It must be observed, however, that while this expansion was calling ſor more latent heat, the sensible heat necessary for the diminishing elasticity would be lessening; but it does not ſollow that these quantities should necessarily balance each other.+ When this fluid, steam, is raised in low temperatures, and of course under a low degree of elasticity, it obtains  I huve no view here to any substances not having the natural power oſ expunsion, as water, ice, &c. J. S. tI have, ſor very many years, entertained a similar hypothesis; but I Enow oſ no experiment whereby the truth oſ it can be demonstrated conclusively. w. from its source, at the same instant, not only the constitutional part of its latent heat, but also that of expansion, and thus the two kinds are conſounded; and, in experiments where they are developed by total condensation, are only to be detected together in sum; and it may be that this sum, together with the sensible heat, in different states of elasticity, may make a constant quantity; but, iſ the Ilatent heat of expansion from a denser to a rarer state, be greater than the diminution of the sensible heat necessary only ſor the latter, the sum oſ the sensible and total latent hent will be more in steam raised in low temperatures than in high ones, which the result of your experiments made in Iow temperatures seems to countenance. In all that I have said above, when speaking of steam, I have always intended that fluid in the state in which it is raised from water, viz. saturated therewith; but undoubtedly this fluid, aſter it is so raised under any temperature, and being clear from any additional accession of water, may be heated above that temperature, and cooled down to it again with changes of elasticity corresponding to those oſ temperature; like as common air may be, without limitation of temperature, as far as is known. This, however, is a view of the subject which has been totally excluded. BESIDES the experiments first related, in which the temperature of stenm raised under high pressures was observed, others had been made some years beſore (in 1797 and 8) ſfor that purpose only; and as they were made with the greatest circumspection, both the manner of making them and their results may be here deseribed, as may also the results of other experiments, made with equal care, to nscertain the temperature of steam raised under low pressures. The instrument used in the former was a Papin's digester, similar to what you had used in your original experiments, and to that described in the  Encyclopædia Britannica, art. Steam; No. 22, the leading differences being in adapting a metallic tube to it to contain the thermometer, or rather as much of it as contained mercury, in the manner mentioned in the beginning of this letter, and instead of a valve, by the load on which to measure the elasticity of the contained steam, a nicely bored cylinder was applied, with a piston fitting it, 50 as to have very little friction, and to the rod of this was applied a lever, constructed to work on edges like those oſ a scale-beam, by vhich the resistance against the elastic ſorce of the steam could be accurately determined; and at your suggestion, to be assured that no inaccuracy had erept into the calculation, by which this resistance through the medium of the lever was ascertained, an actual column of mercury of 30 inches high was substituted, and thè correspondence was found to be within ,3, of an inch. The observations at each of the points of pressure noted were continued some minutes, the temperature at each bing alternately raised and lowered, so as to make the pressure of the steam on the under side of the piston alternately too much and too little for the weight with which it was loaded; ; and thence a mean temperature was adopted, the extremes oſ which were, as well as I now recollect, not more than half a degree on each side of it. The load on the piston, including its own weight, &e. &e. was calculated to be successively just equal to I, 2, 4, and 8 atmospheres of 20.8 inches of mercury each, and the temperature of the steam was varied as above till that of each point was determined; the results were thus, The experiments for ascertaining the temperature oſ steam below the atmospheric pressure were made with an apparatus essentially similar to that which you originally used, and with scrupulous care and attention: and I met vith the same incidents as you had done: such as, the production of a bubble of air whenever, aſter any experiment, the tube was inclined to reſill the ball; and also the extraordinary suspension of a column of mercury of 85 inches vertical height, and of 7 inches of water above that, although the counterpoise was only that of the atmosphere, then under 30 inches. I found also that the tube required a considerable degree of tabouring or shaking to make the column subside and leave a space in the ball. This ph]enomenon was not produced till aſter much pains taken in inverting and re- inverting the tube again and again, nor till it had been suffered, aſter these operations, to stand for three or ſour days undisturbed in the exhausting position, and then discharging the air that had been accumulating in the interval. The results, to be found in the table below, were deduced ſrom the observations as you had done, viz. by adding to the height oſ the column of mercury in the tube (ascertained by a gauge ſloating on the surface of the mercury in the basin,) that of the water above it, or rather oſ an equivalent column of mercury, and substracting their sum from the height of the common barometer at the time. All these resulis were tahen from observations made aſter tho apparatus had been so perſectly exhausted of air as to produce the phenomenon just mentioned. mhæL 15.91 The ſollowing formula will be found to give the elasticity belonging to a given temperature, and vice versa, with a suſficient degree oſ accuracy for most purposes, within the range of the experiments, at least, from which they have been formed. Let : = temperature, e  elasticity, in inches oſ mercury; Tæ t+52, and E=ei;, m=4250,000000: 514 T Then m =E 5.14 EmæT. But as the calculation is most easily performed by logarithms, let L signify the logarithm of the quantity to which It is prefixed: Then 5.14 LT-10.97407LE LE+ 10.97497 ti =LT. P. S. Some circumstances which occurred in the pers formance of the experiments (made in 1797 and 1798) of which the results are last related, suggested the trials of a mixture of air with the steam; and I made a few, not indeed vith the greatest nicety, but as they furnished a strong probability that the following law oſ elasticity oſ a given mixture was either nearly or accurately corret, it may be of use to say, that the apparatus used in the steam experiments being prepared as if for a repetition of them, and as perſectly exhausted of air as for them, a known measure of common air was sent up the tube through the mercury and water, and took its place in the ball; the water surrounding which was heated, and its temperature observed at diſferent periods as beſore; and indeed the process was precisely the same as the former, with the additional notice of the space in the ball occupied by the expanded air and steam jointly. This process was repeated three or four times with different quantities of air, but the notes not being preserved, I can only noW mention the conclusion they induced me to ſorm as to the law above mentioned, viz. that whatever the elastic force of the air admitted would be in its expanded state, aupposing it dry and to occupy the whole empty space in the ball (not occupied by water), aſter adding ſor the increase of its elasticity by the increase of temperature, it was yet to be augmented by the elasticity which steam alone of the same temperature would pomess, to give the elasticity of the mixture. Let b æ bulk of air introduced into the ball, measured before its introduction. =its elasticity (expressed in inches of mercury, or the height of the common barometer). B=nbulk occupied by it jointly with the steam in the ball, when their common temperature, governed by that of the water in the pan, is ſ. 1: r=ratio oſ elasticity which the air had beſore introduction to what it would have by augmenting its temperature to t; or, which is nearly the same, the ratio of expansion of air by the augment of temperature to ?, vhen under the same pressure. Eæpillar of mercury (in inches) which steam of the temperature ? vould support: Then E +235piar oſ mercury (in inches) which would be supported by the elasticity of the mixture at the temperature t. Erample. Suppose b } cubic inch; A= 30 inches; t =102° 10 to 11, ratio of elasticity oſ air at the temperature at which it was introduced to what it would possess at 102, consequently 2æI.1; Bæ0 inches, and E (by the table) 1.95. Then 1.95+3 X 30æ I. 1-6=4.70 for elasticity of the mixture, or column oſ mercury it would support. REFERENCE TO THE PLAT —_— 9_u:: PLATEI. Pulse-glass, page 14. S. 4. Apparatus for experiments on the elasticity 21, und 38. Theory of the Geyser fountain, p. 43. SAVARYS Steam-Engine, ꝑ. 50. A, The Boiler. V, Saſety-valve. B, Steam-pipe. C, Steam-cock. R, Receiver. D, Injection-cock. HG, Suction-pipe; G, its valve. IK, Ascending-pipe. I, Valve. NEWCOMEN'S Steam-Engine, p. 59. A, Boiler. N, Steam-regulator. Q Steam- pipe. CB, Cylinder. P, Piston. PD, Piston-rod. S, Injection-cock. v, Injection. cistern; f, Sniſting-valve. d e g, Eduction-pipe. A, Valve. HE, Working-beam; O its gudgeon. FD EG, Arched- heads. i k, Injection pump. M, Great-pump; XI., its rod. Reſerence to Plate I. Mr WATT'S Steam-Engine. A, Boiler. BC, Steam-pipe. I, Steam-valve. L, Exhaustion- valve. G, Cylinder; gh, its cover. P, Piston. D, Piston-rod. OQR, Eduetion-pipe. a b o, Injection- pipe. ST, Air-pump. XY, Hot-water pump. Reference to Plate II. BEIGHTONS Steam- Engine. A, Boiler. Z, Steam regulator. K, Steam pipe. F V, Cylinder. P, Piston. X, Pistonrod. R, Injection-cock. QM, Injection-pipe. C C, Injection-cistern. W, Sniſting-valve. 2, Eduction-pipe. i I, Injection-pump. . M, Great. pump. K K, Working-beam. Fig. 10. On the expansion of steam in a cylinder. ence to Plate III. MrR War?s Double Steumsrom his Specification of 1782. . A section; Fig. 12. A front view oſ the cylinder, pipes, &e. A, The piston. j . II. M Cylinder. 1, 1, Steam-case surrounding it. Jteam-pipe ſrom the hoiler. Place of the upper steam. regulator, or valve. Upper exhausting, or condensing- valve. Lower steam-valve. Lover exhausting-valve. Eduction-pipe and condenser. Injection-pipe and jet oſ water. Valve between the condenser and air- pump. Air-pump, with its bucket. Box containing a valve similar to L. Piston-rod. A toothed rack; Q, A sector fixed on the main lever, or beam. A pinion. A reciprocating ſfly-wheel. Arch-head. Pump-rod. Connecting-rod. A toothed- wheel. Another toothed-wheel. Rotative fly-wheel. Platſorm and beams ſor fixing the cylinder. Wall of the condensing-cistern. Walls of the house. VWindows and doors. ection of a regulatorbox, H, H, J, J. Opening ſrom the cylinder; K, Cover oſ the box. Spindle, passing through one side oſ the hox. Toothed sector, which works into the toothed rack C. The valve; E, Its seat; F, Guide ſor the stem oſ the valve. Pipe leading to the condenser. anner of the action oſ the plugtree on the levers oſ the regulating- valves. Part oſ the plug-tree; P, One of its pins. Lever, moveable on the axis N. An arm attached to the same axis, with a joint at M, connecting it with the rod M L. Lever, ſixed on the spindle A. trence to Plate IV. of MrR Warr's Single Reciprocating Engine. The Cylinder. Piston. Piston-rod. Stuſfing-hox on the cylinder cover. Steam-case oſ the cylinder. Steam- pipe ſrom the boiler. Steam-nozle and valve, or regulator. Perpendicular steam- pipe. Eduction- pipe. Equilibrium- valve and nozle. Exhaustion- valve and no3zle. , Condenser. Injection-cock. Blow- valve pipe. Air-pump. Air pump bucket and rod. Lower valve of the air-pump. Upper valve. (The hot-water pump, represented in section of Albion-Mill engine, was discontinued about this time) Pump ſor supplying boiler. Injection, or cold-water pump. Working gear of the nozle, or regulator valves. Plug-tree, which acts on the working-gear. Main lever, or working-beam. Gudgeon of the main- lever. Straps ſor strengthening the beam. d, King-post. Arch- heads. Chains ſor the piston-rod and pump rodArch- heads and chains for the air-pump. Rod of the great pump. Bucket. Working barrel oſ the pump. Clack. Boiler. o, Flues on the sides oſ it. Grate. Damper. s, Chimney. Feed- pipe. Reſerence to Plates V. VI. VII. VIII. of one of  the Albion- Mill Steam-Engines. lll the Letters are not to be found on any one of the Plates. A, The cylinder, 34 inches diameter. B, Piston, which makes a stroke oſ eight ſeet. C, Piston-rod. D, Stuſfing-box on the cylinder cover. E, Steam-case of the cylinder; e, syphon to empty it of water. F, Steam-pipe ſrom the boiler; ſ, a pipe to supply cylinder-case. G, Upper steam-nozle and valve, or regulator-box and regulator. H, Upper exhaustionr-nozle and valve. I, Perpendicular steam-pipe. J, Eduction-pipe. K, Lower steam-nozle and valve. L, Lower exhaustion-nozle and valve. M, Condenser, immersed in a cistern of cold water. N, njection-cock (always open when the engine works.) O, Blow-valve. P, Air-pump. Q, Loer valve oſ air-pump. R, Air-pump bucket and rod. S, Upper valve oſ air-pump. T, Hot-water pump, with its bucket and rod. U, Cold- water pump. V, Pump ſor supplying boiler. W, Governor, turned by a band ſrom the ſly-wheel shaſt. X, Lever and rod to connect governor with the throttle-valve at ?. Y, Working-gear oſ the nozle-valves. Z, Plug-tree, which acts on the working-gear. a, Main lever, or working-beam. b, Its main gudgeon. c, Perpendiculor links of the parallel motion. d, Parallel burs. e, Regulating radiuses. ſ, Small perpendicular links. g, Secondary parallel motion ſor the air-pump. h, Connecting-rod. i, Planet-wheel, fixed to the connecting rod. j» Sun-wheel. E, Fly-wheel shaſt, on which the sun-wheel is ſixed. 1, Connectinglink, to retain the planet-wheel in its orbit. m, Fly-wheel. n, Boiler. o, Tube through the boiler and ſlues round it. P, Grate. q, Feeding-mouth. r, Damper. 3, Chimney. t, Feed-pipe. u, Gage pipes and cocks. v, Saſety-valve. w, Bevil-wheels oſ the mill x, Upright shaſt. y, Large spur-wheel. 2, Pinions. * Millstones. Description of the Method of Working the Albion-Mill Engines. Plates V. VI. VII. VIII. The steam-pipe F (Plate VI.) conveys steam ſrom the boiler  to the cross-pipe, or upper steam-nozle G, and by the perpendicular steampipe I, to the lower steam-nozle X. In the nozle G is a valve, which, when open, admits steam into the cylinder above the piston B, (Platæ V.) through the horizontal square pipe at its top; and in the lower steamnozle  there is another valve, which, when open, admits steam into the cylinder below the piston. In the upper exhaustion nozle H is a valve, which, when open, admits steam to pass ſrom the cylinder abore the piston into the exhaustion-pipe J, which conveys it to the condensing- vessel M, where it meets the jet oſ the injection from the cock N, and is reduced to water; and, in the lover exhaustion-nozle L, there is also a valve, which, when open, admits steam to pass out of the cylinder belon the piston, by the eduction-pipe, into the condenser M. Tho engine being at rest, the cylinder quite cold, and the condensercistern full of water, when the water in the boiler begins to boil, steam uill enter hy the small pipe 7 (Plate VL) into the space between the cylinder and the heating-case E, which will expel the air contained in that space, and between the two bottoms oſ the cylinder, at a cock ſixed in the outer bottom, which, when all the air is expelled, and the cylinder thoroughly warmed, is to be shut, and the water which may be ſormed in these spaces during the working oſ the engine, will issue by the inverted syphon e. Things being in this situation to produce a commencement o? motion, the ſirst operation is to open all the four valves, G, H, K, L; (the injection cock being shut) tho steam will drive the air out of the steam and exhaustion-pipes I and J, and out of the condenser M, through the blo- pipe and its valve O, (Plate VI.) and as s00n as this is succeeded by a sharp crackling noise in the little cistern O, the valves are to be shut until it is thought that the steam which has entered is mostly condeused. The same operation is to be repeated, giving a longer time to coòl between the times oſ blowing, until it is found that, upon opening the injection-cock, some water will enter, and the barometer shall shew some degree of exhaustion, aſter which, the repetition of blowing ill soon empty the c; linder of air. The piston being then at the top oſ its stroke, the valves G and L are to he opened, and the ſly-wheel m (Plate V.) turned by hand about oneeighth of a revolution, or more, in the direction in which it is intended to move; the steam which is then in the cylinder ill pass by L into the condenser, when, meeting the jet oſ water from the injection- cock, it vill be converted into water, and the cylinder thus becoming exhausted, the steam, entering the cylinder by the valve G, will press upon the piston and cause it to descend, while, by its nction upon the working-beam through the piston-rod, &e., it pulls down the eylinder-end oſ the beam, and raises up the outer-end and the connecting rod h, which causes the plunet- wheel ĩ to tend to revolve round the sun-wheel Ji but the former oſthese wheels, being fixed upon the connecting-rod so that it cannot turn upon its own axis, and its teeth being engaged in those oſ the sunwheel, the latter, and the ſly-wheel, upon whose axle or shaſt it is fixed, are made to revolve in the desired direction, and give motion to the mill-work. As the piston descends, the plugtree Z also descends, and a clamp, or slider ę, (Plate V.) fixed upon the side oſ the plug-tree, presses upon the handle 1 oſ the upper Y-shaſt, or axis, and thereby shuts the valves G and I, and the same operation, by disengaging a detent, permits a weight suspended to the arm of the lower Y-shaĩt to turn the shaſt upon its axis, and thereby to open the valves K and H. The moment previous to the opening these valves, the piston had reached the lowest purt of ita stroke, and the cylinder above the piston was filled with steam; but as soom as H is opened, that steam rushes by the eductionpipe J, into the condenser, and the cylinder ubove the piston beeomes exhausted. The steam ſrom the boiler entering by I and K, (Plate VI.) - acts upon the lower side of the piston, and ſorces it to return to the top of the cylinder. When the piston is very near the upper termination of its stroke, another slider a raises the handle ꝗ, and, in 10 doing, disengages the cateh which permits the upper Y.shaſt to revolve upon its own axis, and open the valves G and L, and the downward stroke recommences as has been related When the piston descends, the buckets R, T of the air-pump P and hot water pump T also descend. The water which is contained in these pumps passes through the valves of their buckets, and is drawn up and discharged by them through the lander or trough ?, by the next descending: stroke of the piston. Part oſ this water is raised up by the pump V, for the supply of the boiler, and the rest runs to waste. Particular Description of the Mechanism which opens and shuts the Nozle-valves or Regulators. Plate VII. Fig. 2.* The piston approaching the top oſ the cylinder, the slider u fastened upon the plug-tree Z, raises up the handle b, which is ſixed upon the lower Y-shaſt, or axis e, as is the detent d, and the latter takes hold oſf the double-ended catch e; but, in doing this, the upper end oſ the catch allows the detent ſ to escape, and a weight hung to the rod turns the axis . The arm i, and rod j, are moved out oſ the straight line at I, and by a lever h turn the spindle m in the upper nozle, which, by means of a toothed-sector n, and rack o, raises the valve , and admits steam into the cylinder ubove the piston through the horizontal pipe A. At the same time, another arm u, ſixed upon the same shaſt, by means oſ the rod u, acts upon a spindle, &c., in the lower nozle, and opens the exhaustion-valve L, (Plate V.) and thereby ſorms a communication between the cylinder bælow the piston and the condenser. The piston now descending, another slider ꝗ, moves the handle r into the position s; this raises the weight g, while i and  are brought back to the position I, and the valves ꝓ and L are shut. The detent f, in acting upon the catch e, disengages d; the lower Y-shaſt turns upon its axis, and two arms attached to it (similar to those upon the upper Y-shnſt, which are omitted to avoid confusion) by means of the rod f and v, open the lower steam-valve K, (Plate V.) and the upper exhaustion-valve ſ.  In the plan, only one oſ the Y-shaſts is shown, and the levers which open and shut the steam- valve oſ the upper nosle. The cylinder above the piston becomes exhausted, and the steam, entering below it, causes the piston to reascend. Description of the Governor. The governor W (Plate V.) consists oſ a perpendicular axis which is put in motion by means oſ a band passing round a pulley fixed upon it, and round another pulley fixed upon the main-shaſt æ (Plates VII. and VIIL) Two heavy balls are appended to this axis by means of two rods which cross each other in a mortise ſormed in the upper part of the uxis| Aſter crossing each other, these two rods are bent outwards in a contrary direction, and to them are jointed two short pieces, the other ends of which join to a collar capable of sliding up and down upon the upper part of the axis, ſorming altogether an assemblage resembling one of the joints of a tobacco tongs; so that, when the balls recede, which happens from the centriſugal force given hy any increase of velocity of the main-shaſt, the collar is depressed, and, vice versa, raised when the velocity diminishes; and, by its action upon the double-ended lever æ, which is connected with an arm fixed upon the spindle ? of the throttlevalve, admits more or less steam to the cylinder as the case requires.  This construction oſ the nosle-regulators and working gear was in use at the time Dr Rohison composed his Essay, but several material alterations have since been made in it; an account oſ which I must leave to some ſuture historian, as they do not ſull within the ccope oſ these annotations upon Dr R.s Essuy. Tuæ term Machine is now vulgarly given lo a great variety of subjects, which have very litile analogy bv which they can be classed with propriety under any one name. We say a travelling machine, a bathing machine, a copying machine, a threshing machine, an electrical machine, &c. &. The only circumstance in which all these agree seems to be, that their construction is more complex and artificial than the utensils, tools, or instruments, which oſſr themselves to the ſirst thoughts of uneultivated people. They are more artificial than the common cari, the batliing tub, or the flail. In the language of ancient Athens and Rome, ihe term was applied to every ool by which hard labour of any kind was perſormed; but, in the language oſ moderu Europe, it secius restricted cither to such tools or instruments as are employed ſor execuling some philosophical purpose, or oſ which the construction employs the simpje mechanicul powers in a conspicucus manuer, in which their operation and eneigy cugage the attention. An electiical muchine, a conuilu⸗ul machine, ure of the ſirst cluss; a threshing muchine, a ſire nuchine, ure oſ the other cluss. It is neay æ; nonymous, in our lunguage, with ENGINE; a term ailogetior mouemm, and in VuL. 1l. N some measure honourable, being bestowed only, or chieſly, on contrivances for executing work in which ingenuity and mechanical sill are manifest. Perhaps, indeed, the term engine is limited, by careſul writers, to machines of considerable magnitude, or at least of considerable art and contrivancee We say, with propriety, steam-engine, fire-engine, plating-engine, boring-engine; and a dividing machine, a copying machine, &e. Either of these terms, machine or engine, are applied with impropriety to contrivances in which some piece of work is not executed on materials which are then said to be manufactured. A travelling or bathing machine is surely a vulgarism. A machine or engine is thereſore a rooL; but of complicated construction, peculiarly fitted for expediting labour, or for perſorming it according to certain invariable principles: and ve should add, that the dependence of its efficacy on mechanical principles must be apparent, and even conspicuous. The contrivance and erection of such works constitute the profession of the engineer; a proſession which ought by no means to be confounded with that of the mechanic, the artisan, or manufacturer. By ſar the greatest number of our most serviceable engines consist chieſly of parts which have a motion of rotation round fixed axes, and derive all their energy ſrom levers virtually contained in them. And these acting parts are also material, requiring force to move them over and above what is necessary for producing the acting force at the working part of the machine. The modiſfications which this circumstance frequently makes of the whole motions oſ the machine, are indicated in the article RoraTioꝶ (see vol. i.) in an elementary way; and the propositions there investigated will be found almost continually involved in the complete theory of the operation of a machine. Lastly, it will be proper to consider attentively the propositions contained in the article StRENGTE of Material, that we may combine them with those which relate wholly to the working oſ the machine; because it is ſfrom this combination only that we discover the strains which are excited at the various points of support, and of communication, and in every member of the machine. We suppose all these things already understood. 78. Our object at present is to point out the principles which enable us to ascertain what will be the precise motion of a machine oſ given construction, when actuated by a natural power of known intensity, applied to a given point of the machine, while it is employed to overcome a known resistance acting at another point. To abbreviate language, we shall call that the IMPELLED POINT Of the machine to which the pressure of the moving power is immediately applied; and we may call that the oRRING POINT, where the resistance arising from the work to be perſormed immediately acts. To consider this important subject, even in its chief varieties, requires much more room than can be allowed in a work like this, and thereſore wo must content ourselves with a very limited view; but, at the same time, such a view as shall give sufficient indication of the principles which should direct the practical reader in every important case. We shall consider those machines which perform their motions round fixed axes; these being by far the most numerous and important, because they involve in their construction and operations all the leading principles. 79. That we may proceed securely, it is necessary to have a precise and adequate notion of moving ſorce, as applied to machinery, and of its measures. We think this peculiarly necessary. Diſferent notions have been entertained on this subject by Mr Leibnitz, Des Cartes, and other eminent mechanicians of the last century; and their successors have not yet come to an agreement. Nay, some of the most eminent practitioners of the present times, (for we must include Mr Smeaton in the number,) have given measures of mechanical power in machinery which we think inaccurate, and tending to erroneous conclusions and maxims.* We take for the measure (as it is the effect) of exerted mechanical power the quantity oſ motion which it produces by its uniform exertion during some given time. We say uniform exertion, not because this uniſormity is necessary, but only because, if any variation of the exertion has taken place, it must be known, in order to judge oſ the pover. This would needlessly complicate the calculations; but in whatever way the exertion may have varied, the whole accumulated exertion is still accurately measured by the quantity of motion existing at the end oſ the exertion. The reader must perceive that this is the same thing that is expressed in the article DYNAMICS, (vol. i. p. 108) by the area of the figure whose abscissa or axis represents the time of exertion; and the ordinates are as the pressures in the diſferent instants of that time, the whole being multiplied by the number of particles, (that is, hy the quantity of matter,) because that ſigure represents the quantity of motion generated in one particle of matter only. All this is abundantly clear to persons conversant in thee disquisitions; but we wish to carry along with us the distinet conceptions of that useſul class of readers whose proſession engages them in the construction and employment of machines, and to vhom such discussions are not so ſamiliar. We must endeavour, therefore, to justiſy our choice oſ this measure by appealing to familiar facts. If a man, by pressing uniſormly on a mass oſ matter ſor five seconds, generates in it the velocity oſ eight ſeet per second, we obtain an exact notion of the proportion of this exertion to the mechanical exertion of gravity, vhen we say that the mans exerted forcœ has been precisely one-  A very able paper in support oſ Smeaton's measure oſ moving foree, by Mr Ewart, ill be founã in the Manchester Memoirs, vol. iĩi. p. 118.En. twentieth part oſ the action of gravity on it; for ve know that the weight oſ that body (or, more properly, its heaviness) would, in ſive seconds, have given it the velocity of 160 feet per second, by acting on it during its fall. But let ns attend more closely to what we mean by saying that the exerted ſorce is one-twentieth of the exertion of gravity. The only notion we have of the exertion of gravity is what we call the weight of the bodythe pressure which ve feel it make on our hand. To say that this is 20 pounds weight does not explain it; because this is only the action of gravity on another piece oſ matter. Both pressures are the same. But if the body weighs 20 pounds, it will draw out the rod of a steelyard to the mark 0. The rod is so divided, that the 20th part of this pressure vill draw it out to I. Now the ſact is, that if the man presses on the mass of 20 pounds weight with a spring steelyard during ſive seconds, and if during that time the rod of the steelyard was always at the mark l, the body will have acquired the velocity of eight feet per second. This is an acknowledged ſact. Thereſore we were right in saying, that the man's exertion is one-twentieth of the exertion of gravity. And since we believe the weight of bodies to be proportional to their quantity of matter, all matter being equally heavy, we may say, that the mans exertion was equal to the action of gravity on a quantity of matter whose weight is one pound. We express it much more ſamiliarly, by saying, that the man exerted on it the pressure oſ one pound oſ matter, or the force oſ one pound. In this manner, the motion communicated to a mass of matter, by acting on it during some time, informs us with accuracy of the real mechanical force or pressure which has been exerted. This is judged to be double when twice the velocity has been generated in the same mass, or where the same velocity has been generated in twice the mass; because we know that a double pressure would have done either the one or the other. But ſarther: ve know that this pressure is the exertion: we have no other notion of our own force; and our notion of gravity, of elasticity, or any other natural force, is the same. We also know that the continuance of this exertion ſatigues and exhausts our strength, as completely as the most violent motion. A dead pull, as it is called, of a horse, at a post fixed in the ground, is a usual trial of his strength. No man can hold out his arm horizontally for much more than a quarter of an hour; and the exertion of the last minutes gives the most distressing ſatigue, and disables the shoulder from action for a considerable time after. This is thereſore an expenditure of mechanical power, in the strict primitive sense of the word. Of this expenditure we have an exact and adequate effect and measure in the quantity oſ motion produced; that is, in the product of the quantity of matter by the velocity generated in it by this exertion. And it must be particularly noticed, that this measure is applicable even to cases where no motion is produced by the exertion; that is, if we know that the exertion which is just unable to start a block of stone lying on a smooth stone pavement, but would start it, if increased by the smallest addition; and iſ we know that this would generate in a second 82 feet of velocily in a 100 pounds of matter, we are certain that it was a pressure equal to the weight of this 100 pounds. It is a good measure, though not immediate, and may be used without danger or mistake when we have no other. 80. The celebrated engineer, Mr Smeaton, in his excellent dissertation on the power oſ water and wind to drive machinery, and also in two other dissertations, all published in the Philosophical Transactions, and aſterwards in a little volume, has employed another measure, both oſ the expenditure oſf mechanical power, and of the mechanical effect produced. He says, that the weight of a body, multiplied by the height through which it descends, while driving a machine, is the only proper measure of the power expended; and that the weight, multiplied by the height through which it is uniformly raised, is the only proper measure oſ the effect produced. And he produces a large train of accurate experiments to prove that a certain weight, descending through a certain space, always produces the same efſect, whether it has descended swiſtly or slowly, employing little or much time. Had this eminent engineer proposed this as a popular measure, of easy comprehension and remembrance, and as well accommodated to the uses of those engaged in the construction oſ machines, when restricted to a certain class of cases, it might have answered very good purposes; but the author is at pains to recommend it to the philosophers as a necessary correction of their theories, which, he says, tend to mislead the artists. His own reasonings terminate in the same conclusion with Mr Leibnitæs, namely, that the power of producing a mechanical effect, and the effect produced, are proportional to the square of the velocity. The deference justly due to Mr Smeatons authority, and the influence of his name among those who are likely to make the most use of his instructions, render it necessary ſor us to examine this matter with some attention. Mr Smeaton was led to the adoption of this measure by his proſessional habits. Raising a weight to a height is, in one shape or another, the general task of the machines he was employed to erect; and we may add, the opportunities of expending the mechanical powers of nature which are in our command, are generally in this proportion. A certain daily supply of water, coming from a certain height, is our best opportunity, and may very properly be said to be expended. 81. This being the general case, the measure was obvious, and natural, and good. The power and effect were of the same kind, and must be measures oſ each other; at least, in those circumstances in which they were set in opposition. Yet even here Mr Smeaton was obliged to make a restriction of his measures: * The height through which a body ilowly and equally descended, or to which it was raised. And why was this limitation necessary?  Because in rapid or accelerated motions, the inertia of bodies occasioned some variation But this is too vague language for philosophical disquisition. Besides, what is meant by this variation? What is the standard from which the unrestricted measure varies? This standard, whatever it is, is the true measure, and it was needless to adopt any other. Now, the standard from which Mr Smeaton estimates the deviation, is the very measure which we wish to employ, namely, the quantity of motion produced. Strictly speaking, even this is not the immediate measure The immediate measure is that faculty which we call pressure. This is the intermedium preceivable in all produetions of motion; and iĩt is also the intermedium of mechanical eſfect, even when motion is not produced; as when the weight of a body bends a spring, or the elasticity of a body supports another pressure. How it operates in all or any of these eases, we know not; but we know that all these measures of pressure agree with each other. A double quantity of motion will bend a spring doubly strong, will raise a double weight, will withstand any double pressure, &e. &e. In short, pressure is the immediate agent in every mechanieal phenomenon. It penetrates bodies, overcoming their tenacity; it overcomes friction; it bulances pressure; it produces motionn. Mr Smeatons measure is only nearly true, in any case; and in all cases it is far from being exact in the first instants of the motion, during its acceleration or retardation. We have already noticed the complete expenditure of animal power by continued pressure, even when motion is not produced; the only diſficulty is to connect this in a measurable way with the power which the sume exertion has of generating motion in a body. When a man supports a weight for a single instant, he certainly balances the pressure or action of gravity on that body; and he continues this action as long as he continues to support it: and we know that iſ this body were at the end oſ a horizontal arm turning round a vertical axis, the same eſſort which the man exerted in merely carrying the 10 weight, iſ now exerted on the body, by pushing it horizontally round the axis, will generate in it the same velocity which gravity would generate by its falling ſreely. On this authority, thereſore, we say, that the whole accumulated action of a man, vhen he has just carried a body whose weight is SO pounds for one minute, is equal to the whole exertion of gravity on it during that minute; and, if emPloyed, not to counteract gravity, but to generate motion, would generate, during that minute, the same motion that gravity would, that is, 60X 32 feet velocity per second, in a mass of 30 pounds. There would be 30 pounds of matter moving with the velocity of 1920 feet per second. We would express this produetion or effect by 30x 1990, or by 57600, as the measure of the man's exertion during the minute. But, according to Mr Smeaton, there is no expenditure of power, nor any production of mechanical effect, in thus carrying 30 pounds for a minute; there is no product of a weight by a height through which it is equably raised; yet such exertion will completely exhaust a mans strength if the body be heavy enough. Here then is a case to which Mr Smeaton's measure does not readily apply; and this case is important, including all the actions of animals at a dead pull. But let us consider more narrowly what a man really does when he performs what Mr Smeaton allows to be the production of a measurable mechanical effect. Suppose this weight of 30 pounds hanging by a cord which passes over a pulley, and that a man, taking this cord over his shoulder, turns his back to the pulley, and walks away from it. We know, that a man of ordinary force will walk along, raising this weight, at the rate oſ ahout 60 yards in a minute, or a yord every second, and that he can continue to do this for eight or ten hours from day to day; and that this is all that he can do without fatigue. Here are 30 pounds raised uniſormly 180 feet in a minute; and Mr Smenton would express this by 30 æ 180, or 5400, and would 0 call this the measure of the mechanical eſfect, and also of the expenditure of power. This is very diſferent from our measure 57600. 82. But this is not an accurate and complete account of the man's action on the weight, and of the whole effect produced. To be convinced of this, suppose that a man A has been thus employed, while another B, walking alongside of him at the same rate, suddenly takes the rope out of his hand, ſrees him of the task, and continues to raise the weight without the smallest change on its velocity of ascent. What is the action of B, and whether is it the same with that oſ A or not? It is acknowledged by all, that the exertion of B against the load is precisely equal to 30 pounds. If he holds the rope by a spring steelyard, it will stand constantly at the mark 30. B exerts the same action on the load as when he simply supports it from ſalling back into the pit. It was moving with the velocity of three feet per second when he took hold of the rope, and it would continue to move with that velocity if any thing could amnihilate or counteract its gravity. If, thereſore, there was no action when a person merely carried it, there is none at present when it is rising 180 ſfeet in a minute. The man does, indeed, work more than on that occasion, but not against the load: his additional work is walking, the motion of his own body, as a thing previously necessary that he may continue to support the load, that he may continue his mechanical effort as it ſollows him. It appears to yield to him; but it is not to his efforts that it yields; ita weight completely baIances those efforts, and is balanced by them. It was to a greater effort of the man A that it yielded. It was then lying on the ground. He pulled at the cord gradually, perhaps increasing his pull, till it was just equal to its weight. When this obtains, the load no longer presses on the ground, but is completely carried by the rope. But it does not move by this effort of 30 pounds; but let Lim exert a force of 31 pounds, and continue this ſor three seconds. He vill put it in motion; will accelerate that motion; and, at v the end of three seconds, the load is rising with the velocity of three feet per second. The man feels that this is as much speed as he can continue in his walk; he thereſore slackens his pull, reducing his action to SO pounds, and vith this action he walks on. All this would be distinetly perceived by means of a steelyard. The rod would be pulled out beyond 36, till the load acquired the uniform velocity intended, and aſter this it would be observed to shrink back to 30. More is done, therefore, than appears by Mr Smeatons measure. Indeed, all that appears in it is the exertion necessary ſor continuing a motion already produced, but which would be immediately extinguished by a contrary power, which must therefore be counteracted. This measure vill not apply to numberless cases of the employment of machines where there is no such opposing power, and where, notwithstanding, mechanieal power must be expended, even according to Mr Smeaton's measurement. Such are cornmills, boring-mills, and many others. How then comes it that Mr Smeatons valuable experiments concur so exactly in shewing that the same quantity of water descending from the same height, always produces the same effect, (as he measured it) whatever be the velocity? In the first place, all his experiments are cases where the power expended, and the work performed, are of the same kind: A heavy body descends, and, by its preponderancy, roises another heavy body. But even this would not ensure the precise agreement observed in his experiments, if Mr Smeaton were not careſul to exelude from his calculations all that motion where there is any acceleration, and all the expenditure of water during the acceleration, and to admit only those motions that are sensibly uniſorm. In moderate velocities, the additional pressure required for the first acceleration is but an insignificant part of the whole; and to take these accelerated motions into the account, would have embarrassed the calculations, and perhaps con- ſused many oſ his readerss We sec; in the instance now given, that the addition oſ one pound continued for three seconds only, was all that was necessary. Mr Smeaton's measurement is thereſore abundantly exact ſor practice; and being accommodated to the circumstances most likely to engage the attention, is very proper for the instruction of the numerous practitioners in all manuſacturing countries vho are employed ſor ordinary erections: But it is improperly proposed as an article essential to a just theory oſ mechanies, and thereſore it was proper to notice it in this place. Besides, there frequently oceur most important cases, in which the motion of a machine is, of necessity, desultory, alternately accelerated and retarded. We should not derive all the advantages in our power from the first mover, if we did not attend particularly, and chieſly, to the accelerating forces. And, in every case, the improvement, or the proper employment of the machine, is not attained, i we are not able to discriminate between the two parts of the mechanical exertion; one of them, by which the motion is produced and accelerated to a certain degree; and the other, by which that motion is continued. We must be able to appreciate what part of the efſect belongs to each. But it is now time to proceed to the important question, VWhat will be the precise motion of a machine of a given construction, actuated by u power of known intensity and manner of acting, and opposed by a known resistance? 83. In the solution of this question, much depends on the nature of both power and resistance In the statical consideration of machines, no attention is paid to any diſferences. The intensity of the pressures is all that it is necessary to regard, in order to state the proportion of pressure which vill be exerted in the various parts of the machine. The pressures at the impelled and working-points, combined with the proportions of the machine, necessarily determine all the rest. Pressure being the sole eause oſ all me- chanical action among bodies, any pressure may be substituted for another that is equal to it; and the pressure which is most ſumiliar, or oſ easiest consideration, may be used as the representative of all otherss This has occasioned the mechanical writers to make use oſ the pressure of gravity as the standard of comparison, and to represent all powers and resistances by weights. However proper this may be in their hands, it has hurt the progress of the science. It has rendered the usual elementary treatises oſ mechanics very imperſect, by limiting the experiments and illustrations to such as can be so represented with facility. This has limited them to the state of equilibrium, (in which condition a working machine is never ſound) because illustrations by experiment out of this state are neither obvious nor easy. It has also prevented the students of mechanies from accomplishing themselves with the mathematical knowledge required ſor a successſul prosecution oſ the study. The most elementary geometry is suſficient for a thorough understanding of equilibrium, or the doctrines of statics; but true mechanics, the knowledge of machines as instruments by which vork is performed, requires more refined mathematics, and is inuccessible without it. Had not Newton, or others, improved mathematics by the invention of the inſinitesimal analysis and colculus, we must have rested contented with the discoveries (really grenat) of Galileo and Huyghens. But Newton, suũẽ muthesi facem praæſerente, opened a boundiess field of investigation, and has not only given a magniſicent and brilliant specimen of the discoveries to be made in it, but has also traced out the purticular paths in which we are to ſind the solution of all questions of practical mechanies. This he has done by shewing another species oſ equilibrium, indiented, not by the cessation oſ all motion, but by the uniſormity of motion; by the cessation of all acceleration or retardation. As the extinction of motion hy the action of opposite ſorces ĩs assumed by us as the indication of the perſeet equality oſ thosc forces, so the extinction of acceleration should be received as the indication of something equal and opposite to the force wvhich was known to have caused the acceleration, and, thereſore, as the indication of an equilibrium between opposite forces, or else of the cessation of all force. 84. This new view of things was the source of all our distinct notions of mechanical forces, and gave us our only unexceptionable marks and measures of them. The 39th proposition of the first book of Newton's Principles of Natural Philosophy, and its corollaries, contain almost the whole doctrine of active mechanical nature, and are peculiarly applicable to our present purpose, because they enable us to comprehend in this mechanical equilibrium (so different from the statical) every circumstance in which those pressures which are exerted by natural powers diſſer from each other, and vary in their action on the impelled and vorking-points of a machine. Indeed, vhen we recollect that the operations of our machines are the same on board a ship as on shore, and that all our machines are moving with the ground on which they stand, we must acknovledge, that even ordinary statics is only an imperſect view of an equilibrium among things which are in motion; and this should have taught us that, even in those cases where nothing like equilibrium appears, an equilibrium may still be usefully traced. 85. In the statical consideration of machines, the quantity of pressure is all that we need attend to. But, in the mechanical discussion of their operations, we must attend to their distinctions in kind: and iĩt will by no means be sufficient to represent them all by weights; for their distinction in kind is accompanied by great differences in their manner of acting on the machine. Some natural powers, in order to continue their action on the impelled point of the machine, must, at the same time, put into motion a quantity of matter external to the machine in which these powers reside; and this must be made to follow the impelled point iu its motion, and not only follow, but continue to press it ſorward; or this matter, thus continually put into motion, must be successively applied to different points of the machine, which become impelled points in their turn. This is the case with a weight, with the action of a spring, the action of animals, the action of a stream of water or wind, and many other powers. A purt of the natural mechanical powers must thereſore be employed in producing this external motion. This is sometimes a very considerable part of the whole natural power. In some cases it is the whole of it. This obtains in the action of a descending weight, lying on the end of a lever and pressing it down, or hanging by a chord attached to the machine. There is also an important distinction in the manner in which this external motion is kept up. In a weight employed as the moving power, the actuating pressure seems to reside in the matter itself; and all that is necessary for continuing this pressure is merely o continue the connection of it with the machine. But in the action of animals it may be very different: A man pushing at a capstan-bar, must ſirst of all walk as fast as the bar moves round, and this requires the expenditure of his muscular force:. But this alone vill not render his action an eſfective power: He must also pres forward the capstan-bar with as much force as he has remaining over and above what he expends in walking at that rate. The proportion of these two expenditures may be very diſferent in different circumstances; and in the judicious selection of such circumstances as make the first of these as inconsiderable as possible, lies much of the skill and sagacity of the engineer. In the common operation of thrashing corn, much more than half of the man's power is expended in giving the necessary motion to his ovn body, and only the remainder is employed in urging forward the swiple with a momentum suſficient for shaking off the ripe grains ſfrom the stalk. We had suſſicient prooſ of this by taking off the swiple of the ſlail, 1l putiing the same weight of lend on the end of the staſt; and then causing the hind to perſorm the usual motions of thrashing with all the rapidity that he could continue during the ordinary hours oſf work. We never could ſind a man who could make three motions in the same time that he could make two in the usual mannes, so as to continue this ſor half an hour. Hence we must conclude, that half (some vill say to-thirds) of a threshers power is expended in merely moving his ovn body. Such modes of animal action will thereſore be avoided by a judicious engineer; but to be avoided, their inconvenience must be understood. More of this will occur hereafter. In other cases, we are almost (never wholly) ſree from this unproſitable expenditure of power. Thus, in the steam- engine, the operation requires that the external air follow the piston down the cylinder, in order to continue its pressuree But the force necessary for sending in this rare fluid into the cylinder vith the necessary velocity, is such an insignificant part of the whole force which is at our command, that it would be ridiculous affectation in any engineer to take it into account; and this is one great ground of preſerence to this natural power. The same thing may be said oſ the action of a strong and light spring, which is thereſore another very eligible ſirst mover for machinery. The ancient artillerists had discovered this, and employed it in their warlike engines. We must also attend to the nature of the resistance which the vork to be perſormed opposes to the motion of our muchine. Sometimes the work opposes not a simple obstruction, but a real resistance or re-action, which, if applied alone to the machine, would cause it 1o move the contrary way. This always obtains in cases where a heavy body ĩs to be raised, where a spring is to be compressed, and in some other cases. Very oſten, however, there is no such contrary action. A ſlour-mill, a saw-mill, a boring- nill, and many cuch engines, exhibit no reaction oſ this kind. But although such machines, when at rest or not impelled by the first mover, sustain no pressure in the opposite direction; yet they will not acquire any motion whatever, unless they be impelled by a power of a certain determinate intensity. Thus, in a saw- mill, a certain force must be impressed on the teeth of the saw, that the cohesion of the fibres of the timber may be overcome. This requires that a certain fſorce, determined by the proportions oſ the machine, be impressed on the impelled point. If this, and no more, be applied there, a ſorce will be excited at the teeth of the sawv which will halunce the cohesion of the wood, but vill not overcome it. The machine will continue at rest; and no work will be performed. Any addition of force at the impelled point will oceasion an addition to the fſorce excited in the teeth of the saw. The cohesion will be overcome, the machine will move, and work will be performed. It is only this addition to the impelling power that gives motion to the machine; the rest being expended merely in balancing the cohesion of the woody ſibres. While, therefore, the machine is in motion, perſorming work, we must consider it as actuated by a force impressed on the impelled point by the natural power, and by another acting at the working- point, furnished by, or derived ſrom, the resistance of the work. Again: It not unfrequently happens that there is not even any such resistance or obstruction excited at the working- point of the machine; the whole resistunce (if we can with propriety give it that name) arises ſrom the necessity of giving motion 10 a quantity of inert and inactive matter. This happens in urging round a heavy ſly, as in the coining-press, in the punching-engine, in drawing a body along a horizontal plane without ſriction, and a ſew similar cases. Hre the smallest ſorce whatever, applied at the impelled point, will begin motion in the machine; and the whole force s0 applied is consumed in this service. Such cases are rare as the ultimate performance of a mavoL. 11. o : chine; but occasionally, and for a farther purpose, they frequently occur; and it is necessary to consider them, because there are many of the most important applications of machinery where a very considerable part of the ſorce is expended in this part of the general task. Such are the chief circumstances of distinction among the mechanical powers of nature which must be attended to, in order to know the motion and performance of a machine. These never occur in the statical consideration of the machine, but here they are of chief importance. 86. But farther: The action of the moving power is transferred to the working-point through the parts of a machine, which are material, inert, and heavy. Or, to describe it more accurately, beſore the necessary force can be excited at the working-point of the machine, the various connecting forces must be exerted in the different parts oſ the machine; and, in order that the working-point may follow out the impression already made, all the connecting parts or limbs of the machine must be moved in different directions, and with different velocities. Force is necessary for thus changing the state of all this matter, and frequently a very considerable force. Time must also elapse beſore all this can be accomplished. This often consumes, and really wastes, a great part of the impelling power. Thus, in a crane worked by men walking in a wheel, it acquires motion by slow degrees; because, in order to give suſficient room for the action of the number of men or cattle that nre necessary, a very capacious wheel must be employed, containing a grent quantity of inert matter. All of this must be put in motion by a very moderate preponderance of the men. It accelerates slowly, and the load is raised. Wahen it has attained the required height, all this matter, now in considerable motion, must be stopped. This cannot be done in an instant with a jolt, vhich would be very inconvenient, and even hurtſul; it is thereſore brought to rest gradually. This also consumes time: nay, the wheel must get a motion in the contrary direction, that the load may be lowered into the cart or lighter. This can only be accomplished by degrees. Then the tackle must he lowered down again for another load, which also must be done gradually. All this wastes a great deal both of time and of force, and renders a walking-wheel a very improper form for the ſirst mover of a crane, or any machine whose use requires such frequent changes of motion. The same thing obtains, although in a lower degree, in the steam-engine, where the great beam and pump-rods, sometimes weighing very many tons, must be made to acquire a very brisk motion in opposite directions, twice in every working-stroke. It obtains, in a greater or a less degree, in all engines which have a reciprocating motion in any of their parts. Pumpmills are, of necessity, subjected to this inconvenience In the famous engine at Marly, ;3 of the whole moving power of some of the water-wheels is employed in giving a reciprocating motion to a set of rods and chains, which extend from the wheels to a cistern about three- fourths of a mile distant, where they work a set of pumps. This engine is, by such injudicious construction, a monument of magniſicence, and the struggle of ignorance with the unchangeable laws of nature. In machines, all the parts of which continue the direction of their motions unchanged, the inertia of a great mass of matter does no harm, but, on the contrary, contributes to the steadiness of the motion, in spite of small inequalities of power or resistance, or unavoidable irregularities of force in the interior parts. But in all reciprocations, it is highly prejudicial to the performance; and thereſore constructions which admit sueh reciprocation without necessity, are avoided by all intelligent engineers. The mere copying artist, indeed, who derives all his knowledge from the common treatises of mechanics, will never suspect such imperſections, because they do not occur in the statical consideration of machines. 87. Lastly, no machine can move without a mutual rubbing oſ ĩts parts at all points of communication; such 4 the teeth of wheel-work, the wipers and liſts, and the gudgeons of its difſerent axes. In many machines, the ultimate task perſormed by the working-point is either frietion, or very much resembles it. This is the ease in polishingmills, grinding-mills, nay, in boring-mills, saw- mills, and otherss. A knovledge of ſriction, in all its varieties, seems therefore absolutely necessary, even for a moderate acquaintance with the principles oſ machinery. This is a very abstruse subject; and although a good deal of attention has been paid to it by some ingenious men, we do not think that a great deal has been added to our novledge of it; nor do the experiments which have been made seem to us well calculated to lead us to a distinet know ledge of its nature and modiſications. It has been considered chieſly with a view to diminish it as much as possible in the communicating parts of machinery, and to obtain some general rules for ascertaining the quantity of what unavoidably remains. Mr Amontons, of the Royal Academy oſ Sciences at Paris, gave us, about the beginning of this century, the chief information that we have on the subject. He discovered that the obstruction which it gave to motion vas very nearly proportional to the force by which the rubbing surſaces are pressed together. Thus he found that a smooth oaken board, lnid on another smooth board of the same wood, requires a foree nearly equal to one-third of what presses the surſaces together. Diſſercnt substances required difſerent proportions. 88. He also ſound, that neither the extent of the rubbing surfaces, nor the velocity of the motion, made any considerable variation on the obstruction to motion. These were curious and unexpected results. Subsequent observations have made several correetions necessary in all these propositions;* but since the deviations ſrom Mr Amonton's * The most recent and valuable experimenis on the subject oſ ſriction were made by the celebrated Coulomb. He ſound that the ſriction increased with the time during which the rubbing surſaces were in contact; and that it in- rules are not very considerable, at least in the cases which occur in this general consideration of machines, we shall make use of it in the mean time. It gives us a very easy method of estimating the effect of ſriction on machines. It is a certain proportion of the mutual pressure of the rubbing surſaces, and thereſore must vary in the same proportion with this pressure. Now, we learn from the principles of statics, that whatever pressures are exerted on the impelled and working-point of the machine, all the pressures on its different parts have the same constant proportion to these, and vary as these vary: Thereſore the whole ſrietion oſ the machine varies in the sume proportion. But ſarther, since it is found that the ſriction does not sensibly change with the velocity, the ſorce which is just sufficient to overcome the friction, and put the loaded machine in motion, must be very nearly the same with the force expended in overcoming the friction while the machine is moving with any velocity whatever, and perſorming work. Thereſore, if we deduct from the force which just puts the loaded mochine in motion, that part of it which balances the reaction of the impelled point occasioned by tho resistance of the work, or which balances the resistance oſ the work, the remainder is the part of the impelling power which is employæd in overcoming the ſriction. If, indeed, the actual recreased also with ſhe velocity, he ſriction being nearly in an arithmetical progression, while the velocity was in a geometrical progression. It appeared in general that ſriction was proportional to the ſorce with which the rubbiog surſaces were presed together, and was, for the most purt, cqual to between 1 J and 2 oſ that ſorce. When oak rubbed against pine, it was T When pine : f . l l :i rubbed aguinst pine, it was and onk against oak 345 When iron rubbed against brass the ſriction was least, and was, in that case, à oſ the ſorce oſ pressure. A ſull account of Coulombs experiments will be ſound in the Memoires des Savans Itrangers, tom. x.; and a popular abstract of them in Ferguson's Lectures, vol. ĩi. p. 5330.Eb. sisting pressure of the work varies with the velocity of the working- point, all the pressures, and all the frictions in the different communicating parts of the machine, vary in the same proportion. But the law of this variation oſ working resistance being known, thè friction is again ascertained. We can nov state the dynamical equilibrium of forces in the working machine in two ways. We may either consider the eſficient impelling power as diminished by all that portion which is expended in overcoming the friction, and which only prepares the machine for performing work, or we may consider the impelling power as entire, and the work as increased by the friction of the machine; that is, wo may suppose the machine without friction, and that it is londed with a quantity of additional resistance acting at the working-point. Either of these methods will give the same result, and each has its advantages. We adopted the Iast method in the slight view which we took oſ this subject in the article RoraTioN, and shall thereſore use it here. Supposing now this previous knowledge of all these variable circumstances which aſſect the motion of machines oſ the rotative kind, so that, for any momentary position of it while performing work, we know what are the precise pressures acting at the impelied and working-points, and the construction oſ the machine, on which depend the frietion, and the momentum of its inertia (expressed in the article RorarioN by ſi p ); we are nov in a condition to determine its motion, or at least its momentary acceleration, competent to that positionn. Thereſore, 80. Let there be a rotative machine, so constructed, that while it is performing work, the velocity oſ its impelled point is to that of its working-point as m to n. It is easy to demonstrate, ſfrom the common principles of statics, that if a simple wheel and axle be substituted for it, having the radius oſ the wheel to that oſ the axle in the same proportion of m to n, and having the same momentum of ſriction and ſ J— inertia, and actuated by the same pressures at the impelled and working-points, then the velocities of these points will be precisely the zame as in the given machine. Let ꝑ represent the intensity (hich may be measured by pounds weight) of the pressure exerted in the moment at the impelled point; and r express the pressure exerted at the working-point by the resistance opposed by the work that is then performing. This may arise from the weight of a body to be raised, ſrom the cohesion of timber to be sawed, &c. Any of these resistances may also be measured by pounds weight; because we know that a certain number oſ pounds hung on the saw of a saw-mill, will just overcome this cohesion, or overcome it with any degree oſ superiority. Therefore the impelling power ꝑ, and the resistance r, however differing in kind, may be compared as mere pressures. Let æ represent the quantity of inert matter which must be urged by the impelling pover ꝓ, with the same velocity as the impelled point, in order that this pressure p may really continue to be exerted on that point. Thus, if the impelling power is a quantity oſ water in the bucket of an overshot wheel, acting by its weight, this weight cannot impel the wheel except by impelling the water. In this way, 2 may be considered as representing the inertia of the impelling power, while p represenis its pressure on the machine. In like manner, let v represent the quantity ofexternal inert matter which is really moved with the velocity of the working-point in the execution of the task performæd by the machine. Whatever be the momentum of the inertia of the machine, we can always ascertain vhat quantity oſ matter, attached to the impelled point, or the working-point of the wheel and axle, will require the same force to give the wheel the same angular motion; that is, which shall have the same momentum of inertia. Let the quantity a, attached 1o the working-point, give this nomentum oſ inertia a n*. Lastly, supposing that the wheel and axle have no frie- tion, let 7 be such a resistance, that, if applied to the working-point, it shall give the same obstruction æs the friction of the machine, or require the same ſorce at the impelled point to overcome it. 90. These things being thus established, the angulur velocity of the wheel and axle, that is, the number of turns, or the portion of a turn, which it will make in a given timẽ will be proportional to the fraction p. m.r ſn 47 (LSee RoraTion. 9l. Since the whole turns together, the velocities of the diſferent points are as their distances ſrom the axis, and may be expressed by muliiplying the common angular velocity by these distances. Thereſore the above formula, multiplied by m or a, will give the velocity of the impelled or of the working-point. Consequently, rm 7 4  mn loci : _;; Velocity of impelled point 15] qn) : i pPpmn ſn? Velocity of working-point - 5- (IL) In order to obiain a clear conception of these velocities, we must compare them with motions with which we are well acquainted. The proposition being universally true, we may take a case where gravity is the sole power and resistance; where, ſor example, p and r are the weights of the water in the bucket of a wheel, and in the tube that is raised by it. In this case, p =a, and r =y3. We moy als0, ſor greater simplicity, suppose the machine without inpm rmn 47 æ 92. Let g be the velocity which gravity generates in a second. Then it will generate the velocity g ? in the moment i. Let v be the velocity generated during this moment in ꝑ, connected as it is with the wheel and axle, and with r. This connection produces a change of condition =2g i 2. For, had it ſallen ſreely, it would have acquiertia and ſriction. The velocity oſ ꝑ is noW ———————— J— red the velocity g 7, whereas it only acquires the velocity ⸗. In like manner, had r ſallen freely, it would have acquired the velocity g ?. But, instead of this, it is raised with the velocity 2i. The change on it is thereſore = gi + Z3. These changes of mechanical condition arise ſrom their connection with the corporeal machine. Their pressures on it bring into action its connecting forces, and each of the two external forces is in immediate equilibrium with the force exerted by the other. The force excited at the impelling point, by r acting at the working-point, may be called the momentum or energy oſf r. These energies are precisely competent to the produetion of the changes which they really produce, and must thereſore be conceived as haying the same proportionss They are thereſore, equal and opposite, by the general laws ubserved in all actions of tangible matter; that is, they are such as balance each other. Thus, and only thus, the remaining motions are what we observe them - be. That is,  }  u m rxgir 25 xn Orpmgiꝑmi =rngi+r&; Or p mg i—p m o rmngi4rnò Orp mm7vũ n x EETEET That is, p m +r : pm  ;n HY That is, the denominator of the ſietion, capresing the velocily of the impelled point, is to the , nerator, as ihe velocity which a heavy body would acquire in tiæ. ti i freely, is to the velocity hich the impelied * ſ ; npa ihat moment. The sume thing is true of the ve:  oſ the vorking-point. ſThis reasoning suſſers no change ſrom the more con. cated nature oſ the gen⸗ſ proposition. Here the impel ling power is still n out the matter to be accelerated by it a the working-point is a +4, while its reaction, diminishing the impelling power, is ouly . We have only to consider, in this case, the velocity with which a +  would ſall freely vhen impelled, not by a +, but only by . The result would be the same; g i would still be to v as the denominator of the same fraction to its numerator. Thus have we discovered the momentary acceleration of our machine. It is evident, that if the pressures ꝓ and r, and the ſriction and inertia of the machine, and the external matter, continue the same, the acceleration will continue the same; the motion of rotation will be uniformly accelerated, and 2 m* + v 50 vill be to p m* Jm n as the space s, through which a heavy body would fall in any given time t, is to the space through which the impelled point will really have moved in the same time. In like manner, the space through which the working-point moves pm n7J n n p a u Thus are the motions of the vorking-machine determined. We may illustrate it by a very simple example. Suppose a weight ꝓ of ſive pounds, descending ſrom a pulley, and dragging up another weight r of three pounds on the other side. m and n are equal, and each may be called I. in the same time is æ . The ſormula becomes - or a or Thereſore, in a second, the weigh ? vill descend ;th of 16 ſeet, or à feet; and will acquirthe velocity of8 feet per second. 93. Having obtained Enovledge of the velocity of every point of the machip- Ve can ensily ascertain its performance. This der ũa on a combination of the quantity of resistance th overcome at the working-point, and the d which it is overcome. Th a .. velocityæ on the quant. Ihus, in raising water, it &in the bcter V (proportional to the weight) of s lited Tt pump, and the velocity with which D s will be had L; multiplying the third ſormula by r, or by r g ĩ, or by r s. Thereſore we obtain this expression, Work done =?Prn—+rræ ;: , pm +aa +yn* Such is the general expression of the momentary performance of the machine, including every circumstance which can affect it. But a variation of those circumstances produces great changes in the resultss These must be distinetly noticed. Cor. 1. If p m r n be equal to r +4r n?, there will be no work done, because the numerator of the ſraction is annihilatedl. There is then no unbalanced force, and the natural power is only able to balance the pressure propagated from the working-point to the impelled point. 2. In like manner, if n  o, no work is done although the machine turns round. The working-point has no motion. For the same reason, iſ m be infinitely great, although there is a great prevalence of impelling momentum, there will not be any sensible performance during a finite time. For the velocity which p can impress is a finite quantity, and the impelled point cannot move ſaster than æ would be moved by it if detached from the machine. Now, when the inſinitely remote impelled point is moved through any finite space, the motion of the working-point must be infinitely Iess, or nothing, and no work will be done. Remark. We sce that there are two values of n, viz. v, and m x I, which give no perſormancee But in all other r proportions of m and a, some work is done. Thereſore, as we gradually vary the proportion of m to n, we obtain a series of values expressing the performance, which must grãdually increase from nothing, and then decrease to nothing. There must, therefore, be some proportion of m to n, depending on the proportion of ꝑ to r +, and of æ toa +4, which will give the greatest possible value of the perſorm- ance. And, on the other hand, if the proportion oſ m to n be already determined by the construction of the machine already erected, there must be some proportion of ꝑ to r +4, and of æ to a +4, by which the greatest performance of the machine may be ensured. It is evident that the determination of these two proportions is of the utmost importance to the improvement of machines. The well-informed reader will pardon us ſor endeavouring to make this appear more forcibly to those who aro less instructed, by means of some very simple examples of the first principle. Suppose that we have a stream of water affording three tons per minute, and that we want to drain a pit which receives one ton per minute, and that this is to be done by a wheel and axle? We wish to know the best proportion of their diameters m and n. Let m be taken m 6; and supporo l. That n =3. Then Pmr n—r m361595 05 pn-ru 5.50  L.3C 158 Q. Let n be æ 6. The formula is = O,5. S. Let n =7. The formula is 0, 9045. Hence ve find, that the performance is greater when n is 6, than vhen it is either 5 or 7. As an example of the second principle, suppose the machine a simple pulley, and let ꝓ be I0. l. Let r be æ 3. The formula is 10 X S/9 6oi 3. Let r be  5. The ſormula is o x -95 2 TOF5 5 Here it appears that more work is done when r is 4, than when it is 5 or S. It must, therefore, be allowed to be one oſ the most important problems in practical mechanics to determine that construction by which a given power shall overeome a given resistance with the greatest advantage, and the proportion of work which should be given to a machine already construct2d so as to gain a similar end. 94. I. The general determination of the first question has but little difſiculty. We must consider, n as the variable magnitude in the formula pmrnr4ſn which pu +a+yn* expresses the work done, and find its value when the formula is a maximum. Taking this method, we shall find that the formula IV. is a maximum when n is nmſ 7 r51C+f) P©+y) This expression of the eromance, in its best state, appears pretty complex; but it becomes much more simple in all the particular applications of it, as the circumstances of the case occur in practice, We have obtained a value of n expressed in parts of m. Iſwe substitute this for n in the third ſormula, we obtain the greatest velocity with which the resistance r, connected with the inertia 5, can be overcome by the power ꝑ, connected with the inertia æ, by the intervention of a machine, whose momentum of inertia and friction are a n and fn. This . r a +Y . i is H5æ u æE 1) gh This exre u - of the working-point in ſeet per sccond, and thereſore the actual perſormance of the machine. But the proper proportion of m to n, ascertained by this process, varies exceedingly, aceording to the nature both of the impelling power, and of the work to be perſormed by the machine. 1. It frequently happens that the work exerts no controry strain on the machine, and consists merely in im- pelling a body which resists only by its inertia. This is the ease in urging round a millstone or a heavy ſly; in urging a body along a horizontal plane, &e. In this case r does not enter into the formula, which now bePr4p æa+y] xf . comes m X 7+9) . If the fricPæ+) tion be insigniſicant we may take n = m 7ũ 5 a : : - . =m/ 7 The velocity of the working-point is nearly æ 2In this case, it will be ſound that the L v] a+Yy velocity acquired at the end of a given time will be nearly in the proportion of the power applied to the machine. 9. On the other hand, and more frequently, the inertia of the external matter which must be moved in perſorming the work, need not be regarded. Thus, in the grinding of grain, sawing of timber, boring of cylinders, &e. the quantity of motion communicated to the flour, to the saw-dust, &ec. is too insignificant to be taken into the account. In this case, v vanishes ſfrom the formula, which becomes extremely simple when the friction and inertia of the machine are inconsiderablee We shall not be far from the truth if we make m to n as è r to ꝑ, or n = m X —In this case, 2r+4 r» a Ppr a+sf)+ E il But it is rare that machines of this kind have a small inertin. They are generally very ponderous and powerſul; and the force which is necessary ſor generating even a very moderate motion in the unloaded machine, (that is, unloaded with any work,) bears a great proportion to the ſforce necessary ſor overcoming the resistance opposed by the work. The formula must, thereſore, be used in all the torms, bethe velocity of the working-point is cause o is joined with . It would have been simpler in this purticular, had a been joined with æ in the expression of the angular velocity. 3. In some cases we need not attend to the inertia of the pover, as in the steam-engine. In this caso, if taken strietly, n appears to have no value, because æ is a ſactor of every term of the numerator. But the formula gives this general indication, that the more insignificant the inertia of the moving power is supposed, the larger should m be in proportion to n; provided always, that the impelling power is not, by its nature, greatly diminished, by giving so great a velocity to the impelled point. This circumstance will be particularly considered afterwards. 4. If the inertia of the power and the resistance be proportional to their pressures, as when the impelling power is water lying in the buckets ofan overshot wheel, and the work is the raising of water, minerals, or other heavy body, acting only by its weight; then ꝑ and r may be substituted ſor æ and y, and the ſormula expressing the value oſ n, when the performance is a maximum, becomes Y ? X +0 xatr—pxæſ. n=m ?} a4r If; in this case, the inertia and ſriction of the machine may be disregarded, as may often be done in pulleys, we have p n=nsL 4 I—I. IF we make m the unit of the radii, and r the unit oſ force, we have ' n=Vp +1—1, in parts of m æ. Or, making p =Il, we have n = / 1I. Thò very simple expressions are of considerable use, even in cases where the inertia of the machine is very considerable, provided that it have no reciprocating motions. A simple wheel and axle, or a train of good wheel-work, have very moderate friction. The general resulis, therefore, vhich even very unlettered readers can deduce from these simple formulæ, will give notions that are useſul in the cases which they cannot so thoroughly comprehend. Some service of this kind may be derived from the following little table of the best proportions of m to n, corresponding to the proportions of the power ſurnished to the engineer, and the resistance which must be overcome by it The quantity r is always  10, and m æ 1. n n 0,048809 0,732051 0,095415 0, 760682 0,140175 0,78854 0 183216 0,81659 0,224745 0,843900 0,264911 0,570800 0,508841 0,897500 0,41641 0,928500 0,378405 0,949100 0,14214 0,974800 P I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 l This must suſſice for a very general view of the first problem. 25. II. The next question is not less momentous, namely, to determine for a machine of a given construction that proportion of the resistance at the working-point to the impelling power which will insure the greatest perſormance of the machine; that is, the proportion oſ m to n being given, to find the best proportion of ꝓ tor. This is a much more complicated problem than the other; for here we have to attend to the variations both oſ the pressures » and r, and also of the external matters æ and y, which are generally connected with them. It will not be sufficient, thereſore, to treat the question by tſſt usual  We have recomputed this table ſrom the ſormula, extending the numbers two decimal places, and adding the values oſ n ſor several intermediate vaInes oſ 5Ebp. ſluxionary process ſor determining the maximum, in which r is considered as the only varying quantit. We must, in this cursory discussion, rest satisfied with a comprehension of the circumstances which most generally prevail in practice. It must either happen, that when r changes, there is no change (that is, of moment) in the mass of external matter which must be moved in performing the work, or that there is also a change in this circumstance. If no change happens, the denominator of the fourth formula, expressing the performance, remains the same; and then the ſormula attains a maximum when the numerator p rm n i rn* is a maximum. Also, we may include f without complicating the process, by the consideration, that fis always in nearly the same ratio to r; and therefore r + may be considered as a certain multiple of r, such as b r. We may, therefore, omit f in the fluxionary equations for obtaining the maximum, and then, in computing the perſormance, divide the whole by 5. Thus if the whole friction be ,,th of the resisting pressure r, we have r + æ a of r, and b æ - Having ascertained the best value for r, ve put this in its place in the ſourth ſormula, and take E- of this for the perſormance. This will never diſfer much ſrom the truth. This process gives us p m n æ Q n* r, and r æ 2 and if we farther simplify the process, by making p æ1l, and m æ l, we have r æ a most simple expresn sion, directing us to make the resistance one-half of what would balance the impelling power by the intervention of the machine. voL. n. r This will evidently apply to many very important cases, namely, to all those in which the matter put in motion by the working-point is but trifling. But it also happens in many important cases, that the change is at least equally considerable in the inertia of the work. In this case it is very diſficult to obtain a general soIlution. But we can hardly imagine such a change, without supposing that the inertia of the work varies im the same proportion as the pressure excited by it at the working-point oſ the machine; for since r continues the same in kind, it can rarely change but by a proportional change of the matter with which it is connected. Yet some very important cases occur where this does not happen. Such is a machine which ſorces water along a long main pipe. The resistance to motion and the quantity of water do not follow nearly the same ratioo. But in the cases in which this ratio is observed, we may represent  by any multiple b r of r, which the case in hand gives us; b being a number, integer, or fractional. In the ſarther treatment of this case, we think it more convenient to free r from all other combinations; and instead o supposing the force ſ (which we made equivalent with the ſriction of the machine) to be applied at the working-point, we may apply it at the impelled point, making the effective power  = pſ. For the same reasons, instead oſ making the momentum of the machine's inertia = a n*, we may make it a m*, and make a +r =2. Nov, supposing q, or pf, æ l, and also m æI, our formula expressing the perſormance becomes uu This is æ væ F Z0nz2 bn* l Cor. 1. If the inertia of the vork is always equal to its pressure, as when the work consists wholly in raising a weight, such as drawing water, &e. then b æ I, and the formula for the maximum performance becomes maximum vhen r 9. If the inertia of the impelling power is also the same vith its pressure, and if we may neglect the inertia and ſriction of the machine, the formula becomes Example. Let the machine be a common pulley, so that the radii m and n are equal, and therefore n æ I. Then,  than àths of what would balance it. Here follows a series of the best values of r, corresponding to different values of n. m and ꝓ are each æ I. The nombers in the last column have the same proportion to l which r has to the resistance which will balance ꝓ.* The above table has been extended to values oſ n ſrom b . 12 inęln sive.En. From what has now been established, we see, with suſficient evidence, the importance of the higher mathematies to the science oſ mechanics. If the velocities oſ the impelled and working points of an engine are not properly adjusted to the pressures, the inertia, and the friction of the machine, we do not derive all the advantages which we might from our situation. Hence also we learn the ſalsity of the maxim which has been received as well ſounded, that the augmentation of intensity oſ any force, by applying it to the long arm of a lever, is always ſully compensated by a loss of time; or, as it is usually expressed,  what we gain by a machine in force we lose in time. If the proportion of m to n is well chosen, we shall find that the work done, when it resists by its inertia only, increnses nearly in the proportion of the pover employed; whereas, when the inertia of the work is but a small part of the resistance, it increases nearly in the duplicate ratio of the power employed. It was remarked, in the setting out in the present problem, that the formulæ do not immediately express the velocity of any point of the machine, but its momentary acceIeration. But this is enough for our purpo:e; because, when the momentary acceleration is a maximum, the velocity acquired, and the space described, in any given time, is also a maximum. We also shewed how the real velocities, and the spaces described, may be ascertained in known measures. We may say in general, that if g& represent the pressure of g is to mn—r fn w am +a +yn as I6 feet to the space described in a second by the workingpoint in a second, or as 32 feet per second is lo the velocity acquired in that time. 96. A remark now remains to be made, which is oſ the greatest consequence, and gives an unexpected tura to the vhole of the preceding doctrines. It appears, from all that has been said, that the motion of a machine must be uniformly accelerated, and that any point will describe spaces gravity on any mass of matter m, then proportional to the squares of the times; ſor while the pressures, ſriction, and momentum of inertia remain the same, tho momentary acceleration must also be invariable. But this seems contrary to all experience:. Such machines as are properly construeted, and work without jolts, are observed to quicken their pace ſor a ſew seconds aſter starting; but all of them, in a very moderate Lime, acquire a motion that is sensibly uniform. Is our theory erroneous, or what are the circumstances which remain to be considered, in order to make it agree with observation ? The science of machines is imperſect, till ve have explained the causes of this deviation from the theory of uniform acceleration. The causes are various. I. In some cases, every increase of veloeity of the machine produces an increase of friction in all its communicating parts. By these moans, the accelerating force, which is pmr + fn, or Jmrn, is diminished, and consequently the acceleration is diminished. But it seldom happens that friction takes away or employs the whole accelerating force. We are not yet well instructed in the nature of friction. Most of the kinds of friction which obtain in the communicating parts of machines, are such as do not sensibly increase by an increase of velocity; some oſf them really diminish. Yet even the most accurately constructed machines, unloaded with work, attain a motion that is sensibly uniform. If we take off the pallets from a pendulum clock, and allow it to run down amain, it accelerates for a while, but in a very moderate time it acquires an uniſorm motion. So does a common kitchen jack. These two machines seem to bid the ſairest oſ any for an uniformly accelerated motion; ſor their impelling power acts with the utmost uniformity. There is something yet unexplained in the nature of friction, which takes away some of this acceleration. 2. But the chief cause oſits cessation in these two instances, and others of very rapid motion, is the resistance of the air. This arises ſfrom the motion which is communicated to the Bir displaced by the swiſt moving parts of the machine. At first it is very small; but it increases nearly in the duplicate ratio of the velocity (see RESiISTANCE Of Fluids) Thus r increases continually; and, in a certain state of motion, 7FV n becomes equal to p m. Whenever this happens, the accelerating power is at an end. The acceleration also ceases; and the machine is in a state of dynamical equilibrium; not at rest, but moving uniformly, and perſorming work. 3. Sitill, however, this is not one of the general causes of the uniform motion attained by working engines. Rarely is the motion of their parts so rapid, as to occasion any great resistance from the air. But in the most frequent empPloyments of machines, every increase of velocity is accomranied by an increase of resistance from the work perſormed. This occurs at once to the imagination; and few persons think of enquiring farther for a reason. But there is, perhaps, no part of mechanics that is more imperſectly understood, even in our present improved state of mechanical science. In many kinds of work, it is very diſficult to state what incrense of labour is required in order to perform the work with twice or thrice the speed. In grinding corn, for instance, we are almost entirely ignorant of this matter. It is very certain, that twice the force is not necessary for making the mill grind twice as fast, nor even for making it grind twice as much grain equally well. It is not easy to bring this operation under mathematical treatment; but we have considered it with some attention, and we imagine that a very great improvement may still be made in the construction of grist mills, founded on the law of variation of the resistance to the operation of grinding, and a scientific adjustment of m to n, in consequence of our knowledge of this laiwmm We may make a similar observation on many other kinds of work perſormed by machines. In none of those works where the inertia of the work is inconsiderable, are we vell acquainted with the real mechanical process in perſorming it. This is the case in sawing-mills, boringmills, rolling-mills, slitting-mills, and many others, where the work consists in overeoming the strong cohesion oſ a small quantity oſ matter. In sawing timber, (which is the most easily understood of all these operations,) if the saw move with a double velocity, it is very difficult to say how much the actual resisting pressure on the teeth of the saw is increased. Twice the number of fibres are necessarily torn asunder during the same time, because the same number are torn by one descent of the saw, and it makes that stroke in half the time. But it is very uncertain whether the resistance is double on this account; because if each fibre be supposed to have the same tenacity in both cases, it resists with this tenacity only for half the time. The parts oſ bodies resist a similar change of condition in different manners; and there is another difference in their resistance of different changesthe resistance of red-hot iron under the roller may vary at a very different rate from that of its resistance to the cutting tool. The resistance of the spindles of a cotton-mill, arising purtly ſfrom friction, partly from the inertia of the heaped bobins, and partly from the resistance of the air, is still more complicated, and it may be diſficult to learn its lawm. The only case in which we can judge with some precision is, hen the inertia oſ matter, or a constant pressure like that of gravity, constitutes the chieſ resistancee. Thus in a mill employed to raise water by a chain of buckets, the resistance proceeds from the inertia only of the water. The buckets are moving with a certain velocity, and the lowest of them takes hold of a quantity of water lying at rest in the pit, and drags it into motion with its acquired velocity. The force required for generating this motion on the quiescent water must be double or triple, vhen the velocity that must be given to it is so. This absorbs the overplus of the impelling power, by which that power exceeds what is necessary for balancing the weight of the water contained in all the ascending buckets. This is a certain determinate quantity which does not change; ſor in the same instant that a new bucket of water is forced into motion below, and its weight added to that of the ascending buckets, an equal bucket is emptied of its water at top. The ascending buckets require only to be balanced, and they then continue to ascend, with any velocity already acquiredl. While the machine moves slow, the motion impressed on the new bucket oſ water is not sufficient to absorb all the overplus of impelling power. The quantity not absorbed accelerates the machine, and the next bucket must produce more motion in the water which it takes up. This consumes more of the overplus. This goes on till no overplus of power is leſt, and the machine accelerates no more. The complete performance of the machine now is, that è a certain quantity of water, formerly at rest, is now moving with a certain velocity.? Our engineers consider it differently;  as a certain weight of water liſted up But while the machine is thus moving uniformly, it is really not doing so much as before; that is, it is not exerting such great pressures as before the motion was rendered uniſorm; for at that time there was a pressure at the working-point equal to the weight of all the water in the ascending buckets; and also an overplus of pressure, by which the whole was accelerated. In the state of uniform motion, the pressure is no more than just balances the weight oſ the ascending chain. We shall learn by and by how the pressures have been diminishing, although the mill has been accelerating; a thing that seems a paradox. In this instance, then, we see clearly, why a machine must attain a uniform motion. A pumping machine gives us the same opportunity, but in a manner so diſferent as to require explanation. The piston may be supposed at the very surſace of the pit water, and the impelling power may be less than will support a column in the pipe as high as can be raised by the pressure of the atmosphere. Suppose the impelling power to be the water lying in the buckets of an overshot wheel. Let this water be laid into the buckets by a very small stream. It ill fill the buckets very slowly; and, as this gives them a preponderance, the mill loses its balance, the wheel begins to move, and the piston to rise, and the water to follow it. The water may be delivered on the wheel drop by drop; the piston ill rise by insensible degrees, always standing still again as soon as the atmospheric pressure on it just balances the water on the wheel. The water in the risingpipe is always a balance to the pressure of the atmosphere on the cistern; thereſore the pressure of the atmosphere on the piston (which is the r in our ſormula) ĩs equal to the weight of this water. Our pump-makers thereſore (calling themselves engineers) say, that the weight of water in the pipe balances the water on the wheel. It does not balance it, nor is it raised by the wheel, but by the atmosphere; but it serves us at present for a measure of the power of the wheel. At last, all the buckets of the wheel are full, and the water is (for example) 95 feet high in the pipe. Now let the stream of water run its full quantity. It will only run over from bucket to bucket, and run ofſ at the bottom of the wheel; but the mill will not move, and no work will be performed. (N. B. We are here excluding all impulse or stroke on the buckets, and supposing the water to act only by its weight) But nov let all be emptied again, and let the water be delivered on the wheel in its full quantity at the first. The wheel will immediately acquire a preponderancy, which vill greatly exceed the first small pressure of the atmosphere on the piston. It will, therefore, accelerate the piston, overcoming the pressure of the air with great velocity. The piston rises fast; the water ſollows it by the pressure of the atmosphere; and when it attains the former utmost height, it attains it vith a considerable velocity. If allowed to run off there, it vill continue to run off with that velocity; because there is the same quantity of water pressing round the wheel as before, and thereſore enough to balance the pressure of the atmosphere on the piston. The pressure of the same atmosphere on the water in the cistern, raised the water in the pipe with this velocity; thereſore it will continue to do s0, and the mill will deliver water by the pump with this velocity, although there is no more pressure acting on it than before, vhen the water ran to waste, doing no work whatever. This mode of action is extremely different from the former example. The mill is not acting against the inertia  of the water to be moved, but against the pressure r of the atmosphere on the piston. The pressure oſ the same atmosphere on the cistern is employed against the inertia of the water in the pipe; and the use of the mill is to gire occasion, by raising the piston, to the exertion oſ this atmospherical pressure, which is the real raiser of the water. The maxim of construction, and the proper adjustment of m to n in this case, are diſferent from the former; and we should run the risk of making an imperſect engine were we to coufound them. We must mention another case oſ a pumping-mill, seemingly the same with this, but essentially different. Suppose the pipe of this pump to reach 30 ſeet below the surface of the pit-water, and that the piston is at the very bottom of it. Suppose also, that the wheel buckets, when filled with water, only enable it to support 5 feet of water in the rising pipe. Let the water be delivered into the wheel drop by drop. The wheel will gradually preponderate; the piston vill gradually rise, liſting the water above it, sustaining a pressure of water which gradually increasess At last, the water in the pump is 25 feet higher than that in the cistern; the wheel is full and running to waste; but no work is performed. Let all be emptied, and now let the water come to the wheel in its full stream, but without impulse. The piston will liſt the water briskly, bring it to 25 feet high with a considerable velocity, and the mill will now raise it with this velocity. In this example, the mill is the immediate agent in raising the water; but, in this case also, its ultimate oſfice is not overcoming inertia, but overcoming pressure. It was the overplus of power only that was employed in overcoming inertia, while accelerating the water in the rising pipe, in order to give it the necessary velocity for a continued discharge. 97. These and similar examples shew the great diſſerence between the statical and dynamical equilibrium of machines, and the necessity oſ a scientific attention by all who wish to improve practical mechanies. Without this, and even a pretty refined attention, we cannot see the connection between a copious supply of water to the bucket-wheel and a plentiſul discharge by the pump. We believe, that the grealest part of those employed in erecting machines conceive it as owing to the greater weight of water impelling the wheel with greater force; but we see that there is no difference in the pressures on the mill at rest, and the mill doing its work steadily and uniſormly, with any velocity, however grent. Without keeping the notions of that part of the impelling power which supports distinet from that of the part which accelerates, we shall never have a ciear conception of the operation of machines, or of mechanical power in genera. We cannot derive all the advantages of our natural powers, without knowing how our machine employs the pressurè excited by it at the working point; that is, without perceiving in what cases it is opposed to inertia, and in what to the mechanical properties of tangible matter. This only can inform us at what rate the resistance varies by a change of velocity; and when it happens that this augmentation, necessarily accompanied by an augmentation of all the frictions, and the resistance of the air, is in equilibrio with the whole of the impelling power, and all acceleration is at an end. 98. Lastly, another chieſ cause of the finally uniform motion of machines is, that, in most cases, an incrense of velocity produces  real diminution of impelling power. We hardly know any exception to this besides the employment of one descending weight as a power or first nover Most of the powers which we employ reside in bodies external to the machine; and these bodies must be put in motion, and continued in that motion, in order to continùe their presure on the impelled point. Frequently a great part of the pover is employed in giving this necessary motion to the external matter, and the remainder only is employed in pressing ſorward the machine. We mentioned a remarkable instance of this in the operation of threshing. Now, the power thus employed must increase in proportion to the motion required; that is, in proportion to the velocity oſ the impelled point; what remains, urging forward the machine, is therefore diminished. The acceleration is therefore diminished, and may cease. At last the actual pressure is 5s0 much diminished, that it is no more than what is necessary for overcoming the increased resistance of the work, the increased ſriction. The machine, thereſore, accelerates no more, but moves uniformly. This cause of the diminution of power by an increase of velocity, obtains in all cases where the strength of animals, of springs, the force of fired gunpowder, &e. is exerted. In 30me cases, the visible effect is not very considerable; as in the employment oſ a strong spring, the force of gunpowder, and a few others. In the action of animals, this defaleation oſ power is very great when the velocity is considerable. Nay, even in the action of gravity, although it acts as strongly on a body in rapid motion as on one at rest, yet when gravity is not the immediate agent, but acts by the intervention of a body in which it resides, the necessity of previously moving this body frequently diminishes the acceleration which it would otherwise produce. Thus, in an overshot- wheel, iſ the water be delivered into the bucket vith a velocity (estimated in the direction of the part of the wheel into which it is delivered) less than that of the rim of the wheel, it must retard the motion; for itmust be immediately dragged into that motion; that is, part of the accelerating overplus, already acting on the wheel, must be employed in accelerating this new bucket of water, and this must lessen the general acceleration oſ the machine, Hence we learn, that the water must be delivered on the wheel with a velocity that is at least not less than that oſ the wheel's motion. The case in which we see this diminution of power on machines most distinctly is, vhen water or wind, acting by impulso alone, is our moving power. Since the mutual impulses of bodies depend entirely on their relative motions, it ſollows, that when the velocity of the impelled point is augmented, the impulsion, or effective pressure, must be diminished. Nay, this velocity may be so increased, that there shall be no relative motion, and therefore no impulsion. If the floats of an undershot wheel be moving with the velocity of the stream, they remain conjoined in their progress, but without any mutual action. Thereſore, when an undershot wheel is set into a running water, the ſirst impulsions are strong, and accelerate the wheel. This diminishes the next impulsion and acceleration: but the wheel is still impelled and accelerated; less and less in every succeeding moment, as it moves ſaster; by and by, the accleration becomes insensible, and the wheel appears to attain a motion which is perſectly uniſorm. This requires a very long time, or rather it is never attained, and we only cannot discern the very small additions which ore still made to the velocity. All this happens generally aſter a very moderate time, by reason of various other obstructions. Animal action is subject to the same variation. We know that there is a certain rate at which a horse can run, exhausting or employing his whole strength. If he be made to drag any the smallest load aſter him, he must employ part of his foree on it, and his speed will be checked. The more he is loaded with a draught, the slower he will run, still employing all his strength. The draught may be increased till he is reduced to a trot, to a walk, nay, till he is unable to draw it. Now, just inverting this process, we see that there is a certain strain which will sufficiently tire the horse without stirring from the spot, but which he could ll continue to exert ſor hours. This is greater than the load that he can crawl along with, employing his strength as much as would be prudent to continue from day to day. And, in like nanner, every lesser draught has a corresponding rate, at which the horse, employing his whole working strength, can continue to draW at during the working hours of a day. At setting out, he pulls harder, and accelerates it. Following his pull, he walks ſaster, and therefore pulls less (becausæe we are still supposing him to employ his whole working strength.) At last he attains that speed which occupies his whole strength in merely continuing the pull. Other animals act in a similar manner; and it becomes a general rule, that the pressure actually exerted on the impelled point of a machine diminishes as its velocity increases. 99. From the concurrence of so many ſacts, we perceive that we must be careſul to distinguish between the quantity of power expended, and the quantity that is usefully employed, which must be measured solely by the pressure exerted on the machine. When a weight of five pounds is employed to drag up a weight oſ three pounds by means of a thread over a pully, it descends, with a motion uniſormly accelerated, four feet in the first second. Mr Smeaton would call this an expenditure of a mechanical power 20. The weight three pounds is raised four feet. Mr Smeaton would call this a mechanical effect 12. Thereſore the eſfect produced is not adequate to the power expended. But the fact is, that the pressure, strain, or mechanical power really exerted in this experiment, is neither five nor three pounds; the five-pound weight would have ſallen 16 feet, but it falls only four. A force has thereſore acted on it suſicient to make it deseribe I9 ſeet in a second, vith a uniformly accelerated motion; for it has counteracted so much oſ its weight. The thread was strained with a ſorce equal to 37 pounds, or bths of 5 pounds. In like manner, the S-pound weight would have ſallen 16 feet; but it was raised 4 feet. Fere was a change precisely equal to the other. A force oſ 37 pounds, acting on a mass whose matter is only 3, will, in a second, cause it to describe 20 feet with a uniformly accelerated motion. Now, 5 x 12, and 3 x 20, give the same product 60. And thus we see, that the quantity of motion extinguished or produced, and not the product of the weight and height, is the true unequivocal measure of mechanical power really expended, or the mechanical effect really produced, and that these two are always equal and opposite. At the same time, Mr Smeaton's theorem merits the attention of engineers, because it generally measures the opportunities that we have for procuring the exertion of power. In some sense, Mr Smeaton may say, that the quantity oſf water multiplied by the height from which it descends in working our machines, is the measure of the power expended, because we must raise this quantity to the dam again, in order to have the same use of it. It is expended, but not employed; for the water, at leaving the wheel, is still able to do something. 100. It requires but little consideration to be sensible that the preceding account of the cessation of accelerated motion in our prinepal machines, must introduce different maxims of construetion from those which were expressly adopted to this acceleration; or rather, which proceeded on the erroneous supposition of the constancy of the impelling power and the resistance The examination of this point has brought into view the ſundamental principle of working machines, namely, the perfect equilibrium which takes place between the impelling power aud the simultaneous resistance. It muy be expressed thus: The force required for preserving a machine in uniform motion, with any velocity whatever, is that which is necessary for balancing the resistance then actually exerted on the workingpoint of the machine. We saw this distinetly in the instance of the tvo weights acting against each other by the intervention of a thread over a fixed pulley. It is equally true of every case oſ acting machinery: ſor if the ſorce at the impelled point be greater than what balances the resistance acting at the same point, it must accelerate that point, and thereſore accelerate the whole machine; and if the impelling force be less than this, the machine must immediately retard in its motion. When the machine has once acquired this degree oſ motion, every part of it will continue in its state of motion, if only the two external forces are in equilibrio, but not otherwise. But when the pressure of the external power on the impelled point balances the resistance opposed by that point, it is, in fact, maintaining the equilibrium with the external power acting at the workingpoint; for this is the only way that external forces can be set in opposition to ench other by the intervention of a body. The external forces are not in immediate equilibrio with each other, but each is in equilibrio with the force exerted by the point on which it acts. This force exerted by the point is a modiſication of the connecting forces of the body, all of which are brought into action by means of the actions of the external forces, and each is accompanied by a force precisely equal and opposite to it. Now, the principles of statics teach us the proportions of the external pressures which are thus set in equilibrium by the intervention of a body; and therefore teach us what proportion of pover and resistance will keep a machine of a given construction in a state of uniſorm motion. This proposition appears paradoxical, and contrary to common observation; for we find, that, in order to make a mill go ſaster, we must either diminish the resistance, or we must employ more men, or more water, or water moving vith greater velocity, &e. But this arises from some of the causes already mentioned. Either the resistance oſ the work is greater when the machine is made to move ſaster, or the impulsion of the power is diminished, or both these changes obtain. Friction and resistance oſ air also come in for their share, &. The actual pressure of a gi- ven quantity of the external power is diminished, and therefore more of it must be employed. When a weight is uniformly ruised by a machine, the pressure exerted on it by the working-point is precisely equal to its weight, whatever be the velocity with which it rises. But, even in this simplest case, more natural power must be expended in order to rãise it faster; because either more natural power must be employed to accelerate the external matter which in to press forward the impelled point, or the relative motion of the pressing matter vill be diminished. It is well known, that, in the employment of the mechanic powers, whether in their state of greatest simplicity, or any how combined in a complicated machine, if the machine be put in motion, the velocities of the extreme points hich we have called the impelled and working-points) are inversely proportional to the forces which are in equilibrio when applied to these points in the direction of their motion. This is an inductive proposition, and has been used as the foundation of systems oſf mechanics. It is unnecessary to take up time in proving what is so familiarly known; consequently, the products of the pressures at those points by the velocities of the motions are equal; that is, the product of the pressure actually exerted at the impelled point of a machine working uniformly, multiplied by the velocity of that point, is equal to the product of the resistance actually exerted at the working-point, multiplied by the velocity of that point, that is, by the velocity with which the resistance is overcome, p mmrn. . Now, the produet oſ the resistance, by the velocity with which it is overcome, is evidently the measure of the perſormance of the machine, or the work done. The product of the actual pressure on the impelled point, by the velocity of that point, may be called the MOMENTUM OF IMPULSE. I0I. Hence we deduce this proposition: In all working machines which have acquired a uniform voL. II. Q motion, the performance of the machine is equal to the momentum of impulse.* This is a proposition of the utmost importance in the science of machines, and leads to the fundamental maxim of their construction. Sinee the performance of a machine is equal to the momentum of impulse, it increases and diminishes along with it, and is a maximum when the momentum of impulse is a maximum; thereſore, the fundamental maxim in the construction of a machine is to fashion it in such a manner that the momentum of impulse shall be a maximum, or that the product of the pressure actually exerted on the impelled point of the machine by the velocity with which it moves may be as great as possible. Then are e certain that the product of the resistance, by the velocity of the working-point, is as great as possible, provided that we take care that none of the impulse be needlessly wasted by the way by injudicious communieations of motion, by friction, by unbalanced loads, and by reciprocal motions, vhich irrecoverably waste the impelling power.  The truth oſ this proposition has been long perceived in every particular instance that happened to engage the attention; but we do not recollect any mechanician before Mr Euler considering it as a general truth, expressing in a ſew words a mechanical law. This celebrated mathematician undertook, about the year 1735, or 736, a general and systematic view oſ machines, in order io ſound a complete theory immediately conducive to the improvement oſ practical mechunics. In 1743 he published the ſirst propositions of this useſul theory in the tenth volume of the Comment. Petropolitani, containing the excellent dynamical theorems oſ which we have given the substance. In the third volume oſ the Comment. Novi Petropol. he prosecuted the subject little ſarther; and, in the eighth volume, he entered on what we are now engaged in, and ſormally announces this ſundamental proposition, calling these two products the momentum of impulse, and the momentum of effect. It is much to be regretted that this consummate mathematician did not continue these useſul labours, his ardent mind being carried away by more abstruse speculations in all the most reſined departments oſ mathematics and philosoPhy. No man in Europe could have prosecuted the subjeet with more judęment and succes,See also Mem. Acad. Berlin, 1747 and 1752. This maxim holds good whether the resistanco remains constantly the same, or varies by any law whatever. 102. But much remains to be done for the improvement of mechanical science beſore we can avail ourselves oſ this maxim, and apply it with success. The chief thing, and to this we should give the most unremitting attention, is, to lenrn the changes which obtain in the actual pressure exerted by those natural powers which we can command; the changes of actual pressure produced by a change of the velocity of the impelled point of the machine. These depend on the speciſic natures of those powers, and are different in almost every different case. Nothing will more contribute to the improvement of practical mechanies than a series of experiments, well contrived, and accurately made, for discovering those laws of variation, in the cases of those powers which are most ſrequently employed. Such experiments, however, would be costly, beyond the abilities of an individual; thereſore, it were greatly to be wished that public aid were given to some persons of skill in the science to institute a regular train of experiments of this kind. An experimental machine might be constructed, to be wrought either by men or by cattlee. This should be loaded with some kind of work which can be very accurately measured, and the load varied at pleasuree. When loaded to a certain degree, the men or cattle should be made to work at the rate which they can continue from day to day The number of turns made in an hour, multiplied by the load, vill give the perſormance corresponding to the velocities; and thus will be discovered the most advantageous rate of motion. The same machine should also be fitted ſor grinding, for sawing, boring, &e., and similar experiments will discover the relation between the velocities with which these operations are performed, and the resistances which they exert. The laws of friction may be investigated by the same machine. It should also be fitted with a walkingwheel, and the trial should be made of the slope and velocity of walking which gives the greatest momentum of im- pulse. It is not unreasonable to expect great advantages from such a train of experiments. 108. Till this be done, we must content ourselves with establishing the above, in the most general terms, applicable to any case in which the law of the variation of force may hereafter be discovered. There is a certain velocity oſ the impelled point of a machine which puts an end to the action of the moving power. Thus, if the floats of an undershot wheel be moving ith the velocity of the stream, no impulse is made on them. If the arm of a gin or capstan be moving with that velocity with which a horse or a man can just move, so as to continue at that speed from day to day, employing all his working strength, but not fatiguing himself; in this state of motion, the animal can exert no pressure on the machine. This may be called the 2x TINGUISHING VELOCITY, and ve may express it by the symbol e. Let f be that degree of force or pressure which the animal can exert at a dead pull or thrust, as it is calledd. We do not mean the utmost strain of which the animal is capable, but that which it can continue unremittingly during the working hours of a day, fully employing, but not fatiguing itself. And let ꝓ be the pressure which it actually exerts on the impelled point of a machine, moving with the velocity m. Let e m be called the RELATIVE VELOCITY, and let it be expressed by o. And Iet it be supposed that it has been discovered, by any means whatever, that the actual pressure varies in the proportion of oĩ, or em. This supposition gives us e':  æ f: ꝑ l ; : and p mf x v For the machine must be at rest, in order that the agent may be able to exert the ſorce ſ on its impelled point. But when the machine is at rest, vhat we have named the relative velocity is e, the whole of the extinguishing velocity. . The momentum of impulse is p m, that is 5 s m, or ſfx 6 vx ?7 (because m / env0.) Thereſore ſ x v x — must be made a maximum. But f and æ are two quantities which sufſer no change. Thereſore the momentum of impulse will be a maximum when & xX ?7 is a maximum. Now o' Xx ev =v'eo v, = v? e2o. The fluxion of this is  q + Io'i. This being supposed e, we have the equation Therefore o  And m, which is æ env0, becomes Thereſore we must order matters so, that the elocity of the impellod point of the machine may be E3: Now ꝑ is m and therefore æ f x And p m, æ / Vn  norm of impulse, - therefore æ the momentum of eſfect, or the performance of the machine, when in its best state. 104. Thus may the maxim of construction be said to be brought to a state of great simplicity, and oſ most easy recollection. A particular case of this maxim has been long known, having been pointed out by Mr Parent. Since the action of bodies depends on their relative velocity, the impulse of fluids must be as the square of the relative velocity. From which Mr Parent deduced, that the most advantageous velocity of the floats of an undershot wheel is onethird of that oſ the stream. This maxim is evidently included in our general proposition; for, in this case, the index q oſ that function oſ the relative velocity v, which is proportional to the impulse, is  2. Thereſore we have c Fũ =3 , and m=} e. The extinguishing velocity e, is evidently the velocity oſ the stream. Our proposition also gives us the precise value of the performanee. The impulse of the stream on the float at rest being supposed æ f, its impulse on the float moving with the maximum when  æ the velocity 3 e must be = H f. This is the measure of the actual pressure ). This being multiplied by m, or by ; e, gives h f. Now ſ is considered as equal to the weight of a column of water, having the surface of the ſloatboard for its base, and the depth of the sluice under the surface of the reservoir (or, more accurately, the ſall required for generating the velocity of the stream) for its height. Hence it has been concluded, that the utmost perſormance of an undershot wheel is to raise of the water which impels it, to the height from which it falls. But this is not found very agreenble to observation. Friction, and many imperſections of execution in the delivery of the water, the direction of its impulse, &c. may be expected to make a defalcation from this theoretical performance. But the actual performance, even of mills of acknowledged imperſection, considerably exceeds this, and sometimes is found nearly double of this quantity. The truth is, that the particular ſact from which Mr Parent first deduced this maxim, (namely, the perſormance oſ hat is called Parent's or Dr Barkers mill,) is, perhaps, oſ all that could have been selected, the least calculated for being the foundation of a general rule, being of n nature so nbstruse, that the first mathematicians of Europe are to this day doubtful whether they have a just conception of its principles. Mr Smeaton's experiments shew  See the Edinburgh Encyclopædia, Art. HroroDYNAMICS, ſor a full account oſ the theory oſ this curious machine.Ebn. very distinetly, that the maximum of performance of an undershot wheel corresponds to a velocity considerably greater than one- third of the stream, and approaches nearly to one-half; and he assigns some reasons for this which seem well founded. But, independent of this, the performance of Mr Smeaton's model was much greater than vhat corresponds with the velocity by the above-mentioned estimation of ſ. The theory of the impulsion of ſluids is æxtremely imperſect; and Daniel Bernoulli shews, from very unquestionable principles, that the impulse of a narrow vein of fluid on an extended surſace is double of what was generally supposed; and his conclusions are abundantly confirmed by the experiments adduced by him. I05. It is by no means pretended, that the maxim of construction is reduced to the great simplicity enounced in the proposition now under considerationn. We only supposed, that a case had been observed where the pressure exerted by some natural agent did follow the proportions of o. This being admitted, the proposition is strictly true. But we do not know any such case; yet is the proposition of considerable use: for we can aſfirm, on the authority of our own observations, that the action both of men and of draught horses does not deviate very far from the proportions of ?'. The observations were made on men and horses tracking a lighter along a canal, and working several days together, without having any knowledge of the purpose of the observations. The force exerted was first measured by the curvature and weight oſ the track-rope, and afterwards by a spring steelyard. This was multiplied by the number of yards per hour, and the product considered as the momentum. We found the action of men to be very nearly as m. The action of horses, loaded 50 as not to be able to trot, was nearly as em'. The practitioner can easily avail himself of the maxim, although the function 5 should never be reduced to any algebraic ſorm. He has only to institute a train oſ experiments on the natural agent, and select that velocity which gives the highest product when multiplied by its corresponding pressure. 106. When this selection has been made, wve have two ways of giving our working-machines the maximum of effect, having once ascertained the pressure f which our natural power exerts on the impelled point of the machine when it is not allowed to move. 1. When the resistance arising from the work, and from friction, is a given quantity; as when water is to be raised to a certain height by a piston of given dimensions. Since the ſriction in all the communicating parts oſ the machine varies in the same proportion with the pressure, and since these vary in the same proportion with the resistance, the sum oſ the resistance and friction may be represented by br, b being an abstract number. Let n be the undetermined velocity of the working-point; or let m: n be the proportion of velocities at the impelled and working-points. Then, because the pressures at these points balance each other, in the case of uniſorm motion, they are inversely as the velocities at those points. Thereſore ve must make i m i 7 ; ſ br: p=m:n, andnm , æ = 4 orm: n=F  xbr: q. 2. On the other hand, when m: n is already given, by the construction oſ the machine, but b r is susceptible of variation, ve must load the machine with more and more work, till we have reduced the velocity of its impelled : e t to pon 7 In either case, the perſormance is expressed by what exBut the useful per- formance, which is really the work done, will be had by dividing the value now obtained by the number b, which expresses the sum of the resistance overcome by the working-point and the friction of the machine. What has been now delivered contains, we imagine, the chief principles of the theory of machines, and points out the way in which we must proceed in applying them to every case. The reader, we hope, sees clearly the imperfection of a consideration oſf machines which proceeds no farther than the statement of the proportions of the simultaneous pressures which are excited in all the parts of the machine by the application of the external forces, which we are accustomed to call the power and the weight. Unless we take also into consideration, the immediate effect of mechanical force applied to body, and combine this with all the pressures which statical principles have enabled us to ascertain, and by this combination be able to say what portion of unbalanced force there is acting at one and all of the pressing points of the machine, and what will be the motion of every part of it in consequence of this overplus, we have acquired no knowledge that can be of service to us. We have been contemplating, not a working machine, but a sort of balancee But, by reasoning about these unbalanced forces in the same simple manner as about the ſall of heavy bodies, we were able to discover the momentary accelerations of every part, and the sensible motion which it would acquire in any assigned time, if all the ciroumstances remain the same. We found that the results, although deduced from unquestionable principles, were quite unlike the observed motions of most working machines. Proceeding still on the same principles, we considered this deviation as the indieation, and the precise measure, of something which ve had not yet attended to, but which the deviation brought into view, and enabled us to ascertain with accuracy. These are the changes which happen in the exertions of our actuating powers by the velocity with which we ſind it con- venient to make them act. Thus we learn more of the nature of those powers; and we found it necessary to distinguish careſully between the apparent magnitude of our actuating power and its real exertion in doing our work. This consideration led us to a fundamental proposition concerning all working machines when they have attained an uniform motion; namely, that the power and resistance then really exerted on the machine precisely balance each other, and that the machine is precisely in the condition of a steelyard loaded with its balanced weights, and moved round its axis by some external forœœ distinct from the power and the weightt. We ſound that this force is the previous overplus of impelling power, beſore the machine had acquired the uniform motion; and on this occasion we learned to estimate the effoct produced, by the momentum (depending on the form oſ the machine) of the quantity oſ motion produced in the whole assemblage of pover, resistance, and machinery. 107. The theory of machines seemed to be now brought back to that simplicity of equilibrium which we had said was s0 imperfect a ſfoundation for a theory; but in availing ourselves of the maxim founded on this general proposition, we saw that the equilibrium is of a very diſferent kind from a quiescent equilibrium. It necessarily involves in it the knowledge oſ the momentary accelerations and their momenta; without which we should not perceive that one state of motion is more advantageous than another, because all give us the same proportion of ſorces in equilibrio. But this is not the only use oſ the previous knowledge of the momentary accelerations of machines; there are many cases where the machine works in this very stat:. Many machines accelerate throughout while perſorming their work; and their efficacy depends entirely on the final acceleration. OF this kind is the coining-press, the great forge or tilt-mill, and some other capital engines. The steamI—_____j—.—————.§eesu engine, and the common pump, are necessarily oſ this class, although their efficacy is not estimated by their final acceleration. A great number of engines have reciprocating motions in different subordinate parts. The theory of all such engines requires for its perſection an accurate knowledge of the momentary accelerations; and we must use the ſformulæ contained in the first part of this article. 108. Still, however, the application of this knowledge has many difficulties, vhich make a good theory of such machines a much more intricate and complicated matter than we have yet led the reader to suppose. In most of these engines, the whole motion may be divided into two parts. One may be called the WOREING-5TROKE, and the other, in which the working-points are brought back to a situation which fits them ſor acting again, may be called the nETURNING-5TROKE. This return must be effected either by means of some immediate application of the actuating power, or by some other force, which is counteracted during the working-stroke, and must be considered as making part of the resistance. In the steam-engine, it is generally done by a counterpoise on the outer end of the great working- beam. This must be accounted a part of the resistance, for it must be raised again; and the proportions of the machine for attaining the maximum must be computed accordingly. The quantity of this counterpoise must be adjusted by other considerations. It must be such, that the descent of the pump-rods in the pit may just employ the whole time that is necessary ſor ſilling the cylinder with steam. If they descend more briskly, (hich an unskilful engineer likes to see,) this must be done by means of a greater counterpoise, and this employs more power to raise it again. Desaguliers describes a very excellent machine for raising water in a bucket by a mans stepping into an opposite bucket, and descending by its preponderancy. When he comes to the bottom, he steps out, goes up a stair, and finds the bucket returned and ready to receive him again. This machine is extremely simple, and perhaps the best that can be contrived; and yet it is one oſ the most likely to be a very bad one. The bucket into which the man steps must be brought up to its place again by a preponderancy in the machine when unloaded. It may be returned sooner or later. It should arrive precisely at the same time with the man. If sooner, it is of no use, and wastes power in raising a counterpoise which is needlessly heavy; iſ later, time is lost: therefore, the perſection of this very simple machine requires the judicious combination of two maximums, each oſf which varies in a ratio compounded of two other ratios. Suppose the man to employ a minute to go up stairs 50 feet, which is very nearly what he can do from day to day as his only work, and suppose him to weigh 150 pounds, and that he acts by means of a simple pulleythe maximum for a lever oſ equal arms would require him to raise about 60 pounds of water. But when all the other circumstances are calculated, it will be found that he must raise 138 pounds (neglecting the inertia of the machine.]) Ho should raise 542 pounds I0 feet in a minute; and this is nearly the most exact valuation of a man’s work. There is the same necessity of attending to a variety of circumstances in all machines which reciprocate in the whole or any considerable part of their motion. The force employed for bringing the machine into another working position, must be regulated by the time necessary for obtaining a new supply of power; and then the proportion of m to n must be so adjusted, that the work performed, divided by the whole time of the working and returning strokes, may give the greatest quotient. It is still a diſficult thing, thereſore, to construct a machine in the most perſect manner, or even to say what will be the performance oſ a machine already constructed; yet we see that every circumstance is susceptible of accurate computation. With respect to machines which acquire a sort oſ uniform motion in general, although subject to partial reciprocations, as in a pumping, stamping, forging-engine, it is also diſficult to assign the rate even oſ this general uniform motion. We may, however, say, that it will not be greater than if it were uniform throughout. Were it entirely free from friction, it would be exactly the same as if uniform; because the accelerations during the advantageous situations of the impelling power would compensate the retardations. But friction diminishes the accelerations, without diminishing the retardations. We may conclude this article with some observations tending to the general improvement of machines. 109. Nothing contributes more to the perſection of a machine, especially such as is massive and ponderous, than great uniſormity of motion. Every irregularity of motion wastes some of the impelling power; and it is only the greatest of the varying velocities which is equal to that which the machine would acquire iſ moving uniſormly throughout; for, while the motion accelerates, the impelling force is greater than what balances the resistance then actually opposed to it, and the velocity is less than what the machine would acquire if moving uniformly; and when the machine attains its greatest velocity, it attains it because the power is then not acting against the whole resistance: In both of these situations, thereſore, the perſormance oſ the machine is less than if the power and resistance were exactly balanced; in which case it would move uniformly. 110. Every attention should, thereſore, be given to this, and we should endeavour to remove all cause of irregularity. The communications of motion should be so contrived, that if the impelled point be moving uniformly, by the uniform pressure of the power, the working-point shall also be moving uniformly. Then we may generally be certain, that the massy paris of the machine will be moving uniformly. When this is not done through the whole machine, there are continual returns of strains and jolts; the inertia of the difſerent parts acting in opposite directions. Although the vhole momenta may always balance each oſher, yet the general motion is hobbling, and the points of support are strained. A great engine so constructed, commonly causes the building to tremble; but when uniſorm motion pervades the whole machine, the inertia of each part tends to preserve this uniſormity, and all goes smoothly. It is also deserving of remark, that when the communications are s contrived that the uniform motion of one part produces uniform motion on the next, the pressures at the communieating points remain constant or invariablee Now the accomplishing of this is always within the reach oſf mechanics. i 11l. One of the most usual communications in machinery is by means of toothed wheels acting on each other. ;t is of importance to have the teeth so formed, that the pressure by which one of them A urges the other B round its axis, shall be constantly the same. It can easily be demonstrated, that when this is the case, the uniform angular motion of the one will produce a uniſorm angular motion of the other; or, if the motions are thus uniſorm, the pressures are invariable. This is accomplished on this prineiple, that the mutual actions of solid bodies on each other in the way of pressure, are perpendicular to the touching surſaces. Therefſore, let the tooth a (Plate VIII. fig. I.) press on the tooth b in the point C; and draw the line FCDE perpendicular to the touching surfaces in the point C. Draw AF, BE perpendicular to FE, and let FE cut the line AB in D. It is plain, ſfrom the common principles of mechanies, that if the line FE, drawn in the manner now described, always pas: through the same point D, whatever may be the situation of the acting teeth, the mutual action of the wheels will always be the same. It will be the same as if the arm AD acted on the arm BD. In the treatises on the construction of mills, and other works oſ this kind, are many instructions for the ſormation of the teeth of wheels; and almost every noted millwright has his own nostrums: Most of them are egregiously ſaulty in respect of mechanical principle. In- deed, they are little else than instruetions how to make the teeth clear each other without sticking Mr de la Hire first pointed out the above-mentioned principle, and justly condemned the common practice of making the small wheel or pinion in the form of a lantern, (Whence it also took its name) consisting of two round disks, having a number oſ cylindrical spokes (fig. 2.) The slightest inspection of this construction shews, that, in the different situations of the vorking- teeth, the line FCE continually changes its intersection with AB. If the wheel B be very small in comparison of the other, and if the teeth of A take deep hold of the cylindrieal pins of B, the line of action EF is sometimes 30 disadvantageously placed, that the pressure of the one wheel has scarcely any tendency at all to turn the other. Mr de la Hire, or Dr Hooke,* was, we think, the first who investigated the form oſ tooth which procured this constant nction between the wheels; and, in a very ingenious disertation, published among the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences at Paris, 1668, the former of these gentlemen shews, that this will be ensured by forming the teeth into epicycloids. Mr Camus, of the same academy, has published an elaborate dissertation on the same subject, in which he prosecutes the principle of Mr de la Hire, and applies it to all the variety of cases which can occur in practice. ſ There is no doubt as to the goodness of the principle; and it has another cxcellent property,  that the mutual action ofthe teeth is absolutely without any friction.” The one tooth only applies itself to the other, and rolls on it, but does not slide or rub in the smallest degree. This makes them last long, or rather does not allow them to wear in the lenst.  This property oſ the Epicycloid was ſirst pointed out by the celebrateà Danish astronomer, Olaus Roemer.  Camus's Dissertation on the Teeth of Wheels, as published in his Cours de Mathematique, has been tranlated into English, and was published in 1806. But the construction is subject to a limitation which must not be neglected. The teeth must be so made, that the curved part of the tooth b is acted on by a flat part oſ the tooth a till it comes to the line AB in the course of its action; after which, the curved part of a acts on a flat puart of b; or the whole action of a on b is either completed, or only begins at the line AB, joining the centres of the wheels. 112. Another form of the teeth secures the perſect uniſormity of action without this limitation, which requires very nice execution. Let the teeth of each wheel be formed by evolving its circumſerence; that is, let the acting face GCH of the tooth a have the form of the curve traced by the extremity oſ the thread FC, unlapped from the circumference. In like manner, let the acting face of the tooth b be formed by unlapping a thread from its circumference. It is evident, that the line FCE, which is drawn perpendicuIarly to the touching surſaces in the point C, is just the direction or position of the evolving threads by which the two acting faces are formed. This line must thereſore be the common tangent to the two cireles or circumſerences of the wheels, and will therefore always cut the line AB in the same point D. This form allows the teeth to act on each other through the whole extent oſ the line FCE, and therefore will admit of several teeth to be acting at the same time (twice the number that can be admitted in Mr de la Hire's method.) This, by dividing the pressure among several teeth, diminishes its quantity on any one of them, and thereſore diminishes the dents or impressions which they unavoidably make on each other. It is not altogether free from sliding and ſriction, but the whole of it can hardly be said to be sensible. The whole slide of a tooth three inches long, belonging to a wheel oſ ten ſeet diameter, acting on a tooth of a wheel of two ſeet diameter, does not amount to 5th of an inch, a quantity altogether insignificant. In the ſormation of the teeth of wheels, a small deviation ſrom these perfoct ſorms is not perhaps of very great im- portance, except in cases where a very large wheel drives a very small one (a thing which a good engineer will always avoid.) As the construction, however, is exceedingly easy, it would be unpardonable to omit it. Well-ſormed teeth, and a great number oſ them acting at once, make the communication of motion extremely smooth and uniform. The machine works without noise, and the teeth last a very long time without sensibly changing their shape. But there are cases, such as the pallets of clocks and watches, where the utmost accuracy of form is of the greatest importance ſor the perſection of the vork. 113. When heavy stumpers are to be raised, in order to drop on the matters to be pounded, the wipers by which they are liſted should be made of such a ſorm that the stamper may be raised by a uniſorm pressure, or with a motion almost perfectly uniform. IF this is not attended to, and the wiper is only a pin sticking out ſrom the axis, the stamper is forced into motion at once. This oceasions violent jolts to the machine, and great strains on its moving parts and their points of support; whereas, when they are gradually lifted, the inequality of desultory motion is never felt at the impelled point of the machino. We have seen pistons moved by means of a double rack on the piston-rod. A half wheel takes hold of one rack, and raises it to the required height. The moment the half wheel has quitted that side of the rack, it lays hold of the other side, and forces the piston down again. This is proposed as a grent improvement; correcting the unequable motion of the piston moved in the common way by a crank. But it is ſar inferior to the erank motion. It occasions such abrupt changes of motion, that the machine is shaken by joltss Indeed, if the movement were accurately executed, the machine would be shaken to pieces, if the parts did not give way by bending and yielding. Accordingly, we have always observed that this motion soon failed, and was changed ſor one that was more smooth. A judicious engineer VOL. II. R will avoid all such sudden changes of motion, especially in any ponderous part of a machine.* When several stampers, pistons, or other reciprocal movers, are to be raised and depressed, common sense teaches us to distribute their times of action in a uniſorm manner, s0 that the machine may always be equally loaded with work. When this is done, and the observations in the preceding paragraph attended to, the machine may be made to move almost as smoothly as if there were no reciprocations in it. Nothing shews the ingenuity of the author more than the artſul, yet simple and eſſectual contrivances, for obviating those diſſiculties that unavoidably arise from the very nature of the work that must be perſormed by the machine, and of the power employed. The inventive genius and sound judgment of Watt and Boulton are as perceptible to a skilled observer, in these subordinate parts of some of their great engines, as in the original discovery on which their patent is ſounded. In some oſ those engines, the mass of dead matter which must be put into motion, and this motion destroyed and again restored in every stroke, is enormous, amounting to above an hundred tons. The ingenious authors have even contrived to drav some advantages from it, by allowing a great want of equilibrium in certain positions; and this has been condemned as a blunder by engineers who did not see the use made of it. 114. There is also great room for ingenuity and good choice in the management of the moving power, when it is such as cannot immediately produce the kind of motion required ſor eſſecting the purpose. We mentioned the conversion oſ the continued roſation of an axis into the reciprocating motion oſ a piston, and the improvement which was  For ſarther information on this subjeet, seæ Camus' Cours de Mathematique, § 550; Robertson Buchanan's Essay on the Teeth of Whneels, London, 1808; and Ferguson's Lectures, vol. ii. Appendis/Fo. thought to have been made on the common and obvious contrivance oſ a erank, by substituting a double rack on the piston-rod, and the inconvenience arising from the jolts oceasioned by this change. We have seen a great ſorge, where the engineer, in order to avoid the same inconvenience arising from the abrupt motion given to the great sledge-hammer of seven hundred weight, resisting with a fivo- fold momentum, ſormed the wipers into spirals, which communicated motion to the hammer almost without any jolt whatever; hut the result was, that the hammer rose no higher than it had been raised in contact with the wiper, and then fell on the iron bloom with very little eſfeet. The cause oſ its ineſſiciency was not guessed at; but it was refnoved, and wipers oſ the common form were put in place oſ the spirals. In this operation, the rapid motion of the hammer is absolutely necessary. It is not enough to lift it up; it must be tosed up, so as to ſly higher than the wiper lifts it, and to strike with great force the strong onken spring which is placed in its way It compresses this spring, and is reflected by it with a considerable velocity, s50 as to hit the iron as if it had ſallen from a great height. Had it been allowed to ſly to that height, it would have fallen upon the iron with somewhat more ſorce (because no onken spring is perfectly elastic,) but this would have required more than twice the time. 115. In employing a power which of necessity reciprocates, to drive machinery which requires a continuous motion, (as in applying the steam-engine to a cotton or a gristmill,) there also occur great difficulties. The necessity of reciprocation in the ſirst mover wastes much power; because the instrument which communicates such an enormous force must be extremely strong, and be vell supported. The impelling power is wasted in imparting, and aſterwards detroying, a vast quantity of motion in the working beam. The s&ilſul engineer will attend io this, and do his utmost to procure the necessary strength oſ this first mover, without making it a vast load of inert matter. He ill also remark, that all the strains on it, and on its supports, are changing their directions in every stroke. This requires particular attention to the manner of supporting it. Iſ we observe the steam-engines which have been long erected, ve see that they have uniſormly shaken the building to pieces. This has been owing to the ignorance or inattention of the engineer in this particular. They are much more judiciously erected now, experience having taught the most ignorant that no building can withstand their desultory and opposite jolts, and that the great movements must be supported by a frame-work independent of the building of masonry which contains it.* The engineer will also remark, that when a single-stroke steam-enginc is made to turn a mill, all the communications of motion change the direction of their pressure twice every stroke. During the working-stroke of the beam, one side of the teeth of the intervening wheels is pressing the machinery forward; but during the returning stroke, the machinery, already in motion, is dragging the beam, and the wheels are acting with the other side of the teeth. This occasions a rattling at every change, and makes it proper to ſashion both sides of the teeth with the same care. It will ſfrequently conduce to the good perſormance of an engine, to make the action of the resisting work unequable, accommodated to the inequalities of the impelling power. This will produce a more uniform motion in machines in  The gudgeons oſ a water-nheel should never rest on ſhe wall oſ the building. It shukes it; and if set up soon aſter the building has been erected, it prevents the mortar ſrom taking ſirm bond; perhaps by shattering the calcareous crystuls as they ſorm. When the engineer is obliged to rest the gudgeons in this way, they should be supported by a block oſ ouk luid a little hollow. This soſtens all tremors, like the springs oſ a wheel carriage. This practice would be very serviceable in many other paris oſ the construetion. - - which the momentum of inertia is inconsiderablee. There ure some beautiful specimens of this kind oſ adjustment in the mechanism of animal bodies. 116. It is very customary to add what is called a FLv to machines. This is a heavy disk or hoop, or other mass of matter, balanced on its axis, and so connected with the machinery as to turn briskly round with it. This, may be done with the view of rendering the motion of the whole more regular, notwithstanding unavoidable inequalities of the accelerating ſorces, or of the resistances occasioned by the work. It becomes a REGULATOR. Suppose the resistance extremely unequal, and the impelling power perfectly constant; as when a bucket wheel is employed to work one pump. When the piston has ended its working-stroke, and while it is going down the barrel, the power of the wheel being scarcely opposed, it accelerates the whole machine, and the piston arrives at the bottom of the barrel with a considerable velocity. But in the rising again, the vheel is opposed by the column of water now pressing on the piston. This immediately retards the wheel; and when the piston has reached the top of the barrel, all the acceleration is undone, and is to begin againn. The motion of such a machine is very hobbling; but the surplus of accelerating force at the beginning oſ a returning-stroke will not make such a change in the motion of the machine if we connect the ſly with it. For the accelerating momentum is a determinate quantity. Therefſore, if the radius of the fly be great, this momentum vill be attained by communicating a small angular motion to the machine. The momentum of the ſly is as the square of its radius; therefore it resists acceleration in this proportion; and although the overplus of power generates the sume momentum of rotation in the whole machine as beſore, it makes but a small addition to its velocity. I the diameter of the fly be doubled, the augmentation oſ rotation will be reduced to onefourth. Thus, by giving a rapid motion to a small quan4 — _ ; —rptm——sæ- mmm/4 tity of matter, the great acceleration during the returningstroke of the piston is prevented. This acceleration continues, however, during the whole of the returning-stroke, and at the end of it the machine has acquired its greatest velocity. Now the working-stroke begins, and the overplus of power is at an end. The machine aceelerates no more; but if the power is just in equilibrio with the resistance, it keeps the velocity which it has acquired, and is still more accelerated during the next returning-stroke. But now, at the beginning oſ the subsequent working-stroke, there is an overplus oſ resistance, and a retardation begins, and continues during the whole rise oſ the piston; but it is inconsiderable in comparison of what it would have been vithout the ſly; ſor the ſly, retaining its acquired momentum, drags forward the rest of the machine, aiding the impelling power of the wheel. It does this by all the communications taking into each other in the opposite direction. The teeth oſ the intervening wheels are heard to drop from their ſformer contact on one side, to a contact on the other. By considering this process with attention, we easily perceive that, in a few strokes, the overplus of power during the returning-stroke comes to be s0 adjusted to the deſiciency during the working-stroke, that the accelerations and retardations exactly destroy each other, and every succeeding stroke is made with the same velocity, and an equal number of strokes is made in every succeeding minute. Thus the machine acquires a general uniformity with periodical inequalities. It is plain, that by suſficiently enlar”ing cither the diameter or the weight of ihe ſly, the irregularity of the motion may be rendered as small as we please. It is much better to enlarge the diameter. This preserves the friction more moderate, and the pivot wears less. For these reasons, a ſly is in general a considerable improvement in machinery, by equalizing many exertions that are naturally very irregular. Thus, a man working at a common windlass, exerts a very irrogular pressure on thę winch. In one of his positions in each turn he can exert a ſoree of near 70 pounds without fatigue, but in another he cannot exert above 25; nor must he be loaded with much above this in general. But if a large ſly be connected properly with the windlass, he will act with equal ease and speed against 30 pounds. 117. This regulating power of the ſly is without bounds, and may be used to render uniſorm a motion produced by the most desultory and irregular power. It is Lthus that the most regular motion is given to mills that are driven by a single-stroke steam-engine, where for two or even three seconds there is no forcę pressing round the mill. The communication is made through a massive ſly of very great diameter, whirling with great rapidity. As soon as the impulse ceases, the ſly, continuing its motion, urges round the whole machinery with almost unabated speed. At this instont all the teeth, and all the joints, between the ſly and the first mover, are heard to catch in the opposite direction. j If any permanent change should happen in the impelling poer, or in the resistance, the fly makes no obstacle to its producing its full effect on the machine; and it will be observed to accelerate or retard uniformly, till a new general speed is acquired exactly corresponding with this new power and resistance. Many machines include in their construction movements vhich are equivalent with this intentional regulatorr. A flour-mill, ſor example, cannot be better regulated than by its millstone; but, in the Albion mills, a heavy fly was added with great propriety; for if the mills had been regulated by their millstones only, then at every change oſ stroke in the steam-engine, the whole train of communications between the benm, which is the ſirst mover, and the regulating millstone, which is the very last mover, would take in the opposite direction. Although each drop in the teeth and joints be but a triſle, the whole, added together, would make a considerable jolt. This is avoided by a regulator immediately adjoining to the beam. This continually presses the working-machinery in one direction. So judiciously were the movemenits of that noble machine contrived, and so nicely were they executed, that not the least noise was heard, nor the slightest tremor ſelt in the building. Mr Valouẽ's beautiſul pile-engine, employed at Westminster Bridge, is another remarkable instance of the regulating powers of a fly. When the ram is dropped, and its follower disengnged immediately aſter it, the horses would instantly tumble down, because the load, against vhich they had been straining hard, is at onco taken off; but the gin is connected with a very large ſl, which checks any remarkable acceleration, allowing the horses to lean on it during the descent of the load; aſter which their draught recommences immediately. The spindles, cards, and bobbins, of a cotton-mill, are also a sort oſ ſlies. Indeed all bulky machines of the rotative kind tend to preserve their motion with some degree of stendiness, and their great momentum of inertia is as useſul in this respect as it is projudicial to the acceleration or any reciprocation when wanted. 118. There is another kind of regulating-ſly, consisting of wings whirled briskly round till the resistance oſ the air prevents any great acceleration. This is a very bad one ſor a working machine, ſor it produces its effect by really wasting a part of the moving power. Frequently it employs a very great and unknown part of it, and robs the proprietor of much work. It should never be introduced into any machine employed in manuſactures. 119. Some rare cases occur vhere a very diſſerent regulator is required; where a certain determined velocity is found necessary. In this case the machine is furnished, at its extreme mover, vith a conical pendulum, consisting pf two heavy balls hanging hy rods, which move in very nice and steady joints at the top of a vertical axis. It is wvell known, that vhen this axis turns round, with an angular velocity suited to the length of those pendulums, the time of a revolution is determined. Thus, if the length of each pendulum be 393 inches, the axis will make a revolution in two seconds very nearly. If we attempt to foree it more swiſtly round, the balls will recede a little from the axis, but it employs as long time ſor a revolution as beſore; and we cannot make it turn swiſter, unless the impelling power be increased beyond all probability; in which case the pendulum ill fly out from the centre till the rods are horizontal, aſter which every increase of power will accelerate the machine very sensibly. Watt and Boulton have applied this contrivance with great ingenuity to their steamengines, when they are employed ſor driving machinery for manufactures which have a very changeable resistance, and where a certain speed cannot be much deported from without great inconveniencee Thæy have connected this recess of the balls ſrom the axis (which gives immediate indication oſ an increase of power or a diminution of resistance) with the cock which admits the steam to the workingeylinder. The balls ſlying out, cause the cock to close a little, and diminish the supply of steam. The impelling power diminishes the next moment, and the balls again approach the axis, and the rotation goes on as before, although there may have occurred a very great excess or deficieney of power. The same contrivance may be employed to raise or lover the feeding sluice of a water-mill employed to drive machinery. 120. A ſly is sometimes employed for a different purpose from that of a regulator of motion: It is employed as a collector of power. Suppose all resistance removed from the working-point of a machine furnished with a very large or heavy fly immediately connected with the working-point. When a small force is applied to the impelled point of this machine, motion will begin in the machine, and the ſly begin to turn. Continue to press uniſormly, and the machine will accelerate. This may be contmued till the ſly has acquired a very rapid motion. If at this moment a resisting body be applied to the working- point, it will be acted on with very great force; for the ſly has now accumulated in its circumſeronce a very great momentum. If a body vere exposed immediately to the action of this cireumference, it would be violently struekk Much more will it be 30 if the body be exposed to the action of the working-point, which perhaps makes one turn while the fly makes a hundred. It will exert a hundred times more force there (very nearly) than at its own circumference All the motion which has been accumulated on the fly during the whole progress of its acceleration, is exerted in an instant at the working-point, multiplied by the momentum depending on the proportion of the purts of the machine. It is thus that the coining-press performs its office; nay, it is thus that the blacksmith forges a bar of iron. SWinging the great sledgehammer round his head, and urging it with force the whole way, this accumulated motion is at once extinguished by impact on the iron. It is thus we drive a nail; and it is thus that, by accumulating a very moderate ſorce exerted during four or five turns of a fiy, the whole of it is exerted on a punch set on a thick plate of iron, such as is employed ſor the boilers of stcam-engines. The plate is picreed as if it were a bit of cheese. This accumulating pover of a ſly has occasioned many who think themselves engineers, to imagine that a ſly really adds power or mechanical force to an engine; and, not understanding on what its eſficacy depends, they oſten place the ſly in a situation where it only added a useless burden to the machine. It should always be made to move with rapidity. If intended for a mere regulator, it should be near the first mover. Iſ it is intended to accumulate ſorce in the working-point, it should not be ſar separated ſrom it. In a certain sense, a fly may be said to add power to a machine, because, by nccumulating into the exertion of one moment the exertions of many, we can sometimes overcome an obstacle that we never could have balanced by the same machine unaided by the ſly. It is this accumulation of force which gives such an appearance of power to some of our first moverss. When a man is unſortunately catched by the teeth of a paltry country mill, he is crushed almost to mummy. The power oſ the stream is conceived to be prodigious; and yet we are certain, upon examination, that it amounts to the prossure oſ no more than fifty or sixty pounds. But it has been acting for some time, and there is a millstone of a ton weight whirling twice round in a second. This is the force that crushed the unfortunate man, and it required it all to do it, for the mill stopped. We saw a mill in the neighbourhood of Elbingroda, in Hanover, where there was a contrivance which disengaged the millstone when any thing got entangled in the teeth of the wheels. It was tried in our sight with a head of cabbage. It erushed it indeed, but not violently, and would by no means have broken a mans arm. 121. It is hardly necessary to recommend simplicity in the construction of machines. This seems now suſficiently understoodl. Multiplicity oſf motions and communications increases ſrictions; increases the uuavoidable losses by bending and yielding in every part; exposes to all the imperſections of workmanship; and has a great chance of being indistinctly conceived, and thereſore constructed without science. We think the ſollowing construction of a capstan, or crab, a very good example of the advantages of simplicity. It is the invention of an untaught, but very ingenious country tradesman. 4 A ſigure oſ this capstan was seen by Dr O. Gregory among some Chinese drawings, ncarly a century old. It appears to have been invented by George Eckhardi, and likevise by Mr M Ecan oſ PhiladelphioEb. 129. EAB (fig. S.) is the barrel of the capstan, standing vertically in a proper ſrame, as usual, and urged round by burs such as EF. The upper part A of the barrel is 17 inches in diameter, and the lower B is 16. C is a strong pulley 16 inches in diameter, having a hook D, which takes hold of a hawser attached to the load. The rope ACB is wound round the barrel A, passes over the pulley C, and is then wound round the barrel B in the opposite direction. No ſarther description is necessary, we think, to shew that, by heaving by the bar F, so as to wind more of the rope upon A, and unvwind jt from B, the pulley C must be brought nearer to the capstan by about three inches ſor each turn of the capstan; and that this simple capstan is equivalent to an ordinary capstan of the same length of bar EF, and diameter of barrel B, combined with a sixteenſold tackle of pulleys; or, in short, that it is 16 times more powerſul than the common capstan, free ſrom the great loss by fſriction and bending of ropes, which would absorb a third oſ the power oſ a sixteen- ſold tackle; and that whereas all other engines become weaker as they multiply the power to a greater degree, (unless they are proportionally more bulky) this engine becomes really stronger in itselſ. Suppose we wanted to have it twice as powerful as at prescnt, nothing is necessary but to cover the part B of the barrel with laths a quarter of an inch thick. In short, the nearer the two barrels are to equality, the more powerſul does it become. We give it to the public as an excellent capstan, and as suggesting thoughts which an intelligent engineer may employ vith great effect. By this contrivance, and using an iron wire instend of a catgut, we converted a common eight-day clock into one which goes ſor two months. We have now established the principles on which machines must be construeted, in order that they may produce the greatest effect; but it would be improper to dismiss the subject without stating to our readers Mr Bramah's new method of producing and applying a more considerable degree of power to all kinds of machinery requiring motion and force, than by any means at present practised ſor that purpose. This method, for which, on the 3lst of March, 1796, he obtained a patent, consists in the application oſ water, or other dense fluids, to various engines, so as, in sOome instances, to cause them to act with immense force; in others, to communicate the motion and povers of one part of a machine to some other part of the same machine; and, lastly, to communicate the motion and force of one machine to another, wherè their local situations preclude the application of all other methods of connection. The first and most material part of this invention will be clearly understood by an inspection of fig. 4., where  A ĩs a cylinder of iron, or other materials, suſficiently strong, and bored perſectly smooth and cylindrical; into which is fitted the piston B, which must be made perſectly watertight, by leather or other materials, as used in pump-making. The bottom of the cylinder must also be made sufficiently strong with the other part of the surſace, to be capable of resisting the greatest ſorce or strain that may at any time be required. In the bottom of the cylinder is inserted the end of the tube C, the aperture oſ which communicates with the inside of the cylinder, under the piston B, where it is shut with the small valve D, the same as the suctionpipe of a common pump. The other end of the tube C communicates with the small ſorcing-pump or injector E, by means of which, water, or other dense fluids, can be forced or injected into the cylinder A, under the piston B. Now, suppose the diameter of the cylinder A to be 12 inches, and the diameter of the piston of small pump or injector E only one quarter of an inch, the proportion between the two surfaces or ends of the said pistons will be as 1 to 2304; and supposing the intermediate space botween them to be ſilled with water, or other dense ſluid, capable of suſficient resistance, the force of one piston will act on the othèr just in the above proportion, viz. as I is to 2804. Suppose the small piston in the injector to be forced down when in the act of pumping or injecting water into the cylinder A, with the power of 20 cwt., which could easily be done by the lever H; the piston B would then be moved up with a force equal to 20 cwt. multiplied by 2304. Thus is constructed a hydro-mechanical engine, whereby a weight amounting to 2304 tons can be raised by a simple lever, throngh equal space, in much less time than could be done by any apparatus constructed on the known principles of mechanics; and it may be proper to observe, that the effect of all other mechanical combinations is counteracted by an acenmulated complication of parts, which renders them incapable of being useſully extended beyond a certain degree; but in machines actedl upon or constructed on this principle, every diſficulty of this kind is obviated, and their power subjeet to no ſfinite restraint. To prove this, iĩt will be only necessary to remark, that the force of any machine acting upon this principle can be increased ad infinitum, either by extending the proportion between the diameter of the injector and the cylinder A, or by applying greater power to the lever H.  Fig. 5. represents the section of an engine, by which very wonderſul eſſects may be produced instantaneously by means of compressed air. AA ĩs a cylinder, with the piston B fitting air- tight, in the same manner as described in fig. 2.. C is a globular vessel made of copper, iron, or other strong materials, capable of resisting immense force/ similar to those of air-guns. D is a strong tube of small bore, in which is the stop-cock EE One of the ends of this tube communicates with the cylinder under the piston B, and the other with the globe C. Now, suppose the cylinder A to be the same diameter as that in fig. 4, and the tube D equal to one-quarter of an inch diameter, which is the same as iſhe injector, ſig. 4.: then, suppose that air is injeeted into the globe C (by the common method) till it presses against the cock E with a force equal to 20 cwt., which can easily be done; the consequence will be, that vhen the cock E is opened, the piston B will be moved in the cylinder AA with a power or ſorce equal to 2304 tons; and it is obvious, as in the case fig. 4., that any other unlimited degree of ſorce may be acquired by machines or engines thus constructed. i Fig. 6. is o section merely to show how the power and motion of one machine may, by means of fluids, be transferred or communicated to another, let their distance and Iocal situation be what they may. A and B are two small eylinders, smooth and cylindrical; in the inside of each of which is a piston, made vater and air-tight, as in ſigs. 4. and 5. CC is a tube conveyed under ground, or otherwise, from the bottom of one cylinder to the other, to ſorm a communieation between them, notwithstanding their distance be ever s0 great; this tube being ſilled with water, or other ſluid, until it touch the bottom of each piston; then, by depressing the piston A, the piston B will be raised. The same effect will be produced vice versa: thus bells may be rung, wheels turned, or other machinery put invisibly in motion, by a power being applied to either. s Fig. 7. is a section, shewing another instance of communicating the action and force of one machine to another; and how water may be raised out of wells of any depth, and at any distance from the place where the operating power is applied. A is a cylinder of any required dimensions, in which is the working-piston B, as in the ſoregoing examples; into the bottom of this cylinder is inserted the tube C, which may be of less bore than the cylinder A. This tube is continued, in any required direction, down to the pump cylinder D, supposed to be fixed in the deep well EE, and forms a junction therewith above the piston F; vhich piston has a rod G, working through the stuſingbox, as is usual in a common pump. To this rod G is con3 nected, over a pulley or otherise, a weight H suſſicient to overbelance the weight of the water in the tube C, and io raise the piston F when the piston B is liſted: thus, suppose the piston B is drawn up by its rod, there ill be a vacuum made in the pump cylinder D, below the piston F; this vacuum vill be filled with water through the suctionpipe, by the pressure of the atmosphere, as in all pumps ſixed in air. The return of the piston B, by being pressed downwards in the cylinder A, will make a stroke of the piston in the pump cylinder D, which may be repeated in the usual way by the motion of the piston B, and the action of the water in the tube C. The rod G of the piston F, and the weight H, are not necessary in wells of a depth where the atmosphere will overbalance the water in the suction of the pump cylinder D, and that in the tube C. The small tube and cock in the cistern I, are for the purpose oſ charging the tube C. æ A ſull account oſ Bramah's hydrostatic crane, with correct drawings, toEen ſrom Mr Bramah's ovn machine, ill be ſound in the Edinburgh Encyclopædia, Article CraANE.ED8. RESISTANCE OF FLUIDS. OF all the resistances of bodies to each other, there is undoubtedly none of greater importance than the resistance or re-action oſ fluids. It is here that we must look for a theory of naval architecture, for the impulse oſ the air is our moving power, and this must be modiſied so as to produce every motion ve want by the form and disposition of our sails; and it is the resistance of the water which must be overcome, that the ship may proceed in her course; and this must also be modified to our purpose, that the ship may not drive like a log to leeward, but, on the contrary, may ply to windward, that she may answer her helm briskly, and that she may be easy in all her motions on the surface of the troubled ocean. The impulse of wind and water makes them ready and indefatigable servants in a thousand shapes for driving our machines; and we should lose much of their service did we remain ignorant of the laws of their action: they would sometimes hecome terrible masters, if ve did not fall upon methods of eluding or soſtening their attacks. We cannot refuse the ancients a considerable knowledge of this subjeet. It was equally interesting to them as to us; and we cannot read the accounts of the naval exertions of Phœnicia, Carthage, and of Rome, exertions which have not been surpassed by any thing oſ modern date, without VOL. II. s believing that they possessed much practical and experimental knowledge of this subject. It was not, perhaps, possessed by them in a strict and systematic form, as ĩt is now taught by our mathematicians; but the master-builders, in their dock-yards, did undoubtedly exercise their genius in comparing the forms of their finest ships, and in marking those circumstances of form and dimension which were in sact accompanied with the desirable properties of a ship, and thus framing to themselves maxims of naval architecture in the same manner as ve do now. For we believe that our naval architects are not disposed to grant that they have profited much by all the labours of the mathematicians. But the ancients had not made any great progress n the physicomathematical sciences, which consist chieſly in the application of calculus to the phenomena of naturee In this branch they could make none, because they had not the means of investigation. A knovledge of the motions and actions of fluids is accessible only to those who are familiarly acquainted with the fluxionary mathematics; and without this key there is no admittance. Even when possessed of this guide, our progress has been very slow, hesitating, and devious; and we have not yet been able to establish any set of doetrines which are susceptible of an easy and confident application to the arts of lifee IF we have advanced ſarther than the ancients, it is because ve have come after them, and have profited by their labours, and even by their mistakes. Sir Isaac Newton was the ſirst (as far as we can recollect) vwho attempted to make the motions and actions oſ fluids the subject of mathematical discussionn. He had invented the method oſ fluxions long before he engaged in his physical researches; and he proceeded in these suã mathesi Sacem prœferente. Yet even with this guide he was often obliged to grope his way, and to try various bye-paths, in the hopes oſ obtaining a legitimate theory. Having exerted all his powers in establishing a theory oſ the lunar motions, he was obliged to rest contented ith an approximation instead of a perſect solution of the problem which ascertains the motions of three bodies mutually acting on each other. This convinced him that it was in vain to expect an aceurate investigation of the motions and actions of fluids, where millions of unseen particles combine their influence He therefore cast about to find some particular case of the problem which would admit of an accurate determination, and at the same time furnish circumstances of analogy or resemblance suſficiently numerous for giving limiting cases, which should include between them those other cases that did not admit of this accurate investigationn. And thus, by knowing the limit to which the case proposed did approximate, and the circumstance which regulated the approximation, many useful propositions might be doduced for directing us in the application of these doctrines to the arts of life. . He therefore figured to himself a hypothetieal collection of matter hich possessed the characteristic property of fluidity, viz. the quãquãversus propagation of pressure, and the most perfect intermobility (pardon the uncouth term) of parts, and which formed a physical whole or aggregate, whose parts were connected by mechanical forees, determined both in degree and in direction, and such as rendered the determination of certain important circumstances of their motion susceptible of precise investigation. And he concluded, that the laws which he should discover in these motions must have a great analogy with the laws of the motions of real fluids: And from this hypothesis he deduced a series of propositions, vhich form the basis of almost all the theories of the impulse and resistance of fluids which have been oſfered to the public since his time. It must be acknowledged, that the results oſ this theory agree but ill with experiment, and that, in the way in which it has been zealously prosecuted by subsequent mathematicians, it proceeds on principles or assumptions which are not only gratuitous, but even falsee But it aſſords such a beautiful application of geometry and calculus, that mathematicians have been as it were fascinated by it, and have published systems so elegant and so extensively applicable, that one cannot help lamenting that the foundation is 50 flimsy. John Bernoulli's theory, in his dissertation on the communication oſ motion, and Bouguer's, in his Traitt du Naovire, and in his Theorie du Manæuvre et de la Mãture des Vaisseauæ, must ever be considered as among the finest specimens of physicomathematical science which the world has seenn. And, vith all its imperſections, this theory still furnishes (as was expected by its illustrious author) many propositions of immense practical use, they being the limits to which the real phenomena of the impulse and resistance oſ fluids really approximate. So that when the lav by which the phenomena deviate from the theory is once determined by a vell-chosen series of experiments, this hypothetical theory becomes almost as valuable as a true one. And we may add, that although Mr dAlembert, by treading warily in the steps of Sir Isaac Newton in another route, has discovered a genuine and unexceptionable theory, the process oſ investigation is so intricate, requiring every finesse of the most abstruse analysis, and the ſinal equations are so complicated, that even their most expert author has not been able to deduce more than one simple proposition (hich too was discovered by Daniel Bernoulli by a more simple process) which can be applied to any use. The hypothetical theory of Newton, therefore, continues to be the ground- work oſ all our practical knowledge of the subject. We shall thereſore lay beſore our readers a very short view of the theory, and the manner oſ applying itt. We shall then show its defects (all of which were pointed out by its great author), and give a historical account of the many attempts which have been made to amend it or to substitute another: in all which we think it our duty to show, that Sir Isaac Newton took the lead, and pointed out every path which others have taken, if we except Daniel Bernoulli and d Alembert; and we shall give an account of the chief sets of experiments which have been made on this important subject, in the hopes of establishing an empirical theory, which may be employed with confidence in the arts of life. We know by experience that force must be applied to a body in order that it may move through a fluid, such as air or water; and that a body projected with any velocity is gradually retarded in its motion, and generally brought to rest. The analogy oſ nature makes us imagine that there is a force acting in the opposite direetion, or opposing the motion, and that this force resides in, or is exerted by, the fluid. And the phenomena resemble those which accompany the known resistance oſ active beings, such as animals. Thereſore we give to this supposed force the metaphorical name oſ RESISTANCE. We also know that a fluid in motion will hurry a solid body along with the stream, and that it requires force to maintain it in ĩts place A similar analogy makes us suppose that the ſluid exerts force, in the same manner as vhen an active being impels the body before him; therefore we eall this the Impulsion of a Fluid. And as our knovledge of nature mforms us that the mutual actions of bodies are in every case equal and opposite, and that the observed change of motion is the only indication, characteristic, and measure, of the changing force, the forees are the same (Whether we call them impulsions or resistances) when the relative motions are the same, and therefore depend entirely on these relative motions. The foree, therefore, which is necessary for keeping a body immoveable in a stream of ater, flowing with a certain velocity, is the same with what is required for moving this body with this velocity through stagnant water. To any one who admits the motion of the earth round the sun, it is evident that ve can neither observe nor reason ſfrom a case of a body moving through still water, nor oſ a stream of water pressing upon or impelling a quiescent body. A body in motion appears to be resisted by a stagnant fluid, because it is a law of mechanical nature that foree must be employed in order to put any body in motion. Now the body cannot move forward without putting the contiguous fluid in motion, and force must be employed ſor producing this motion. In like manner, a quiescent body is impelled by a stream of fluid, because the motion of the contiguous fluid is diminished by this solid obstacle; the resistance, therefore, or impulse, no way differs from the ordinary communications of motion among solid bodies. Sir Isaac Newton, thereſore, begins his theory oſ the resistance and impulse of fluids, by selecting a case where, although he canĩot pretend to ascertain the motions themselves which are produced in the particles of a contiguous fluid, he can tell precisely their mutual ratios. He supposes two systems oſ bodies such, that each body of the first is similar to a corresponding body of the second, and that each ĩs to each in a constant ratioo. He also supposes them to be similarly' situated, that is, at the angles of similar figures, and that the homologous lines oſ these figures are in the same ratio ith the diameters of the bodies. He ſarther supposes, that they attract or repel each other in similar directions, and that the accelerating connecting forces are also proportional; that is, the forces in the one ByStem are to the corresponding forces in the other system in a constant ratio, and that, in each system taken apart, the forces are as the squares of the velocities directly, and as the diameters oſ the corresponding bodies, or their distances, inversely. This being the case, it legitimately follows, that if similar parts of the two systems are put into similar motions, in any given instant, they vill continue to move similarly, each correspondent body deseribing similar curves, with proportional velocities: For the hodies being similarly situated, the forces which act on a body in one system, arising from the combination of any number of adjoining particles, will have the same direction with the foree acting on the corresponding body in the ũther system, arising from the combined action of the similar and similarly directed ſorces oſ the adjoining corresponding bodies of the other system; and these compound forces will have the same ratio with the simple forces which constitute them, and vill be as the squares of the velocities directly, and as the distances, or any homologous lines inversely; and therefore the chords of curvature, having the direction of the centripetal or centriſugal forces? and similarly inclined to the tangents of the curves described by the corresponding bodies, will have the same ratio with the distances of the particles The curves described by the corresponding bodies vill therefore be similar, the velocities will he proportional, and the bodies will be similarly situated at the end of the first moment, and exposed to the action of similar and similarly situated centripetal or centrifugal forces; and this will again produce similar motions during the next moment, and so on for ever. All this is evident to any person acquainted with the elementary doctrines of curvilineal motions, as delivered in the theory of physical astronomy. From this fundamental proposition, it clearly. follows, that if two similar bodies, having their homologous lines proportional to those of the two systems, be similarly projected among the bodies of those two systems with any velocities, they will produce similar motions in the two systems, and vill themselves continue to move similarly; and therefore will, in every subsequent moment, suffer similar diminutions or retardations If the initial velocities of projection be the same, but the densities of the two systems, that is, the quantities of matter contained in an equal bulk or extent, he different, ĩt is evident that the quantities of motion produced in the two systems in the same time will be proportional to the densities; and if the densities are the same, and uniform in each system, the quantities of motion produced will be as the squares of the velocities, because the motion communicated to each corresponding body vill be proportional to the velocity &&mmunicated, that is, to the velocity of the impelling body; and the number of similarly situated particles which will be agitated vill also be proportional to this velocity. Thereſore, the whole quantities of motion produced in the same moment of time vill be proportional to the squares of the velocities. And, lastly, if the densities of the two systems are uniform, or the same through the whole extent of the systems, the number of particles impelled by Similar bodies vill be as the surfaces of these hodies. Now the diminutions of the motions oſf the projeeted bodies are (by Newton's third law of motion) equal to the motions produced in the systems; and these diminutions are the measures oſ what are called the resistances opposed to the motions of the projected bodies. Therefore, combining all these circumstances, the resistances are proportional to the similar surſaces of the moving bodies, to the densities of the systems through which the motions are performed, and to the squares oſ the velocities, jointly. We cannot form to ourselves any distinet notion of a fluid, otherwise than as a system of small bodies, or æa eollection of particles, similarly or symmetrically arranged, the centres of each being situated in the angles of regular solids We must form this notion of it, vhether we suppose, with the vulgar, that the particles are little globules in mutual contact, or, with the partisans of corpuscular attractions and repulsions, we suppose the partieles kept at a distance ſrom each other by means of these attroetions and repulsions mutually halancing each other. In this last case, no other arrangement is consistent with a quieseent equilibrium; and in this case, it is evident, from the theory of curvilineal motions, that the agitations of the particles will always be such, that the connecting forces, in actual exer- tion, will be proportional to the squares oſ the velocities directly, and to the chords of the curvature having the direction of the forces inversely. Pnoe. I. The resistances, and (by the third law oſ motion), the impulsions of fluids on similar bodies, are proportional to the surfaces of the solid bodies, to the densities of the fluids, and to the squares oſ the velocities, jointly. We must now observe, that when we suppose the partieles of the fluid to be in mutual contact, ve may either suppose them elastic or unelastic. The motion communicated to the collection of elastic particles must be double of what the same body, moving in the same manner, would communieate to the particles of an elastic fluidl. The imPulse and resistance oſ elastic fluids must therefore be double of those of unelastie fluids.But we must caution our readers not to judge of the elasticity of fluids by their sensible compressibility. A diamond is incomparably more elastic than the finest foot-ball, though not compressible in any sensible degree.It remains to be decided, by well-chosen experiments, whether water be not as elastic as air. If we suppose, with Boscovieh, the particles of perfect fluids to be at a distance from each other, ve shall find it difſicult to conceive a fluid void of elasticity. We hope that the theory of their impulse and resistance will suggest experimenis which will decide this question, by pointing out what ought to be the absolute impulse or resistance in either case. And thus the fundamental proposition oſ the impulse and resistance of ſluids, taken in its proper meaning, is susceptible of a rigid demonstration, relative to the only distinet notion that we ean form of the internal constitution of a fluid. We say, iaken in its proper meuning; namely, that the impulse or resistance of fluids is a pressure, opposed and measured by another pressure, such as a pound veight, the force of a spring, the pressure of the atmosphere, and the like. And ve apprehend that it would be very diſficult to find any legitimate demonstration of this leading proposition different ſrom this, vhich we have now borrowed from Sir Isaac Newton, Prop. 23. B. II. Princip. We acknowledge that it is prolix and even circuitous: but in all the attempts made by his commentators and their copyists to simplify it, we see great defects of logical argument, or assumption of principles, which are not only gratuitous, but inadmissible. We shall have occasion, as we proceed, to point out some of these defects; and doubt not but the illustrious author of this demonstration had exercised his uncommon patience and sagacity in similar attempts, and was dissatisfied with them all. Before we proceed ſarther, it will be proper to make a general remark, which will save a great deal of discussion, Since it is a matter oſ universal experience, that every action of a body on others is accompanied by an equal and contrary re-action; and since all that ve can demonstrate concerning the resistance of bodies, during their motions through fluids, proceeds on this supposition (the resistance of the body being assumed as equal and opposite to the sum of motions communicated to the particles oſ the fluid, estimated in the direction of the bodiess motion), we are entitled to proceed in the contrary order, and to consider the impulsions which each oſ the particles of fluid exerts on the body at rest, as equal and opposite to the motion vhich the body would communicate to that particle if the fluid were at rest, and the body were moving equally swiſt in the opposite direction; and therefore the whole impulsion of the fluid must be conceived as the measure of the vwhole motion which the body would thus communicate to the fluid. It must therefore be also considered as the measure of the resistance which the body, moving vith the same velocity, would sustain ſrom the fluid. When, therefore, we shall demonstrate any thing concerning the impulsion oſ a fluid, estimated in the direction of its motion, ve must consider it as demonstrated concerning the resist- ance of a quiescent fluid to the motion of that body, having the same velocity in the opposite direetionn. The determination of these impulsions being much easier than the determination of the motions communicated by the body to the particles of the ſluid, this method vill be followed in most of the subsequent discussions. The general proposition already delivered is by means suſficient for explaining the various important phenomena observed in the mutual actions of solids and fluidss. In particular, it gives us no assistance in ascertaining the modifications of this resistance or impulse, which depend on the shape of the body, and the inclination oſ its impelled or resisted surface to the direction of the motion. Sir Isaac Newton ſound another hypothesis necessary; namely, that the fluid should be so extremely rare, that the distance of the particles may be incomparably greater than their diameters. This additional condition is necessary ſor considering their actions as so many separate collisions or impulsions on a solid body. Each particle must be supposed to have abundant room to rebound, or otherwise escape, aſter having made its stroke, without sensibly aſſecting the situations and motions oſ the particles which have not yet made their stroke; and the motion must be so swiſt as not to give time for the sensible exertion of their mutual forces oſ attractions and repulsions. Keeping these conditions in mind, ve may proceed to determine the impulsions made by a fluid on surfaces of every kind; and the most convenient method to pursue in this determination, is to compare them all either with the impulse which the same surfuce would receive from the fluid impinging on it perpendicularly, or ith the impulse vhich the same streum of fluid would make when coming perpendicularly on a surface of such extent as to occupy the whole stream. It will greatly abbreviate language, if we make use oſ a few terms in an appropriated sense. By a stream, we shall mean a quantity of fluid moving in one direction, that is, each particle moving in parallel lines; and the breadth of the stream is a line perpendicular to all these parallels. A filument means a portion oſ this stream of very small breadth, and it consists of an indefinite number of particles following one another in the same direction, and successively impinging on, or gliding along, the surface of the solid bod y. The base of any surface exposed to a stream of ſluid, is that portion of a plane perpendicular to the stream, which is covered or protected from the action of the stream by the surface exposed to its impulse. Thus the hase of a sphere exposed to a stream of fluid is its great cirele, whose plane is perpendicular to the stream. If BC (Fig. L) be a plane surface exposed to the action of a stream of fluid, moving in the direction DC, then BR, or SE, perpendicular to DC, is its base. Direct impulse shall express the energy or action of the particle or filament, or stream of fluid, when meeting the surſace perpendicularly, or when the surface is perpendicular to the direction of the stream. Absolute impulse means the actual pressure on the impelled surface, arising from the action of the fluid, whether striking the surface perpendicularly or obliquely; or iĩt is the force impressed on the surface, or tendency to motion which it acquires, and which must be opposed by an equal ſorce in the opposite direction, in order that the surſace may be maintained in its place It is of importance to keep in mind, that this pressure is always perpendieular the surſace. It is a proposition founded on universal and uncontradieted experience, that the mutual actions oſf bodies on each other are always exerted in a direction perpendicular to the touching surfacess Thus, it is observed, that when a billiard-ball A is struck by another B, moving in any direction whatever, the ball A always moves oſſf in the direetion perpendicular to the plane which touches the two balls in the point of mutual contact, or point of impulse. This induetive proposition is supported by every argument which can be dravn from what ve know concerning the forces which connect the particles of matter together, and are the immediate causes of the communieation of motion. It would employ much time and room to state them here; and we apprehend that it is unnecessary: for no reason can be assigned why the pressure should be in any purticular oblique direction. If any one should say that the impulse vill be in the direction of the stream, ve have only to desire him to take notice oſ the effect of the rudder of a ship. This shows that the impulse is not in the direction of the stream, and is therefore in some direction transverse to the stream.He vill also find, that when a plane surface is impelled obliquely by a fluid, there is no direction in which it can be supported but the direction perpendicular to itself. It is quite saſe, in the mean time, to take it as an experimental truth. We may, perhaps, in some other part of this work, give what vill be received as a rigorous demonstration. Relative or effective impulse means the pressure on the surface estimated in some particular direction. Thus, BC Plate IX. Fig. 1.) may represent the sail oſ a ship, impelled by the wind blowing in the direetion DCC. GO may be the direction of the ship's keel, or the line of her coursee The wind strikes the sail in the direction GH parallel to DC; the sail is urged or pressed in the direction GI, perpendicular to BC. But ve are interested to know what tendency this will give the ship to move in the direction GO. This is the effective or relative impulsee Or BC may be the transverse section of the sail of a common vind-mill. This, by the construction of the machine, can move only in the direction GP, perpendicular to the direction of the wind; and it is only in this direction that the impulse produces the desired eſfect. Or BC may be half of the prow of a punt or lighter, riding at anchor by means oſ the cable DC, attached to the prow C. In this ease, GQ, parallel to DC, is that part of the absolute impulse which is employed in straining the cable. The angle of incidence is the angle FGC contained between the direction of the stream FG and the plane BC. The angle of obliquity is the angle OGC contained between the plane and the direction GO, in which we wish to estimate the impulse. Pnor. II. The direct impulse oſ a ſluid on a plane surface, is to its absolute oblique impulse on the same surface, as the square of the radius to the square oſ the sine of the angle of incidence. Let a stream of fluid, moving in the direetion DC, (Fig. 1.) act on the plane BC. With the radius CB describe the quadrant ABE; drav CA perpendicular to CE, and drav MNBS parallel to CE. Let the particle F, moving in the direction FG, meet the plane in G, and in FGproduced take GH to represent the magnitude of the direct impulse, or the impulse which the particle would exert on the plane AC, by meeting it in V. Drav GI and HE perpendicular to BC, and HI perpendicular to GI. Also drav BR perpendicular to DC. The ſoree GH is equivalent to the two forces GI and GK; and GE, being in the direction of the plane, has no share in the impulse The absolute impulse, thereſore, is represented by GI; the angle GHI is equal to FGC, the angle oſ incidence; and therefore GH is to GI as Fadius to the sine of the angle of incidence: Thereſore the direct impulse of each particle or filament is to its absolute oblique impulse as radius to the sine of the angle oſ incidence. But ſurther, the number of particles or filaments which strike the surface AC, is to the number of those which strike the surface BC as AC to NC; ſor all the filments between LA and MB go past the oblique surſace BC without striking itt. But BC: NC æ rad.: sin. NBC, æ rad.: sin. FGC, æ rad.: sin. incidencee. Now the whole impulse is as the impulse of each filament, and as the number oſ filaments exerting equal impulses jointly; thereſore 1he whole direct impulse on AC is to the whole absolute impulse on BC, as the square of radius to the square of the sine of the angle of incidence. Let S express the extent of the surſace, i the angle of incidence, o the angle ob obliquity, v the velocity of the fluid, and d its density. Let F represent the direct impulse, ſ the absolute oblique impulse, and ? the relative or effective impulse; and let the tabular sines and cosines be considered as decimal fractions of the radius unity. This proposition gives us F:  R?: sin.? i, æ: sin.? i, and therefore  F x sin.? i. Also, because impulses are in the proportion of the extent of surſace similarly impelled, we have, in general,  =FS X sin.?, i. The first who published this theorem was Pardies, in his Ocuvres de Mathematique, in 1673. We know that Newton had investigated the chief propositions of the Principia before 1670. Prop. III. The direet impulse on any surface is to the effective oblique impulse on the same surface, as the cube oſ radius to the solid, which has for its base the square of the sine of incidence, and the sine of obliquity for its height. For when GH represents the direct impulse of a particle, GI is the absolute oblique impulse, and GO is the effective impulse in the direetion GO: Now GI is to GO as radius to the sine of GIO, and GIO is the complement of IGO, and is therefore equal to CGO, the angle of obliquity. Therefore f: ?2/R: sin. O. But F:  /R?: sinè i Therefore F: ? =R: sin.i x sin. O, and ? F x sin.? i x sin. O. CorThe direct impulse on any surſace is to the effect- ive oblique impulse in the direction oſ the stream, as the cube oſ radius to the cube of the sine of incidencee For drav IQ and GP perpendicular to GH, and IP perpendicular to GP; then the absolute impulse GI is equivalent to the impulse GQ in the direction of the stream, and GP, which may be called the transverse impulsee The angle GIQ is evidently equal to the angle GHI, or FGC, the angle of incidence. Therefore 7: o9=GI: GQ, R: sin. i. But F: ſ R?: sin.? i. Thereſore F: R?: sinĩ. And 2 F x sin.? i. Beſore we proceed further, ve shall consider the impulse on a surface which is also in motion. This ĩs evidently a ſrequent and an important case. It is perhaps the most frequent and important: It is the case of a ship under sail, and of a wind or water-mill at work. Thereſore, let a stream of fluid, moving with the direction and velocity DE, meet a plane BC, (Fig. 2.) which is moving parallel to itself in the direction and with the velocity DF: It is required to determine the impulse ? Nothing is more easyg The mutual actions of bodies depend on their relative motions only. The motion DE of the fluid relative to BC, which is also in motion, is compounded of the real motion of the fluid, and the opposite to the real motion of the body. Therefore produce FD till D =DF, and complete the parallelogram Dfe E, and draw the diagonal De. The impulse on the plane is the same as if the plane were at rest, and every particle oſ the ſluid impelled it in the direction and with the velocity De; and may thereſore be determined by the foregoing proposition. This proposition applies to every possible case; and ve shall not bestow more time on it, but reserve the important modification oſ the general proposition for the cases which shall occur in the practieal applications of the whole doctrine oſ the impulse and resistance of fluids. l Pror. IV. The direct impulse oſ a stream of fluid, whose breadth is given, ĩs to ĩts oblique eſfective impulse in the direction oſ the stream, as the square of radius to the square of the sine oſ the angle of incidence. For the number of filaments which occupy the oblique plane BC, would occupy the portion NC of a perpendieular plane, and thereſore ve have only to compare the perpendicular impulse on any point V with the effective impulse made by the same filament FV on the oblique plane at G. Now GH represents the impulse which this filament would make at V; and GQ is the effective impulse of the same ſilament at G, estimated in the direction GH oſ the stream; and GH is to GQ as GH? to GI?, that is. as rad.? to sin.? i. Cor. I. The effective impulse in the direction of the stream on any plane surface BC, is to the direct impulse on its base BR or SE, as the square of the sine of the angle of incidence to the square oſ the radius. 2. If an isosceles vedge ACB (Fig. 8.) be exposed to a stream of fluid moving in the direction of its height CD, the impulse on the sides is to the direct impulse on the base, as the square oſ halſ the base AD to the square oſ the side AC, or as the square of the sine of half the angle of the vedge to the square of the radius For it is evident, that, in this case, the two transverse impulses, such as GP in Fig. I. balance each other; and the only impulse vwhich can be observed is the sum of the two impulses, such as GQ oſ Fig. l. which are to be compared with the impulses on the two halves AD, BD of the basee Now AC : AB=rad.: sin. ACD, and ACD is equal to the angle oſ incidence. Therefore, if the angle ACB is a right angle, and ACD is half a right angle, the square of AC is twice the square of AD, and the impulse on the sides of a rectangular wedge is half the impulse on its base. Also, if a cube ACBE (Fig. 4.) be exposed to a stream VOL. II. r moving in a direction perpendicular 1o one of its sides, and then to a stream moving in a direction perpendicular to one oſ its diagonal planes, the impulse in the first case ill be to the impulse in the second as Vãẽ to I. Call the perpendicular impulse on a side F, and the perpendicular impulse on its diagonal plane f, and the effective oblique impulse on its sides ;e have F: f/mAC: AB=æI: /Vẽ, and si o =AC': AD =/2.: l. Thereſore F: r 2: Vẽ, = Vẽ: l, or very nearly as I0 to . The same reasoning vill apply to a pyramid whose base is a regular polygon, and whose axis is perpendicular to the base. If such a pyramid is exposed to a stream of fluid moving in the direction of the axis, the direct impulse on the base is to the effective impulse on the pyramid, as the square of the radius to the square of the sine of the angle which the axis makes with the sides of the pyramid. And, in like manner, the direct impulsion on the base of a right cone is to the effective impulsion on the conical surface, as the square oſ the radius to the square of the sine of half the angle at the vertex of the cone. This is demonstrated, by supposing the cone to be a pyramid of an infinite number of rdes. We may in this manner compare the impulse on any polygonal surface with the impulse on its base, by compuring apart the impulses on each plane with those in their corresponding bases, and taking their sum. And ve may compare the impulse on a curved surſace vith that on its base, by resolving the curved surface into elementary planes, each of which is impelled by an elementary filament oſ the stream. The following beautiful proposition, given by Le Seur and Jaquier, in their Commentary on the Second Book oſ Newtons Principia, vith a few examples of its application, vill suffice for any further aceount of this theory. 5 Pror. V. Let ADB Fig. 5.) be the section of a surſace oſ simple curvature, such as is the surface of a cylinder. Let this be exposed to the action of a fluid moving in the direction AC. Let BC be the section of the plane (#hich we have called its buse), perpendicular to the direction of the stream. In AC produced, take any length CG; and on CG describe the semicirele CHG, and complete the rectangle BCGO. Through any point D of the curve draw ED parallel to AC, and meeting BC and OG in Q and P. Let DF touch the curve in D, and draw the chord GH parallel to DF, and HKM perpendieular to CG, meeting ED in M. Suppose this to he done for every point of the curve ADB, and let LMN be the curve which passes through all the points of intersection of the parallels EDP and the corresponding perpendiculars HEM. The effective impulse on the curve surſace ADB in the direction of the stream, is to its direct impulse on the base BC as the area BONL is to the rectangle BCGO. (Fig. 4) Drav e d ꝗ m p parallel to EP, and extremely near it. The arch Dd of the curve may be conceived as the section of an elementary plane, having the position of the tangent DF. The angle EDV is the angle of incidence of the filament ED d e. This is equal to CGH, because ED, DF, are parallel to CG, GH; and (because CHũ is a semicirele) CH is perpendicular to GH. Also, CG: CH = CH: CE, and CG: CK æ CG: CH?, rad.?: sin?, CGH, = rad.?: sin.? incid. Therefore, if CG, or its equal DP, represent the direct impulse on the point Q of the base, CK, or its equal QM, will represent the effective impulse on the point D of the curve. And thus, Q ꝗꝓP vill represent the direct impulse of the filament on the element Qq of the base, and Q ? m M vill represent the effeetive impulse of the same filament on the element D d of the curvee And, as this is true of the whole curve ADB, the eſfective impulse on the whole curve will be represent- ed by the area BCNML; and the direct impulse on the base will be represented by the rectangle BCGO; and therefore the impulse on the curve-surface is to the impulse on the base as the area BLMNC is to the rectangle BOGC. It is plain, from the construction, that if the tangent to the curve at A is perpendicular to AC, the point N vill coincide with G. Also, if the tangent to the curve at B is parallel to AC, the point L vill coincide with B. Whenever, thereſore, the curve ADB is such, that an equation can be had to exhibit the general relation between the abscissa AR and the ordinate DR, we shall deduce an equation which exhibits the relation between the absciss CK and the ordinate KM of the curve LMN; and this vill give us the ratio of BLNC to BOGC. Thus, iſ the surſace is that of a cylinder, so that the curve BDAbS, (Fig. 6.) which receives the impulse oſ the fluid, is a semicircle, make CG equal to AC, and construet the figure as before The curve BMG is a parabola, whose axis CG, vhose vertex is G, and whose parameter is equal to CG. For it is plain, that CGG DC, Fig. 4.) and GH æ CQ, = ME. And CG X GK  GH? æ EM?; that is, the curve is such, that the square oſ the ordinate KM is equal to the rectangle oſ the abscissa GK and a constant line GC; and it is thereſore a parabola, whose vertex is G. Now, it is well known, that the parabolic area BUGC is two-thirds of the parallelogram BCGO. Thereſore the impulse on the quadrant ADB is two-thirds of the impulse on the base BC. The same may be said of the quadrant A d b and its base c h. Thereſore, The impulse on a cylinder or half cylinder is tuo-thirds of the direct impulse on its iransverse plane through the aris; or it is to-thirds oſ the direet impulse on one side of a parallelopiped of the same breadth and height Pror. VI. If the body be a solid generated by the revolution of the ſigure BDAC (Fig. 5.) round the axis AC, and if it be exposed to the action of a stream oſ fluid moving in the direction of the axis AC; then the effective impulse in the direction of the stream is to the direct impulse on its base, as the solid generated by the revolution oſ the figure BLMNC round the axis ON to the cylinder generated by the revolution of the rectangle BOGC. This scarcely needs a demonstration. The figure ADBLMNA is a section of these solids by a plane passing through the axis; and what has been demonstrated of this section is true of every other, because they are all equal and similar. It is thereſore true of the whole solids, and (their base) the circle generated by the revolution of BC round the axis AC. Hence ve easily deduce, that The impulse on a sphere is one half of the direct impulse on its great circle, or on the base of u cylinder of equal diumeter. For, in this case, the curve BMN, (Fig. 6.) which generates the solid expressing the impulse on the sphere, is a parabola, and the solid is a parabolic conoid. Now this conoid is to the eylinder generated by the revolution of the rectangle BOGC round the axis CG, as the sum of all the circles generated by the revolution of ordinates to the parabola such as KM, to the sum oſ as many circles generated by the ordinates to the rectangle such as XT; or as the sum of ãll the squares described on the ordinates KM to the sum of as many squares described on the ordinates KT. Drav BG cutting MK in S. The square on MK is to the square on BC or TK as the abscissa GK to the abscissa GC (by the nature of the parabola), or as E to BC; because SK and BC are respectively equal to GK and GC. Therefore the sum of all the squares on ordinates, such as MK, is to the sum of as many squares on ordinates, such as TK, as the sum of all the lines SK to the sum of as many lines TK; that is, as the triangle BGC to the rectangle BOGC; that is, as one to two: and therefore the impulse on the sphere is one-half oſ the direct impulse on its great circle. From the same construction ve may very easily deduce a very curious and seemingly useful truth, that of all conical bodies having the circle vhose diameter is AB Fig. 3.) for its base, and FD ſor its height, the one which sustains the smallest impulse, or meets with the smallest resistance, is the frustum AGHB of a cone ACB s0 constructed, that EF being taken equal to ED, EA is equal to EC. This frustum, though more capacious than the cone AFB of the same height, vill be less resisted. Also, if the solid generated by the revolution of BDAC (Fig. 5.) have its anterior part covered vith a frustum of a cone generated by the lines D a, a A, forming the angle at a of 135 degrees; this solid, though more capacious than the included solid, will be less resisted. And, from the same principles, Sir Isanc Newton determined the form oſ the curve ADB, which would generate the solid which, of all others of the same length and base, should have the least resistance. These are curious and important deduetions, but are not introduced here, for reasons which will soon appear. The reader cannot fail to observe, that all that ve have hitherto delivered on this subject, relates to the comparison of different impulses or resistances. We have always compared the oblique impulsions with the direet, and by their intervention we compare the oblique impulsions with each other. But it remains to give absolute measures of some individual impulsion; to which, as to an unit, ve may reſer every other. And as it is by their pressure that they becomæ useful or hurtful, and they must be opposed by other pressures, it becomes extremely convenient to compare them all with that pressure with which we are most ſamiliarly acquainted, the pressure of gravity. The manner in which the comparison is made is this. When a body advances in a fluid with a known velocity, it puts a known quantity of the fluid into motion (as is supposed) with this velocity; and this is done in a known time. We have only to examine what weight will put this quantity of fluid into the same motion, by acting on it during the same time. This weight is conceived as equal to the resistance. Thus, let us suppose that a stream of vater, moving at the rate of eight feet per second, is perpendieularly obstrueted by a square ſoot of solid surface held fast in its placee Conceiving water to act in the manner of the hypothetical fluid now deseribed, and to be without elasticity, the whole efſect is the gradual annihilation of the motion of eight cubic feet of water moving eight feet in a second. And this is done in a second of time. It ĩs equivalent to the gradually putting eight eubic feet of water into motion with this velocity; and doing this by acting uniſormly during a second. What weight is able to produce this effect ? The weight of eight ſeet of water, acting during a second on it, will, as is well known, give it the velocity of thirty-two feet per second; that is, four times greater. Thereſore, the weight of the fourth part of eight cubic feet, that is, the weight of two cubic feet, acting during a second, vill do the same thing, or the weight of a column of water whose hase is a square foot, and whose height is two feet. This will not only produce this effeet in the same time with the impulsion of the solid body, but it will also do it by the same degrees, as any one vill clearly perceive, by attending to the gradual acceleration of the mass of water urged by one-fourth of its weight, and compuring this with the gradual produetion or extinction of motion in the fluid by the progress of the resisted surface. Novw it is well known that eight cubic feet of water, by falling one foot, which it will do in one-fourth of a second, vill acquire the velocity of eight feet per second by its weight; therefore the force which produces the same effect in a vhole seecond is one-fourth of this. This foree is therefore equal to the weight of a column of water, vhose base is a square foot, and whose height ĩs two feet; that is, tuice the height necessary for acquiring the velocity of the motion by gravity. The conclusion is the same whatever be the surface that is resisted, whatever be the fluid that resists, and whatever be the velocity of the motion. In this inductive and familiar manner ve learn, that the direct impulse or resistance of an unelastic sluid on any plane surSace, is equal to the weight of a column of the sluid having the surface for its base, and twice the ſfull necessary for acquiring the velocity of the motion for its height: and if the fluid is considered as elastic, the impulse or resista nce is twice as great. See Newt. Princip. B. II. Prop. 85. and 88. It now remains to compare this theory with experiment. Many have been made, both by Sir Isaac Newton and by subsequent writers. It is much to be lamented, that in a matter of such importance, both to the philosopher and to the artist, there is such a disagreement in the results with each other. We shall mention the experiments which seem to have been made with the greatest judgment and ecare. Those of Sir Isaac Newton vere chieſly made by the oscillations of pendulums in water, and by the descent of balls both in water and in air. Many have been made by Mariotte ( Traitt de Mouvement des Eaux). Gravesande has published, in his System of Notural Philosophy, experiments made on the resistance or impulsions on solids in the midst of a pipe or cana. They are extremely well contrived, but are on so small a scale that they are of very little use. Daniel Bernoulli, and his pupil Professor Kraſſt, have published in the Comment. Acad. Petropol. experiments on the impulse of a stream or vein of vater from an orifice or tubee. These are of great value The Abbè Bossut has published others of the same kind in his Hydrodynamique. Mr Robins has published, in his New Principles of Gunnery, many valuable experiments on the impulse and resistance of air. The Chev. de Borda, in the Mem. Acad. Paris, 1763 and I767, has given experiments on the resistance oſ air and also of water, which are very interesting. The most complete collection of experiments on the resistance oſ water are those made at the publie expense by a committee of the academy of sciences, consisting of the Marquis de Condorcet, Mr D'Alembert, Abb Bossut, and otherss The Chev. de Buat, in his Hydraulique, has published some most curious and valuable experiments where many, important circumstances are taken notice of, which had never been attended to before, and which give a view of the subject totally different from what is usually taken of itt. Don George dUlloa, in his Examine Maritimo, has also given some important experiments, similar to those adduced by Bouguer in his Manæuvre des Voisseauæ, but leading to very diſferent conclusions. All these should be consulted by such as would acquire a practical knowledge of this subject. We must content ourselves with giving their most general and steady results. Such as, 1. It is very consonant to experiment that the resistances are proportional to the squares of the velocitie When the velocities of water do not exceed a few feet per second, no sensible deviation is observedl. In very small velocities the resistances are sensibly greater than in this proportion, and this excess is plainly owing to the viscidity or imperſect ſluidity of water. Sir Isaac Newton has shown that the resistance arising from this cause is constant, or the same in every velocity; and when he has taken off a certain part of the total resistance, he found the remainder was very exactly proportionable to the square of the velocity. His experiments to this purpose were made with balls a very little heavier than water, so as to descend very slowly; and they were made with his usual care and accuracy, and may be depended on. In the experiments made with bodies floating on the surface of water, there is an addition to the resistance arising from the inertia of the water. The water heaps up a little on the anterior surface of the floating hody, and is depress ed hehind it. Hence arises a hydrostatical pressure, acting in concert with the true resistance: A similar thing is observed in the resistance of air, hich is condensed before the body and rarefied behind it, and thus an additional resistance is produced by the unbalanced elasticity of the air; and also because the air, which is actually displaced, is denser than common air. These circumstances cause the resistances to increase faster than the squares of the vælocities: but, even independent of this, there is an additional resistance arising from the tendency to rarefaction behind a very swift body; because the pressure of the surrounding fluid can only make the fluid fill the space left with a determined velocity. We have had occasion to speak of this circumstance more particularly uhder GuNNERY and PNEUMATICS, when considering very rapid motions. Mr Robins had remarked that the velocity at which the observed resistance of the air began to inerease so prodigiously, was that of about 1100 or 1200 feet per second, and that this was the velocity with which air would rush into a void. He concluded, that vhen the velocity was greater than this, the ball was exposed to the additional resistance arising from the unbalanced statical pressure of the air, and that this constant quantity behoved to be added to the resistance arising from the air's inertia in all greater velocitiess This is very reasonable: But he imagined that in smaller velocities there was no such unbalanced pressuree But this cannot be the case: for although in smaller velocities the air will still fill up the space behind the body, it will not fill it up with air of the same density. This would be to suppose the motion oſ the air into the deserted place t0 be instantaneous. There must therefore be a rarefaction behind the body, and a pressure backward; arising from unbalanced elasticity, independent oſ the condensation on the anterior part. The condensation and rarefaction are caused by the same thing, vi. the limited elasticity oſ the ai. Were this infinitely great, the smallest condensation before the body would be instantly diſſfused over the whole air, and s0 would the rarefaction, J—— - s0 that no pressure oſf unbalanced elasticity would be observed; but the elasticity is such as to propagate the condensation vith the velocity of sound only, i. e. the velocity of 1142 feet per second. Thereſore this additional resistance does not commence precisely at this velocity, but is sensible in all smaller velocities, as is very justly observed by Euler. But we are not yet able to ascertain the lav of its increase, although it is a problem which seems susceptible of a tolerably accurate solution. Precisely similar to this is the resistance to the motion of floating bodies, arising from the accumulation or gorging up of the water on their anterior surface, and its depression behind them. Were the gravity of the water infinite, while its inertia remains the same, the wave raised up at the prow of a ship would be instantly diffused over the whole ocean, and it would therefore be infinitely small, as also the depression behind the poop. But this wave requires time for its diffusion; and vhile it is not diffused, it acts by hydrostatical pressure We are equally unable to ascertain the law of variation of this part of the resistance, the mechanism of waves being but very imperſectly understood. The height of the wave in the experiments of the French Academy could not be measured with sufficient precision (being only observed en passant) ſor ascertaining its relation to the velocity. The Chev. Buat attempted it in his experiments, but without successs This must evidently make a part of the resistance in all velocities: and it still remains an undecided question,  What relation it bears to the velocities ? When the solid body is wholly buried in the fluid, this accumulation does not take place, or at least not in the same way: It may, however, be observed. Every person may recollect, that in a very swift running stream a large stone at the bottom vill produce a small swell above it; unless it lies very deep, a nice eye may still observe it. The water, on arriving at the obstacle, glides past it in every direction, and is deflected on all hands; and thereſore what passes over it is also deflected upwards, and causes the water over it to rise above its leve. The nearer that the body is to the surface, the greater will be the perpendicular rise of the vater, but it will be less diffused; and it is uncertain whether the whole elevation will be greater or less. By the vhole elevation we mean the area of a perpendicular section of the elevation by a plane perpendicular to the direction of the stream. We are rather disposed to think that this aren vill be greatest when the hody is near the surface. DUlloa has attempted to consider this subject scientifically; and is of a very different opinion, which he confirms by the single experiment to be mentioned by and by. Mean time, it is evident, that if the water which glides past the body cannot fall in behind it with sufficient velocity for filling up the space behind, there must be a void there; and thus a hydrostatical pressure must be superadded to the resistance arising from the inertia of the water. All must have observed, that if the end of a stick held in the hand be drawn slowly through the vater, the water vill fill the place leſt by the stick, and there vill'be no curled wave: but if the motion be very rapid, a hollow trough or gutter is leſt behind, and is not filled up till at some distance from the stick, and the wave which forms its sides is very much broken and curledl. The writer oſ this article has oſten looked into the water from the poop of a second-rate man oſ war when she was sailing I1 miles per hour, vhich is a velocity of I6 feet per second nearly; and he not only observed that the back of the rudder was naked for about two ſeet below the load water-line, but also that the trough or wake made by the ship was filled up with water which was broken and foaming to a considerable depth, and to a considerable distance from the vessel: There must therefore have been a void. He never saw the wake perſectly transparent (and thereſore completely filled with water) when the velocity exceeded O or IO ſeet per second. While this broken water is observed, there can be no doubt that there is a void and an additional resistance But even when the space leſt by the body, or the space behind a still body exposed to a stream, is completely filled, it may not be filled sufficiently fast, and there may be (and certainly is, as we shall see aſterwards) a quantity of water behind the body, which is moving more slowly away than the rest, and therefore hangs in some shape by the body, and is dragged by it, increasing the resistancee The quantity of this must depend partly on the velocity of the body or stream, and partly on the rapidity with which the surrounding water comes in behind. This last must depend on the pressure of the surrounding water. It would appear, that when this adjoining pressure is very great, as must happen when the depth is great, the augmentation of resistance now spoken of would be less. Accordingly, this appears in Newtons experiments, where the balls were less retarded as they were deeper under vater. These experiments are so simple in their nature, and vere made with such care, and a person so able to detect and appreciate every circumstance, that they deserve great credit; and the conclusions legitimately dravn from them deserve to be considered as physical lavss. We think that the present deduction is unexceptionable: for in the motion of balls, vhich hardly descended, their preponderancy being hardly sensible, the effect of depth must have borne a very great proportion to the whole resistance, and must have greatly influenced their motions; yet they were observed to fall as if the resistance had no vay depended on the depth. The same thing appears in Bordaæ's experiments, where a sphere which was deeply immersed in the water was less resisted than one that moved vith the same velocity near the surface; and this wvas very constant and regular in a course of experimentss. DUlloa, however, affirms the contrary: He says that the resistance of a board, which vas a foot broad, immersed one ſoot in a stream moving two ſeet per second, was 153lbs.; and the resistance to the same board, when immersed 2 feet in a stream moving l3 feet per second (in which case the surſace was 2 feet), was 263 pounds.* We are very sorry that we cannot give a proper account of this theory of resistance by Don George Juan D'Ulloa, an author of great mathematical reputation, and the inspeetor of the marine academies in Spain. We have not heen able to procure either the original or the French translation, and judge oſ it only by an extract by Mr Prony in his Architecture Hydraulique, sect. 868, &e. The theory is enveloped (according to Mr Pronys custom) in the most complicated expressions, so that the physical principles are kept almost out of sight. When accommodated to the simplest possible case, it is nearly as follows: Let o be an elementary orifice or portion of the surſace oſ the side oſ a vessel filled with a heavy fluid, and let  be its depth under the horizontal surface oſ the fluidl. Let) be the density of the fluid, and ⸗ the accelerative power of gravity, 32 feet velocity acquired in a second. It is known, says he, that the water would flow out at this hole with the velocity um Vẽę&, and u' =⸗h and a h :; It is also known that the pressure 2 on the 2 orifice o is , 00h, ? o) 20 hiou Now, let this little surface o be supposed to move vith the velocity 2v. The ſluid would meet it with the velocity u+ v, or u—v, according as it moved in the opposite or in the same direction with the eſflux. In the equation ꝑ = 4 à o u, substitute u æ v for u, and ve have the pressure on op y æo),  Vẽ7hæv) This pressure is a weight, that is, a mass oſ matter m * There is something very unaccountable in these experiments. The resistances are much greater than any other author has observed. actuated by gravity 4, or p=? m, and m=23o 7æ 2 20 ) l This elementary surſace being immersed in a stagnant fluid, and moved with the velocity u, vill sustain on one v side a pressure à o h + 4) and on the other 2 side a pressure à o ( v h 73) ; and the sensible resistance will be the difference of these two pressures, which is 20 4 /h 7 oahæ because VI8; a quantity which is in the subduplicate ratio oſ the depth under the surface of the fluid, and the simple ratio of the velocity of the resisted surface jointly. There is nothing in experimental philosophy more certain than that the resistances are very nearly in the duplicate ratio of the velocities; and we cannot conceive by what experiments the ingenious author has supported this conclusion. But there is, besides, vhat appears to us to be an essential defect in this investigation. The equation exhibits no resistance in the case of a fluid without weightt. Now a theory of the resistance of fluids should exhibit the retardation arising from inertia alone, and should distinguish it from that arising from any other cause: and moreover, while it assigns an ultimate sensible resistance proportional (cateris puribus) to the simple velocity, it assumes as a first principle that the pressure ꝓ is as u æ4&/ ?. It also gives a false measure of the statical pressures; for these (in the case of bodies immersed in our waters at least) are made up of the pressure of the incumbent water, which is measured by h, and the pressure of the atmosphere, a constant quantity. , or 3o 4 v h thatis Whatever reason can be given for setting out with the principle that the pressure on the little surſace o, moving vith the velocity u, is equal to 33 o (u & v)?, makes it indispensably necessary to take for the velocity u, not that vith which water would issue from a hole whose depth under the surface is h, but the velocity with which it will issue from a hole whose depth is h + 88 feet. Because the pressure of the atmosphere is equal to that of a column of water 33 feet high; for this is the acknowledged velocity vith which it would rush into the void leſt by the body. If, therefore, this velocity (which does not exist) has any share in the effort, ve must have ſor the fluxion of pressure not V/ but 2ESIæ This would not only give pressure or resistances many times exceeding those that have been observed in our experiments, but would also totally change the proportions which this theory determines. It was at any rate improper to embarrass an investigation, already very intricate, with the pressure of gravity, and vith two motions of eſflux, vhich do not exist, and are necessary for making the pressures in the ratio of u + 0 and uV. Mr Prony has been at no pains to inform his readers of his reasons for adopting this theory of resistance, so contrary to all received opinions, and to the most distinct experiments. Those of the French academy, made under greater pressures, gave a much smaller resistance; and the very experiments adduced in support of this theory are extremely deficient, wanting fully one- third of what the theory requiress. The resistances by experiment were 15 and 263, and the theory required 204 and 39. The equation, however, deduced from the theory is greatly deficient in the expression of the pressures caused by the accumula: tion and depression, stating the heights oſ them as— a They can never be so high, because the heaped-up water flows oſf at the sides, and it also comes in behind by the sides; 50 that the pressure is much less than half the weight oſ a column whose height i z both because the accumulation and depression are less at the sides than in the middle, and because; when the body is wholly immersed, the accumulation is greatly diminished. Indeed, in this case, the final equation does not include their eſfeets, though as real in this case as when part of the body is above vater. Upon the whole, we are somewhat surprised that an author of D'Ullo's eminence should have adopted a theory 50 unnecessarily and so improperly embarrassed vith foreign cireumstances, and that Mr Prony should have inserted it with the explanation by which he was to abide, in a work destined for practical use.* This point, or the effect oſ deep immersion, is still much contested; and it is a received opinion, by many not accustomed to mathematical researches, that the resistance is greater in greater depths. This is assumed as an important principle by Mr Gordon, author of a Theory of Naoval Architecture ; but on very vague and slight grounds: and the author seems unacquainted with the mammer of reasoning on such subjects. It shall be considered afterwards. With these corrections it may be asserted that theory and experiment agree very well in this respect, and that resistance may be asserted to be in the duplicate ratio of the velocity. We have been more minute on this subject, because it is the leading proposition in the theory of the action oſ ſluids. Newton's demonstration of it takes no notice of the manner in which the various particles of the fluid are put in motion, or the motion which each in particular acquiress He * An examination of Dr Robison's objections to D'Ulloas theory, by Mr Watts, will be ſound in the Ediuhurgh Philosophical Journal, vol. IV. ꝑ. 315ED. VOoL. II. u only shews, that if there be nothing concerned in the eommunieation but pure inertia, the sum-total of the motions of the particles, estimated in the direetion of the bodies motion, or that of the stream, will be in the duplicate ratio of the velocity. Tt was therefore oſ importance to show that this part of the theory was just. To do this, we had to consider the effect of every circumstance which eould be combined with the inertia of the fluid. All these had been foreseen by that great man, and are most brieſly, though perspicuously, mentioned in the last seholium to prop. 86. B. II. 2. It appears, from a comparison of all the experiments, that the impulses and resistances are very nearly in the proportion of the surfaces. They appear, however, to inerease somewhat ſaster than the surſaces. The Chevalier Borda found that the resistance, with the same velocity, to a surſace of O inches 9 r5 . was æ instead of I ll 104,737 l The deviation in these experiments from the theory increases with the surſace, and is probably much greater in the extensive surfaces of the sails of ships and windcmills, and the hulls of ships. 3. The resistances do hy no means vary in the duplicate ratio of the sines of the angles oſ incidence. As this is the most interesting cireumstance, having a chieſ influence on all the particular modifications of the resistance of fluids; and as on this depends the whole theory of the construction and working of ships, and the action of water on our most important machines, and seems most immediately connected with the mechanism of fluids, it merits a very particular considerationn. We cannot do a greater service than by rendering more generally known the excellent experiments of the French academy. Fiſteen boxes or vessels were constructed, which were two fſeet vide, two feet deep, and four feet long. One of them vas a parallelopiped of these dimensions; the others had prows of a wedge-form, the angle ACB (Plate IX. Fig. 7 and 8.) varying by I2 degrees from I20 to 180; s0 that the angle of incidence inerensed by 6 from one to another. These boxes were dragged across a very large basin of smooth water (in which they were immersed two feet) by means of a line passing over a wheel connectet vith a cylinder, from which the actuating weight was suspended. The motion became perſectly uniſorm aſter a very little vay; and the time of passing over 96 French feet vith this uniform motion was very careſully notedl. The resistance was measured by the weight employed, aſter doducting a certain quantity (properly estimated) for frietion, and for the accumulation of the water agæinst the anterior surface. The results of the many experiments are given in the following table; where column Ist contains the angle of the prow, column 2d contains the resistance as given by the preceding theory, column Sd contains the resistãice exhibited in the experiments, and column 4th contains the deviation of the experiment from the theory. I. II. III. v. 180 10000 10000 o 168 9890 9893 +3 156 9568 9578 +10 144 9045 908B4 +39 132 8346 8446 4100 120 n500 mo 4210 108 ò õ6545 6925 +3880 96 5528 6148 +625 84 4am8 5433 +956 7] 3455 4800 +1345 60 ?6500 4404 +1904 48 1654 4%4¢0 +2586 36 955 4142 43187 24 432 4063 +3681 12 109 3999 +8890 The resistance to l square foot, French measure, moving vith the velocity of 2,56 feet per second, was very nearly ,625 pounds French. Reducing these to English measures, ve have the surface =I,1863 feet, the velocity of the motion equal to 2, 7268 feet per second, and the resistance equal to 8,284 pounds avoirdupoiss The weight of a column of fresh water of this base, and having for its height the fall necessary for communicating this velocity, is 8,264 pounds avoirdupoiss. The resistances to other velocities were accurately proportional to the squares of the velocities. There is great diversity in the value which different authors have deduced for the absolute resistance oſ water from their experiments. In the value now given nothing is taken into account but the inertia of the water. The accumulation against the forepart of the box was carefully noted, and the statical pressure backwards, arising ſrom this cause, was subtracted from the whole resistance to the drag. There had not been a sufficient variety of experiments for discovering the share which tenacity and frietion produced; so that the number of pounds set down here may be considered as somewhat superior to the mere effects of the inertia of the water. We think, upon the whole, that it is the most accurate determination yet given oſ the resistance to a body in motion; but we shall aſterwards see reason for helieving, that the impulse oſ a running stream having the same velocity is somewhat greater; and this is the form in which most oſ the experiments have heen made. Also observe, that the resistance here given is that to a vessel to feet broad and deep, and four feet long. The resistance to a plane of two ſeet broad and deep would probably have exceeded this in the proportion of 15,22 to 14,54, for reasons we shall see aſterwards. From the experiments of Buat, it appears that a hody of one foot square, French measure, and two feet long, having its centre 15 inches under water, moving three French feet per second, sustained a pressure of 14,54 French pounds, or 15,68 Englisn. This reduced in the proportion of 3° to 2,56 gives 11,48 pounds, considerably exceeding the 8,2d. Bouguer, in his Manæuvre des Vaisseauæ, says, that he found the resistance of sea-water to a velocity of one foot to be 23 ounces poids des Marc. Borda found the resistance oſ sea-water to the face of a cubic foot, moving against the water one foot per second, to be 21 ounces nearly. But this experiment is complicated: the wave was not deducted; and it was not a plane, but a cube. DUlloa found the impulse of a stream of sea-water, running two feet per second on a foot square, to be 154 pounds English measure. This greatly exceeds all the values given by others. From these experiments we learn, in the first place, that the direct resistance to a motion of a plane surface through water, is very nearly equal to the weight of a column of water having that surſace for its base, and for its height the fall producing the velocity of the motion. This is but one half of the resistance determined by the preceding theory. It agrees, however, very vell with the best experiments made by other philosophers on hodies totally immersed or surrounded by the fluid; and sufficiently shews, that there must be some fallacy in the principles or reasoning by which this result of the theory is supposed to be deducedlc We shall have occasion to return to this again. But we see that the effects oſ the obliquity of incidence deviate enormously from the theory, and that this deviation increnses rapidly as the acuteness of the prow increases. In the prow oſ 6? the deviation ĩs nearly equal to the whole resistance pointed out by the theory, and in the prow of I2 it is nearly 40 times greater than the thooretical resistance. The resistance of the prow of 90° should be one- half the resistance of the base. We have not such a prow; but the medium between the resistance oſ the prow of 96 and 84 is 5790, instead of 500. These experiments are very conform to those of other authors on plane surfaces Robins found the resistance of the air to a pyramid of 450, with its apex foremost, was to that of its buse as 1000 to I411, instead of one to two. Borda ſound the resistance of a cube, moving in vater in the direction of the side, vas to the oblique resistance, when it was moved in the direction of the diagonal, in the proportion of 53 to 7; whereas it should have been that of &/ 2 to l, or of I0 to T nearly. He also found, that a wedge whose angle was 90°, moving in air, gave for the proportion of the resistances of the edge and base 7261: 10000, instead of 5000: 10000. Also when the angle of the wedge was 60, the resistances of the edge and base vere 52 and I00, instead of 25 and 100. In short, in all the cases of oblique plane surfaces, the resistances were greater than those which are assigned by the theory. The theoretical law agrees tolerably with observation in large angles of incidence, that is, in incidences not differing very far from the perpendicular; but in more acute prows the resistances are more nearly proportional to the sines of incidence than to their squares. The academicians deduced ſrom these experiments an expression of the general value oſ the resistance, which corresponds tolerably well with observation. Thus let æ be the complement of the half angle of the prow, and let P be the direet pressure or resistance, with an incidence of 90°, and ꝓ the effective oblique pressure: then /P Xx cosine? æ + 3,153 G). This gives for a prow oſ 12 an error in defect about, 3;5, and in larger angles it is much nearer the truth; and this is exact enough for any practice. This is an abundantly simple formula: but if we introduce it in our calculations oſ the resistances oſ curvilineal prows, it renders them so complicated as to be almost useless; and what is worse, when the calculation is completed for a curvilineal prow, the resistance which results is found to differ widely from experiment. This shows, that the motion of the fluid is so modified by the action of the most prominent part of the prow, that its impulse on what sueceeds is greatly aſfected, so that we are not allowed to consider the prow as composed of a number of parts, each of vhich is aſfected as iſ it were detached from all the rest. As the very nature of naval architecture seems to require curvilineal ſorms, in order to give the necessary strength, it seemed of importance to examine more particularly the deviations of the resistances of such prows from the resistances assigned by the theory. The academicians, thereſore, made vessels with prows of a cylindrical shape; one of these was a half eylinder, and the other was one-third of a cylinder, both having the same breadth, viz. two feet, the same depth, also two feet, and the same length, four feet. The resistance oſ the half cylinder was to the resistance of the perpendicular prow in the proportion of 13 to à, instead of being as 18 to 19,5. Borda found nearly the same ratio of the resistances of the half cylinder, and its diametrical plane vhen moved in air. He also compared the resistances of two prisms or wedges, of the same breadth and height. The first had its sides plane, inclined to the base in angles of 60; the second had its sides portions of cylinders, of which the planes were the chords, that is, their sections were arches of circles of 609% Their resistances were as 138 to 100, instead of being as 138 to 220, as required by the theory; and as the resistance of the first was greater in proportion to that of the base than the theory allows, the resistance of the last was less. Mr Robins found the resistanceoſ a sphere moving in ãirto be to the resistance of its great cirele as 1 to 2.27; whereas theory requires them to be as I to 2 He found, at the same time, that the absolute resistance was greater than the weight of a eylinder of air of the same diameter, and having the height necessary for acquiring the velocity. It was greater in the proportion of 49 to 40 nearly. Borda found the resistance of the sphere moving in water to be to that of its great circle as 1000 to 2508, and it was one-ninth greater than the weight of the column of watẽr whose height was that necessary for producing the velocity. He also found the resistance of air to the sphere vas to its resistance to its great circle as I to 2.45. It appears, on the whole, that the theory gives the resistance of oblique plane surſaces too small, and that of curved surſaces o great; and that it is quite unfit for ascertaining the modifications of resistance arising from the figure of the body. The most prominent part of the prow changes the action of the fluid on the succeeding parts, rendering it totally difſerent from what it would be were that part detached from the rest, and exposed to the stream vith the same obliquity. It is of no consequence, therefore, to deduce any formula from the valuable experiments of the French academy. The experiments themselves are of great importance, because they give us the impulses on plane surfaces with every obliquity. They therefore put it in our power to select the most proper obliquity in a thousand important cases. By appealing to them, we ean tell what is the proper angle of the sail for producing the greatest impulse in the direction of the ship's course; or the best inclination oſ the sail of a wind-mill, or the best inclination of the float oſ a vater-wheel, &. &. These deduetions will be made in their proper places in the course of this work. We see also, that the deviation from the simple theory is not very considerable till the obliquity is grent; and that, in the inclinations which other circum- stances would induce us to give to the floats of water-wheels, the sails of wind-mills, and the like, the results of the theory are sufficiently agreeable to experiment, for rendering this theory of very great use in the construction of machines. Its great defect is in the impulsions on curved surfaces, which puts a stop to our improvement of the science of naval architecture, and the working of ships. But it is not enough to detect the faults of the theory: we should try to amend it, or to substitute another. It is a pity that so much ingenuity should have been thrown avay in the application of a theory so deſectivee Mathematicians were seduced, as has been already observed, by the opportunity which it gave for exercising their calculus, which was a new thing at the time of publishing this theory. Newton sav clearly the deſects of it, and makes no use of any part of it in his subsequent diseussions, and plainly has used it merely as an introduction, in order to give some general notions in a subject quite new, and to give a demonstration of one leading truth, viz. the proportionality of the impulsions to the squares of the velocities. While we proſess the highest respect for the talents and labours of the great mathematicians vho have followed Newton in this most diſficult research, we cannot help being sorry that some oſ the greatest of them continued to attach themselves to a theory which he neglected, merely because it afforded an opportunity of displaying their profound knowledge of the new caleulus, of which they were villing to ascribe the discovery to Leibnitz. It has been in a great measure owing to this, that ve have been so late in discovering our ignorance of the subject. Newton had himself pointed out all the defeets of this theory; and he set himself to work to discover another which should be more conformable to the nature oſ things, retaining only such deductions from the other as his great sagacity assured him would stand the test of experiment. Even in this he seems to have been mistaken by his followerss. He re- tained the proportionality of the resistance to the square of the velocity. This they have endeavoured to demonstrate in a manner conformable to Newton's determination of the oblique impulses of ſluids; and under the cover of the agreement of this proposition with experiment, they introduced into mechanics a mode of expression, and even of conception, which is inconsistent with all accurate notions on these subjects. Newton's proposition was, that the motions communicated to the fluid, and therefore the motions lost by the body, in equal times, were as the squares of the velocities; and he conceived these as proper measures of the resistances. It is a matter of experience, that the forces or pressures by which a body must be supported in opposition to the impulses of ſluids, are in this very proportion. In determining the proportion of the direct and oblique resistances of plane surfaces, he considers the resistances to arise ſfrom mutual eollisions of the surface and fluid, repeated at intervals of time too small to be perceived. But, in making this comparison, he has no occasion vhatever to consider this repetition; and when he assigns the proportion between the resistance oſ a cone and of its base, he, in ſact, nssigns the proportion between two simultaneous and instantaneous impulses, But the mathematicians who followerd him have considered this repetition as equivalent to an augmentation of the initial or first impulse; and in this vay have attempted to demonstrate, that the resistances are as the squares oſ the velocities. When the velocity is double, each impũlse is double, and the number in a given time is double; thereſore, say they, the resistance, and the fore which will withstand it, is quadruple; and observation confirms their deduction: yet nothing is more gratuitous and illogical. It is very true, that the resistance, conceived as Newton conceives it, the loss oſ motion sustained by a body moving in the ſluid, is quadruple; but the instantaneous impulse, and the force vhich can withstand it, is, by all the laws oſ mechanios, 5 only doublee What is the foree which can withstand a double impulse ? Nothing but a double impulse. Nothing but impulse can be opposed to impulse; and it is a gross misconception to think of stating any kind of comparison between impulse and pressure. It is this which has given rise to much jargon and false reasoning about the foree of percussion. This is stated as infinitely greater than any pressure, and as equivalent to a pressure infinitely repeated. It forced the abettors of these doctrines at last to deny the existence of all pressures whatever, and to assert, that all motion, and tendency to motion, was the result of impulse. In consequence of the many objections to the comparison of pure pressure with pure percussion or impulse, John Bernoulli and others were obliged at last to assert, that there were no perſectly hard hodies in nature, nor eould be, but that all bodies were elastic; and that in the communication of motion by pereussion, the velocities of both bodies vere gradually changed by their mutual elasticity acting during the finite but impereeptible time oſ the collision. This was, in ſaet, giving up the whole argument, and banishing pereussion, while their aim was to get rid of pressuree For what is elasticity but a pressure ? and how shall it be produced ? To act in this instance, must it arise from a still smaller impulse? But this will require another elasticity, and so on without end. These are all legitimate consequences of this attempt to state a comparison between percussion and pressure. Numberless experiments have been made to confirm the statement. But nothing affords so specious an argument as the experimented proportionality of the impulse oſ ſluids to the square oſ the velocity. Here is every appearance of the accumulation oſ an infinity of minute impulses, in the known ratio of the velocity, each to each, producing pressures which are in the ratio oſ the squares of the velocities. The pressures are observed; but the impulses or percussions, whose accumulation produces these pressures, are only supposed. The rare fluid, introduced by Newton for the purpose already mentioned, either does not exist in nature, or does not act in the manner we have said, the particles making their impulse, and then escaping through among the rest without affecting their motionn. We cannot indeed say vhat may be the proportion between the diameter and the distance oſ the particles The first may be incomparably smaller than the second, even in mercury, the densest fluid which we are familiarly acquainted with; but although they do not touch each other, they act nearly as iſ they did, in consequence of their mutual attractions and repulsions. We have seen air a thousand times rarer in some experiments than in others, and thereſore the distance of the particles at least ten times greater than their diameters; and yet, in this rare state, it propagates all pressures or impulses made on any part of it to a great distance, almost in an instant. It cannot be, therefore, that fluids act on bodies by impulse. It is very possible to conceive a ſluid advancing with a flat surface against the ſlat surface of a solid. The very first and superficial particles may make an impulse; and if they were amnihilated, the next might do the same: and if the velocity were double, these impulses would he double, and would be withstood by a double force, and not a quadruple, as is observed: and this very circumstance, that a quadruple force is necessary, should have made us conclude that it was not to impulse that this force was opposed. The first particles having made their stroke, and not being annihilated, must eseape laterally. In their escaping, they eſfectually prevent every farther impulse, because they come in the way of those filaments which would have struek the body. The whole process seems to he somewhat as follows: When the flat surface of the fluid has come into contact vith the plane surſace AB (Plate IX. Fig. 6.) perpendil cular to the direction DC of their motion, they must deſleet to both sides equally, and in equal portions, hbecause no reason can be assigned vhy more should go to either side. By this means the filament EF, which would have struck the surface in G, is deflected berore it urrives at the surface, and describes a curved path EFIHK, continuing its rectilineal motion to I, where it is intercepted by a filament immediately adjoining to EF, on the side of the middle filament DC. The diſferent particles of DC may be supposed to impinge in succession at C, and to be deflected at right angles; and, gliding along CB, to eseape at B. Each ſilament in succession, outwards from DC, is deſlected in its turn; and being hindered from even touching the surface CB, it glides off in a direction parallel to it; and thus EF is deflected in I, moves parallel to CB from I to H, and is again deflected at right angles, and describes HK parallel to DC. The same thing may be supposed to happen on the other side of DC. And thus it would appear, that except two filaments immediately adjoining to the line DC, which besects the surface at right angles, no part of the fluid makes any impulse on the surface AB. All the other filaments are merely pressed against it by the lateral filaments without them, which they tumn aside, and prevent from striking the surface. In like manner, when the fluid strikes the edge of a prism or vedge ACB (Plate IX. Fig. 7.) it cannot be said that any real impulse is made. Nothing hinders us. from supposing C a mathematical angle or indivisible point, not susceptible of any impulse, and serving merely to divide the stream. Each filament EF is effectually prevented from impinging at G in the line of its direction, and with the obliquity of incidence EGC, by the filaments between EF and DC, which glide along the surface CA; and it may be supposed to be defleeted when it comes to the line CF which besects the angle DCA, and again deflected and ren- dered parallel to DC at I. The same thing happens on the other side of DC; and we cannot in this case assert that there is any impulse. We now see plainly how the ordinary theory must be totally unfit for furnishing principles of naval architecture, even although a formula could be deduced ſrom such a series of experiments as those oſ the French academy. Although we should know precisely the impulse of the fluid on a surface GL (Fig. 5.) of any obliquity, when it is alone, detached from all others, ve cannot in the smallest degree tell what ill be the action of part of a stream of fluid advancing towards it, with the same obliquity, when it is preceded by an adjoining surface CG, having a diſſerent inclination; for the fluid will not glide along GL in the same manner as if it made part oſ a more extensive surſace having the same inelination. The previous deſlections are extremely diſferent in these two cases; and the previous deflections are the only changes which we can observe in the motions of the ſluid, and the only causes of that pressure vwhich we observe the body to sustain, and vhich ve eall the impulse on it. This theory must, thereſore, be quite unſit for ascertaining the action on a curved surſace, which may be oonsidered as made up of an indefinite number of planes. We now see how it happens that the action oſ fluids on solid hodies may and must be opposed by pressures, and may be compared with, and measured by, the pressure of gravity. We are not comparing ſorees of difſerent kinds, percussions with pressures, but pressures with each other. Let us see whether this view of the subject will afford us any method of comparison or absolute mensurement. When a filament of fluid, that is, a row of corpuscles, are turned out of their course EF (Fig. 6.) and made to take another course IH, force is required to produce this change of direction. The filament is prevented from proceeding by other ſilaments which lie between it and the body, and which deflected it in the same manner as it were contained in a bended tube, and it will press on the concave filament next to it as it would press on the eoncave side of the tube. Suppose such a bended tube ABE (Fig9.) and that a ball A is projected along it with any velocity, and moves in it without any friotion, it is demonstrated, in elementary mechanics, that the ball will move ith undiminished velocity, and ill press on every point, such as B, of the concave side of the tube, in a direction BF perpendicular to the plane CBD, which touches the tube in the point B. This pressure on the adjoining filament, on the concave side of its path, must be withstood by that filament which deſlects it; and it must be propagated across that filament to the next, and thus augment the pressure upon that next filament already pressed by the deſlection oſ the intermediate filament, and thus there is a pressure towards the middle filament, and towards the body, arising from the deſlection oſ all the outer filaments; and their accumulated sum must be conceived as immediately exerted on the middle filiments and on the body, because a perfeet fluid transmits every pressure undimiished. The pressure BF is equivalent to the two BH, BG; one of which is perpendieular and the other parallel, to the direetion of the original motion. By the first, (taken in any point oſ the eurvilineal motion oſ any filament) the two halves of the stream are pressed together: and in the case of Fig 6. and ., exactly balance each other. But the pressures, such as BG, must be ultimately withstood by the surfuce ACB; and it is by these accumulated pressures that the solid body is urged down the stream: and it is these accumulated pressures which we observe and measure in our experimentss We shall anticipate a little, and say that it is most easily demonstrated, that when a hall A (Fige 9.) moves vith undiminished velocity in a tube s incurvated that its axis at E is at right angles to its axis at A, the accumulated action of the pressures, such as BG, taken for every point of the path, is precisely equal to the force which would produce or extinguish the original motion. This being the case, it follos most obviously, that if the two motions of the filaments are such as ve have deseribed and represented by Fig. 6., the whole prèssure in the direction of the stream, that is, the whole pressure which can be observed on the surface, is equal to the weight of a column of fluid having the surſace for its base, and twice the fall produetive of the velocity for its height, precisely as Newton deduced it ſrom other considerations; and it seems to make no odds whether the fluid be elastic or unelastic, if the deflections and velocities are the same. Now it is a fact, that no difference in this respect can be observed in the actions oſ air and vater; and this had alvays appeared a great defect in Newtons theory; but it was only a deſect oſ the theory attributed to him. But it is also true, that the observed action is but one-half of what is just now deduced from this improved view of the subject. Whence arises this difference? The reason is this: We have given a very erroneous account of the motions of the filaments. A filament EF does not move as represented in Fig. 6. with two rectangular inflections at I and at H, and a path IH between them parallel to CB. The process of nature is more like what is represented in Fig. 10. It is observed, that at the anterior part of the body AB, there remains a quantity of ſluid ADB, almost, if not altogether, stagnant, of a singular shape, having two curved coneave sides A a D, B b D, along which the middle filaments glide. This fluid is very slowly changed. The late Sir Charles Knovles made many experiments for ascertaining the paths of the filaments of water. At a distance up the stream, he allowed small jets of a coloured fluid, which did not mix vith water, to make part of the stream; and the experiments were made in troughs vith sides and bottom of plateglass. A small taper was placed at a considerablo height _.;” ;; ;  m;”;”;;;m_,,,—”.;_”—;«;hm—.. J above, by which the shadows of the coloured filaments were most distinctly projected on a white plane held below the trough, so that they were accurately drawn with a pencil. The still water ADC lasted for a long while before it was renewed; and it seemed to be gradually wasted by abrasion, by the adhesion of the surrounding water, which gradually licked away the outer parts from D to A and B; and it seemed to renew itself in the direction CD, opposite to the motion oſ the stream. There was, however, a considerable intricacy and eddy in this motion. Some (seemingly superficial) water was continually, but slowly, flowing outward from the line DC, while other water was seen within and below it, coming inwards and going backwards. The coloured lateral filaments were most constant in their form, while the body was the same, although the velocity was in some cases quadrupled. Any change which this produced seemed confined to the superfſicial filaments. As the filaments were deflected, they were also constipated, that is, the curved parts of the filaments were nearer each other than the parallel straight filaments up the stream, and this constipation was more considerable as the prow was more obtuse, and the deflection greater. The inner filaments were ultimately more deflected than those without them; that is, if a line be drawn touching the curve EFIH in the point H of contrary flexure, where the concavity begins to be on the side next the body, the angle HKC, contained between the axis and this tangent line, is 5o much the greater as the filament is nearer the axis. When the body exposed to the stream was a box of upright sides, flat bottom, and angular prow, like a wedge, having its edge also upright, the filaments were not all deflected laterally, as theory would make us expect; but the filaments near the bottom were also deflected downwards as vell as laterally, and glided along at some distance under the bottom, forming lines of double curvature. voL. II. x The breadth of the stream that was deflected was much greater than that of the body; and the sensible deflection begun at a considerable distance up the stream, especially in the outer ſilaments. Lastly, the form of the curves was greatly influenced by the proportion between the width of the trough and that of the body. The curvature was always less when the trough was very wide in proportion to the body. Great varieties were also observed in the motion or velocity of the filaments. In general, the filaments increased in velocity outwards from the body to a certain small distance, which was nearly the same in all cases, and then diminished all the vay outward. This was observed by inequalities in the colour oſ the filaments, by which one could be observed to outstrip another. The retardation of those next the body seemed to proceed from frietion; and it vas imagined that without this the velocity there would always have been greatest. These observations give us considerable information respeeting the mechanism oſ these motions, and the action of fluids upon solids. The pressure in the duplicate ratio of the velocities comes here again into viewm. We ſound, that although the velocities were very diſferent, the curves were precisely the same. Now the observed pressures arise from the transverse forces by which ench particle of a filament is retained in its curvilineal path; and we know that the force by which a body is retained in any curve is directly as the square of the velocity, and inversely as the radius of curvature The curvature, thereſore, remaining the same, the transverse forees, and consequently the pressure on the body, must be as the square of the velocity: and, on the other hand, ve can see pretty clearly (indeed it is rigorously demonstrated by D'Alembert), that whatever be the velocities, the curves will be the same. For iĩt is known in hydraulies, that it requires a fourſold or nineſold pressure to produce a double or riple velocity. And as all pres- sures are propagated through a perfect fluid without diminution, this fourſold pressure, while it produces a double velocity, preduces also fourfold transverse pressures, which vill retain the particles, moving twice as ſast, in the same curvilineal pathss. And thus ve see that the impulses, as they are called, and resistances of fluids, have a certain relation to the weight of a column of fluid, whose height is the height necessary for producing the velocity. How it happens that a plane surſace, immersed in an extended fluid, sustains just half the pressure which it would have sustained had the motions been such as are sketched in Fig. Gth, is a matter oſ more curious and difficult investigation. But we see evidently that the pressure must be less than what is there assigned; for the stagnant water a-head of the body greatly diminishes the ultimate deſleetions oſ the filaments: And it may be demonstrated, that vwhen the part BE of the canal, Fig. . is inclined to the part AB in an angle less than 90, the pressues BG along the whole canal are as the versed sine oſ the ultimate angle of deflection, or the versed sine oſ the angle which the part BE makes with the part AB. Therefore, since the deflections resemble more the sketch given in Fig. I0, the accumulated sum of all these forces BG of Fig. ꝗ. must be less than the similar sum corresponding to Fig. 6. that is, less than the weight of the column of fluid having twice the productive height for its heightt. How it is just one-halſ shall be our next inquiry. And here we must return to the labours oſ Newton. Aſter many beautiful observations on the nature and mechanism oſ continued fluids, he says, that the resistance which they occasion is but one-half of that occasioned by the rare fluid which had been the subject of his former proposition; which truth, says he, * I shall endeavour to show. He then enters into another, as novel and as diſficult an investigation, viz. the laws oſ hydraulics, and endeavours to ascertain the motion of fluids through orifices when urged by pressures of any kind. He endeavours to ascertain the velocity with which a fluid escapes through a horizontal orifice in the bottom of a vessel, by the action of its weight, and the pressure which this vein of fluid will exert on a little circle which occupies part of the orifice. To obtain this, he employs a kind of approximation and trial, of which it would be extremely diſficult to give an extract; and then, by increasing the diameter of the vessel and of the hole to infinity, he accommodates his reasoning to the case of a plane surſace exposed to an indefinitely extended stream oſ fluid; and, lastly, giving to the little circular surface the motion which he had before ascribed to the ſluid, he says, that the resistance to a plane surface moving through an unelastic continuous fluid, is equal to the weight of a column of the fluid whose weight is one- half of that necessary for acquiring the velocity; and he says, that the resistance of a globe is, in this case, the same vith that of a cylinder of the same diameter. The resistance, thereſore, of the cylinder or circle is ſour times less, and that of the globe is twice less than their resistances on a rare elastic medium. But this determination, though founded on principles or assumptions, which are much nearer to the real state of things, is liable to great objections. It depends on his method for ascertaining the velocity of the issuing fluid; a method extremely ingenious, but defectivee The cataract, which he supposes, cannot exist as he supposes, descending by the full action oſ gravity, and surrounded by a ſfunnel of stagnant fluid. For, in such circumstances, there is nothing to balance the hydrostatical pressure of this surrounding fluid; because the whole pressure of the central cataract is employed in producing its own descent. In the next place, the pressure which he determines is beyond all doubt only half of what is observed on a plane surface in all our experiments. And, in the third place, it is repug- nant to all our experience, that the resistance oſ a globe or of a pointed body is as great as that of its circular hase. His reasons are by no means convincing. He supposes them placed in a tube or canal; and sinee they are supposed of the same diameter, and thereſore leave equal spaces at their sides, he concludes, that because the water escapes by their sides with the same velocity, they ill have the same resistancee But this is by no means a necessary consequence Even iſ the water should be allowed to exert equal pressures on them, the pressures being perpendicular to their surfaces, and these surſaces being inclined to the axis, while in the case of the base of a cylinder it is in the direction oſ the axis, there must be a diſference in the accumulated or compound pressure in the direction of the axis. He indeed says, that in the case of the cylinder or the circle obstructing the canal, a quantity of water remains stagnant on its upper surface, viz. all the vater whose motion would not contribute to the most ready passage of the fluid between the cylinder and the sides of the canal or tube; and that this water may be considered as frozen. If this be the case, it is indifferent what is the form of the body that is covered with this mass of frozen or stagnant water. It may be a hemisphere or a cone; the resistance will be the same. But Newton by no means assigns, either with precision or with distinet evidence, the form and magnitude oſ this standing water, so as to give confidence in the results He contents himself with saying, that it is that water vhose motion is not necessary or cannot contribute to the most easy passage of the vater. There remain, therefore, many imperfections in this theory. But notwithstanding these defects, ve cannot but admire the efforts and sagacity of this great philosopher, who, after having discovered 50 many sublime truths of a mechanical nature, ventured to trace out a path for the solution of a problem which no person had yet attempted to bring within the range of mathematical investigation. And this solution, though inaccurate, shines throughout vith that inventive genius, and that fertility oſ resource, which no man ever possessed in s0 eminent a degree. Those vho have attacked the solution of Sir Isaac Newton have not been more suceessful. Most oſ them, instead of principles, have given a great deal of caleulus; and the chieſ merit which any of them can claim, is that of having deduced some single proposition which happens to quadrate with some single case of experiment, while their general theories are either inapplicable, from difficulty and obscurity, or are discordant with more general observation. We must, however, exeept from this number Daniel Bernoulli, vho was not only a great geometer, but one of the first philosophers oſ the age. He possessed all the talents, and was ſree from the faults of that celebrated family; and while he was the mathematician of Europe vwho penetrated farthest in the investigation of this great problem, he was the only person who felt, or at least who acknovledged, its great diſſiculty. In the 2d volume of the Comment. Petropol. 17, he proposes a formula for the resistance of fluids, deduced from considerations quite different from those on which Nevton founded his solutionn. But he delivers it with modest diffidence, because he found that it gave a resistance four times greater than experiment. In the same dissertation he determines the resistance of a sphere to be one- half of that of its great circle But in his subsequent theory oſ Hydrodynamies, he calls this determination in question. It is indeed founded on the same hypothetical principles which have been unskilfully detached from the rest oſf Newtons physies, and made the ground- work of all the subsequent theories on this subject. In I741, Bernoulli published another dissertation (in the Sth volume of the Com. Petropol.) on the action and resistance oſ fluids, limited to a very particular ease; namely, to the impulse of a vein of fluid falling perpendicularly on an infinitely extended plane surſacee This he demonstrates to be equal to the weight of a column of the fluid whose base is the area oſ the vein, and whose height is twice the fall producing the velocity. This demonstration is drawn from the true principles of mechanies and the acknowledged laws of hydraulies, and may be received as a strict physical demonstration. As it is the only proposition in the whole theory that has as yet received a demonstration accessible to readers not versant in all the refinement of modern analysis; and as the principles on vhich it proceeds vill undoubtedly lead to a solution of every problem which can be proposed, once that our mathematical knowledge shall enable us to apply them 7me think it our duty to give it in this place, although ve must acknovledge, that this problem is so very limited, that it will hardly bear an application to any case that differs but a little from the express conditions of the problem. There do occur cases, however, in practice, where it may be applied to very great advantage. . Daniel Bernoulli gives two demonstrations; one of which may be called a popular one, and the other is more scientific and introductory to further investigationn. We shall give both. Bernoulli first determines the whole action exerted in the efſflux of the vein of fluid. Suppose the velocity of efflux v is that which would be acquired by ſalling through the height h. It is well known that a body moving during the time of this fall with the velocity 0 would deseribe a space 2h. The effect, therefore, of the hydraulic action is, that in the time ? of the fall :, there issues a eylinder or prism of water whose base is the cross section  or area of the vein, and whose length is 2. And this quantity of matter is now moving with the velocity . The quantity of motion, therefore, which is thus produced is 2 5h 9; and this quantity of motion is produced in the time . And this is the accumulated effect of all the expelling forces, estimated in the direction of the eſflux. Now, to compare this with the exertion of some pressing power with which we are familiarly acquainted, let us suppose this pillar 25 h to be frozen, and, being held in the hand, to be dropped. It is well known, that in the time ? it will fall through the height h, and vill acquire the velocity », and now possesses the quantity of motion 2 5 h and all this is the effect of its weight. The weight, thereſore, of the pillar 2 5 h produces the same effect, and in the same time, and (as may easily be seen) in the same gradual manner, vith the expelling forces of the fluid in the vessel, which expelling ſorces arise from the pressure of all the ſluid in the vesse. Therefore the accumulated hydraulic pressure, by which a vein of a heavy fluid is forced out through an orifice in the bottom or side of a vessel, is equal (When estimated in the direction of the efflux) to the weight of a column of the ſluid, having for its base the section of the vein, and twice the ſall productive of the velocity of efflux for its height. Now let ABDC (Fig. 11.) be a quadrangular vessel with upright plane sides, in one of which is an orifice EF. From every point of the circumference of this orifice, suppose horizontal lines E e, Ff, &e. which will mark a similar surface on the opposite side of the vessel. Suppose the orifice EF to the shut. There can be no doubt but that the surfaces EF and è f vill be equally pressed in opposite directionss. Now open the orifice EF; the vater will rush out, and the pressure on EF is now removed. There vill therefore be a tendency in the vessel to move back in the direetion E . And this tendency must be precisely equal and opposite to the whole effort of the expelling forces. Now, let this stream of vater be received on a circular plane MN, perpendicular to its axis, and let this circular plane be of such extent, that the vein escapes from its sides in an infinitely thin sheet, the water flowing off in a diretion parallel to the planee. The vein by this means will ex- pand into a trumpet. like shape, having curved sides, EKG, FLH, Fig. 12. We abstract at present the action of gravity vhich would cause the vein to bend downwards, and occasion a greater velocity at H than at G; and we suppose the velocity equal in every point of the circumference It is plain, that if the action of gravity be neglected aſter the water has issued through the orifice EF, the velocity in every point of the circumſference of the plane MN will be that oſ the efflux through EF. Nov, because EEG is the natural shape assumed by the vein, it is plain, that if the whole vein were covered by a tube or mouth-piece, fitted to its shape, and perſectly polished, so that the water shall glide along it, without any friction (a thing vhich we may always suppose), the water vill exert no pressure whatever on this trumpet mouthpiece: Lastly, let us suppose that the plane MN is attached to the mouth-piece by some bits of wire, 50 as to allow the water to escape all round by the narrow chink between the mouth-piece and the plane: We have now a vessel consisting of the upright part ABDC, the trumpet GKEFLH, and the plane MN; and the water is escaping from every point of the circumference of the chini GHNM vith the velocity v. If any part of this chink were shut up, there would be a pressure on that part equivalent to the force of efflux from the opposite part. Thereſore, when all is open, these efforts of efſlux balance each other all round. There is not thereſore any tendency in this compound vessel to move to any sidee But take away the plane MN, and there would immediately arise a pressure in the direction Ee equal to the weight of the column 2⸗h. This is therefore balanced by the pressure on the circular plane MN, which is therefore equal to this weight, and the proposition is demonstrated. A number of experiments were made by Kraſt at St Petersburg, by receiving the vein on a plane MN (Fig. 11.) vhich was ſastened to the arm of a balance OPQ, having a scale R hanging on the opposite arm. The resistance or pressure on the plane was measured by weights put into the scale R; and the velocity oſ the jet was measured by means of the distance XH, to which it spouted on a horizontal plane. The results of these experiments were as conformable to the theory as could be wished. The resistance was always a little less than what the theory required, but greatly exceeded its halſ; the result of the generally received theories. This defect should be expected; for the demonstration supposes the plane MN to be infinitely extended, so that the film of water which issues through the chink may be aceurately parallel to the plane. This never can be completely effectedl. Also it was supposed, that the velocity was justly measured by the amplitude of the parabola EGK. But it is well known that the very putting the plane MN in the ay of the jet, though at the distance of an inch from the orifice, will diminish the velocity of the efflux through this orific:. This is easily verified by experiment. Observe the time in which the vessel will be emptied when there is no plane in the vay. Repeat the experiment with the plane in its place; and more time will be necessary. The following is a note of a course of experiments, taken as they stand, without any selection. NT 2 8 4 5 6 Resist. by theory 770 1720 1651 1602 I528 1072 Resist. by expt. 1403 1463 1486 1401 1408 Io2l Difference 208 2857 I65 20il I5 5I In order to demonstrate this proposition in such a manner as to furnish the means of investigating the whole mechanism and action of moving fluids, it is necessary to premise an elementary theorem of curvilineal motions. If a particle of matter describes a curve line ABCE 5 Fig. 13.) by the continual action of deflecting forces, vhich vary in any manner, both with respeet to intensity and direction, and if the action of these ſorces, in every point of the curve, be resolved into two directions, perpendicular and parallel to the initial direction AX; then, I. The accumulated effect of the deſlecting forces, estimated in a direetion AD perpendicular to AK, is to the final quantity of motion as the sine of the final change oſ direction is to radius. Let us first suppose that the accelerating forees act by starts, at equal intervals oſ time, when the body is in the points A, B, C, EE And let AN be the deflecting force, which, acting at A, changes the original direetion AK to AB. Produe AB till BHIm/AB, and complete the parallelogram BFCH. Then FB is the force which, by acting at B, changed the motion BH (the continuation of AB) to BC. In like manner make Cſ (in BC produced) equal to BC, and complete the parallelogram CEh. Cſis the deflecting force at C, &e. Draw BO parallel to AN, and GBK perpendicular to AK. Also drav lines through C and E perpendicular to AK, and draw through B and C lines parallel to A. Drav also HL, h I perpendicular, and FG, HI, h i, parallel to AK. It is plain that BK is BO or AN estimated in the direetion perpendicular to AK, and that BG is BF estimated in the same vay And since BH=AB, HL or IM is equal to BX. Also CI is equal to BG. Therefore CM is equal to APBG. By similar reasoning it appears that Em—E i+h IC g+CM,/C g+BGAP. Therefore if CE be taken for the measure oſ the final velocity or quantity of motion, Em vill be the accumulated effect of the deflecting forees estimated in the direction AD perpendicular to AK. But Em is to CE as the sine of m CE is to radius; and the angle m CE is the angle contained between the initial and final directions, because C m is parallel to AK. Nov let the intervals of time diminish continually and the frequency of the impulses increase. The deſleetion becomes ultimately continuous, and the motion curvilineal, and the proposition is demonstrated. We see that the initial velocity and its subsequent changes do not aſfect the conclusion, which depends entirely on the final quantity of motion. 2. The accumulated effect oſf the accelerating forces, vhen estimated in the direction AK of the original motion, or in the opposite direction, is equal to the diſference between the initial quantity oſ motion, and the product of the final quantity of motion by the cosine of the change of direction. For CmæCI m I, BMQ BM æ BL ML, = AKVFG AE  AOOE,  AO—PN. Therefore PNA-FGH7Q (the accumulated impulse in the direction OA) = AO—CM, =AO CE Xx cosine of ECM. Cor. 1. The same action, in the direction opposite to that of the original motion, is necessary ſor causing a body to move at right angles to its former direction as ſor stopping its motion. For in this case, the cosine of the change of direction is o0, and AOCE xcosine ECM/AOo, =AO, æ the original motion. Cor. 2. If the initial and final velocities are the same, the accumulated action of the accelerating forces, estimated in the direction OA, is equal to the product of the original quantity oſ motion by the versed sine oſ the change of direction. The application of these theorems, particularly the second, to our present purpose is very obvious All the filaments of the jet were originally moving in the direction of its axis, and they are finally moving along the resisting plane, or perpendicular to their former motion. Therefore their transverse forces in the direetion oſ the axis are (in cumulo) equal to the foree which would stob the mol tion. For the aggregate of the simultaneous ſorces of every purticle in the whole ſilament is the same with that of the successive forces of one particle, as it arrives at different points of its curvineal path. All the transverse forces, estimated in a direetion perpendicular to the axis of the vein, precisely balance and sustain each other; and the only forees which can produce a sensible effect are those in a direction parallel to the axis. By these all the inner filaments are pressed towards the plane MN, and must be vithstood by it. It is highly probable, nay certain, that there is a quantity of stagnant water in the middle oſ the vein which sustains the pressures of the moving filaments vithout it, and transmits it to the solid plane. But this does not alter the casee. And, fortunately, it is of no consequence what changes happen in the velocities of the particles while each is describing its own curvee. And it is from this circumstance, peculiar to this particular case of perpendicular impulse, that we are able to draw the conclusion. It is by no means diſficult to demonstrate that the velocity of the external surface of this jet is constant, and indeed oſ every jet which is not acted on by external forces aſter it has quitted the orifice: but this discussion is quite unnecessary heree It is however extremely diſficult to ascertain, even in this most simple case, what is the velocity of the internal filaments in the different points of their progress. Such is the demonstration which Bernoulli has given of this proposition. Limited as it is, it is highly valuable, because derived from the true principles oſ hydraulies. He hoped to render it more extensive and applicable to oblique impulses, hen the axis AC of the vein (Fig. 1S. no 2.) ĩs inclined to the plane in an angle ACN. But here all the simplicity of the case is gone, and we are now obliged to ascertain the motion of each filament. It might not perhaps be impossible to determine what must happen in the plane oſ the figure, that is, in a plane passing through the axis of the vein, and perpendicular to the plane MN. But even in this case it would be extremely diſficult to determine how much of the fluid will go in the direction EKG, and what vill go in the path FLH, and to ascertain the ſorm of each filament, and the velocity in its different points. But in the real state oſ the case, the water will dissipate from the centre C on every side; and ve cannot tell in what proportions Let us however consider a little what happens in the plane of the figure, and suppose that all the water goes either in the course EXG or in the course FLH. Let the quantities of water which take these two courses have the proportions of » and n. Let /ꝗ  be the velocity at A, /T5 be the velocity at G, and /ãẽ be the velocity at H. ACG and ACH are the two changes of direction, of which let c andc be the cosiness Then, adopting the former reasoning, we have the pressure oſ the vatery plate GKEACM on the plane in the direction AC yuũ +2 a2&cb, and the pressure of the plate HLFACN 75 x 2 a +2 c ò, and their sum 2c0+ ſ }Qua+2e⸗ n5, vhich being multiplied by the sine of ACM or  I, gives the pressure perpendicular N pPxta& b+ n]σat+ãc Pn But there remains a pressure in the direction perpendicular to the axis of the vein, vhich is not balanced, as in the former case, by the equality on opposite sides oſ the axis. The pressure arising from the water which escapes at G has an eſfect opposite to that produced by the water which eseapes at HWhen this is taken into accunt, we shall find that their joint efforts perpendicular to AC are æ x2 av I—, which, being multiplied bLy to the plane M the cosine of ACM, gives the action perpendicular to MN m xQac7 T, The sum or joint effort of all these pressures is PYQr2cb+mnx 2a+2c6 4 ac/,//. p+n r+n Thus, from this case, which is much simpler than can happen in nature, seeing that there will always be a lateral eſſlux, the determination of the impulse is as uncertain and vague as it was sure and precise in the former case. It is therefore without proper authority that the absolute impulse of a vein of fluid on a plane which receives it wholly, is asserted to be proportional to the sine of incidence. If indeed we suppose the velocity in G and H are equal to that at A, then b5=a, and the whole impulse is Qa /T/, as is commonly supposed. But this cannot be. Both the velocity and quantity at H are less than those at G. Nay, frequently there is no efſlux on the side Hl when the obliquity is very great. We may conclude in general, that the oblique impulse vill alvays bear to the direct impulse a greater proportion than that of the sine of incidence to radius. If the whole water escapes at G, and none goes off laterally, the pressure will be fa+2acaq~bcx vã =n2i The experiments of the Abbè Bossut show in the plainest manner that the pressure oſ a vein, striking obliquely on a plane which receives it wholly, diminishes faster than in the ratio of the square of the sine of incidence; whereas, when the oblique plane is wholly immersed in the stream, the impulse is much greater than in this proportion, and in great obliquities is nearly as the sine. Nor vill this proposition determine the impulse of a fluid on a plane wholly immersed in it, even when the impulse is perpendicular to the plane. The circumstance is now wanting on which we can establish a calculation, namely, the angle of final deflection. Could this be ascertained for ench filament, and the velocity of the filament, the principles are completely adequate to an accurate solution of the problem. In the experiments which we mentioned to have been made under the inspection of Sir Charles Knovles, a cylinder of six inches diameter was exposed to the action of a stream moving precisely one foot per second; and when certain deductions vere made ſor the water wvhich was held adhering to the posterior base (as will be noticed afterward), the impulse was found equal to 34 ounces avoirdupois. There were 36 coloured filaments distributed on the stream, in such situations as to give the most useſul indications of their curvature. It was found necessary to have some which passed under the body and some above it; for the form of these filaments, at the same distance from the axis of the cylinder, was considerably different; and those filaments which were situated in planes neither horizontal nor vertical took a double curvaturee In short, the curves vere all traced with great care, and the deflecting forces were computed for each, and reduced to the direction of the axis; and they were summed up in such a manner as to give the impulse of the whole stream. The deflections were marked as far a-head of the eylinder as they could be assuredly observedl. By this method the impulse was computed to be 237 ounces, differing from observation ſę of an ounce, or about ,5 of the whole; a difference which may most reasonably be ascribed to the adhesion of the water, vhich must be most sensible in such small velocities. These experiments may therefore be considered as giving all the confirmation that can be desired of the justness of the principles This indeed hardly admits of a doubt; but, alas! it gives us but small assistance; for all this is empirical, in as far as it leaves us in every case the task of observing the form of the curves and the velocities in their different points. To derive service from this most judicious method of Daniel Bernoulli, ve must discover some method of determining, a priori, what ill be the motion vhich it would be deflected by a firm surfacee We shall have oceasion hy and by to mention some most valuable and ĩnstruetive experiments made with this tube. Tt was this which suggested to Euler another theory of the impulse and resistance of fluids, vhich must not be omitted, as it is applied in his elaborate performance on the Theory of the Construction and Working of Ships, in two volumes 4too. He supposes a stream of fluid ABCD (Fig. 15.), moving with any velocity, to strike the plane BD perpendicularly, and that part of it goes through a hole EF, ſorming a jet EGHF. Euler says, that the velocity of this jet ill be the same with the velocity of the stream. Now compare this with an equal stream issuing from a hole in the side of a vessel with the same velocity. The one stream is urged out by the pressure occasioned by the impulse oſ the fluid; the other is urged out by the impulse of the fluid; the other is urged out by the pressure of gravity. The eſfects are equal, and the modiſying circumstances are the same. The causes are therefore equal, and the pressure occasioned by the impulse of a stream of fluid, moving with any velocity, is equal to the weight of a column of fluid whose height is productive of this velocity, &c. He then determines the oblique impulse by the resolution of motion, and deduces the common rules of resistance, &e. Not a shadow of argument is given for the leading principle in this theory, viz. that the velocity of the jet is the same vith the velocity of the stream. None ean be given, but saying, that the pressure is equivalent to its produetion; and this is assuming the very thing he labours to provee. The matter of ſact is, that the velocity of the jet is greater than that of the stream, and may be greater almost in any proportionn. Which eurious circumstance was discovered and ingeniously explained long ago by Daniel Bernoulli in his Hydrodynamica. It is evident that the velocity must be greater. Were a stream of sand to come the curvilineal motions oſ the particles M. d'Alembert even thought that these pressures were not the consequences, but the causes, oſ these curvilineal motions. No internal motion ean happen in a fluid but in consequence of an unhalanced pressure; and every such motion vill produce an inequality of pressure, which will determine  the succeeding motions. He therefore endeavoured to reduce all to the diseovery of those disturbing pressures, and thus to the laws of hydrostatic. He had long before this hit on a very refined and ingenious view of the action of bodies on each other, which had enabled him to solve many of the most diſficult problems concerning the motions of bodies, such as the centre of oscillation, of spontaneous conversion, the precession of the equinoxes, &e. &e. with great facility and elegancee. He saw that the same principle would apply to the action of fluid bodies. The principle is this:  In whatever manner any number of bodies are supposed to act on each other, and by these actions come to change their present motions, if we conceive that the motion which each body would have in the following instant f it became free), is resolved into two other motions; one of which is the motion which it really takes in the following instant; the other will be such, that if ench body had no other motion but this second, the whole bodies would have remained in equilibrio We here observe, that  the motion which each body would have in the following instant, if ĩit became free,” is a continuation of the motion vhich it has in the first instant. It may therefore perhaps be better expressed thus: If the motions of bodies, any how acting on cach other, be considered in two consecutive instunts, und if we conceive the motion which it has in the fſirst instunt as compounded of tuo others, one oſ which is the motion which it actually takes in the second instunt, the other is such, that if each body had only those second motions, the whole system would have remained in equilibrio. The proposition itsel? is evident. For if these second motions be not such as that an equilibrium of the whole system would result from them, the other component motions would not be those which the bodies really have after the change; ſor they would necessarily be altered bythese unbalanced motions. See D' Alembert Essai de Dynamique. Assisted by this incontestable principle, M. dAlembert demonstrates, in a manner equally new and simple, those propositions which Newton had so cautiously deduced from his hypothetical fluid, shewing that they were not limited to this hypothesis, viz. that the motions produced by similar bodies, similarly projected in them, would be similar; that whatever were the pressures, the curves described by the particles would be the same; and that the resistances would be proportional to the squares of the velocities. He then comes to consider the fluid as having its motions constrained by the form of the canal or by solid obstacles interposed. It is evident, that if the hbody ADCE (Fig. 16.) did not form an obstruction to the motion of the water, the particles would deseribe parallel lines TF, OK, PS, &. But while yet at a distance from the body in F, X, S, they gradually change their directions, and describe the curves FM, K m, S n, 50 much more incurvated as they are nearer to the body. At a certain distance ZY this curvature will be insensible, and the fluid included in the space ZYHQ vill move uniſormly as if the solid body were not there. The motions on the other side of the axis AC vill be the same; and we need only attend to one half, and we shall consider these as in a state oſ permanency. No body changes either its direction or velocity othervise than by insensible degrees: thereſore the particle which is moving in the axis will not reach the vertex A of the body, where it behoved to deſlect instantaneously at right angless. It will thereſore begin to be deſlected at some point F a-head of the body, and vill describe a curve FM, touching the axis in F, and the body in M; and then, gliding along the body, vill quit it at some point L, describing a tangent curve, which will join the axis again (touching it) in R; and thus there will be a quantity of stagnant water FAM before or a-head of the body, and another LCR behind or astern of it. Let a be the velocity oſ a particle of the fluid in any instant, and  its velocity in the next instant. The velocity a may be considered as compounded of o' and a. If the particles tended to move with the velocities a only, the whole fluid would be in equilibrio (general principle), and the pressure of the fluid would be the same as if all were stagnant, and each particle were urged by a force a . l . Filli expressing an indefinitely small moment of time. N. B. is the proper expression of the accelerating force, which, by acting during the moment i, would generate the velocity a; and a is supposed an indeterminate quantity, different perhaps for each particle) Now, let a be supposed constant, or aq'. In this case a'o. That is to say, no pressure vhatever vill be exerted on the solid body unless there happen changes in the velocities or direetions of the particles. Let a and  then be the motions of the particles in two consecutive instants. They would be in equilibrio iſ urged only by the forces + Therefore if  be the point vhere the particles which deseribe the curve FM begin to change their velocity, the pressure in D would be equal to the pressure which the fluid contained in the canal ? PMD would exert, if each particle ere solicited by its foree æ The question is therefore reduced to the finding the curvature in the canal ,, FMD, and the accelerating forces æ t in its different parts. It appears, in the first place, that no pressure is exerted by any of the particles along the curve FM: for suppose that the particle a Fig. 18.) deseribes the definitely small straight line a b in the first instant, and b c in the second instant; produce a b till bd —a b, and joining dc, the motion a b or b d may be considered as composed of b c, which the particle really takes in the next instant, and a motion d c which should be destroyed. Draw b i parallel to de, and i e perpendicular to be. It ĩs plain that the particle b, solicited by the forces be, e i (equivalent to d ?) should be in equilibrioo. This being established, b æ must be o, that is, there will be no accelerating or retarding force at b; for if there be, draw b m perpendicular to b F, and the parallel n  infinitely near itt. The part b n of the fluid contained in the canal b n ? m would sustain some pressure from b towards n, or from n towards b. Therefore, since the fluid in this stagnant canal should be in equilibrio, there must also be sume action, at least in one of the parts b m, m q, ꝗn, to counterhalance the action on the part bn. But the fluid is stagnant in the space FAM (in consequence of the law of continuity)) Therefore there is no force which can act on bm, m q, n; and the pressure in the canal in the direetion b n or nb is nothing, (Fig. 17.) or the force b eo, and the force i e is perpendicular to the canal; and there is thereſore no pressure in the canal FM, except what proceeds from the part r F, or from the force ei; which last being perpendicular to the canal, there can be no foree exerted on the point M, but what is propagated from the part 7 F. The velocity thereſore in the canal FM is constant if ſinite, or inſinitely small if variable: for, in the first case, the force hię would he absolutely nothing; and in the second case it would he an infinitesimal of the second order, and may be considered as nothing in comparison with the velocity, which is of the first order. We shall see by and hy that the last is the real state of the case. Therefore the fluid, beſore it begins to change its direction in F, begins to change its velocity in some point 7 a-head of F, and hy the time that it reaches F its velocity is as it were annihilated. Cor. 1. Therefore the pressure in any point D (Fig I6.) arises both from the retardations in the part  F, and from the particles which are in the canal MD: as these last move along the surſace of the body, the force, destroyed in every particle, is compounded of two others, one in the direction of the surface, and the other perpendieular to it; call these 2 and 2. The point D is pressed perpendicularly to the surface MD; Ist, by all the forces ꝓ in the curve MD; 2d, by the ſorce 2 acting on the single point D. This may be neglected in comparison oſ the indefinite number of the others: therefore taking in the arch MD, an infinitely small portion Nm æ3, the pressure on D, perpendicular to the surface oſ the body, will be fr 5; and this fluent must be 50 taken as to be o in the point M. Cor. 2. Therefore, to find the pressure on D, we must find the ſoree ꝓ on any point N. Let u be the velocity of the particle N, in the direction Nm in any instant, and u+u its velocity in the followng instant; we must have J ——— Therefore the whole question is reduced to findi ing the velocity u in every point N, in the direetion Nmn. And this is the aim of a series of propositions whieh follow, in which the author displays the most accurate and precise conception of the subject, and great address and elegance in his mathematical analysis He at length brings out an equation which expresses the pressure on the hody in the most general and unexceptionable manner; but be that even s0, I'Alembert has not heen able to exempliſy the application oſ the equation to the simplest case which can be proposed, such as the direct impulse on a plane surſace wholly immersed in the fluid. All that he is enabled to do, is to apply it (by some modiſications and substitutions which take it out oſ iĩts state of extreme generality) to the direet impulse of a vein of fluid on a plane which deſleets it wholly, and thus to shew its conformity to the solution given by Daniel Bernoulli, and to observation and experiencee He shows, that this impulse (independent of the deficiency arising from the plane's not being oſ infinite extent) is somevhat less than the weight oſ a column whose base is the section of the vein, and whose height is twice the fall necessary for communicating the velocity. This great philosopher and geometer concludes by saying, that he does not believe that any method can be found ſor solving this problem that is more direct and simple; and imagines, that if the deductions from it shall be found not to agree with experiment, ve must give up all hopes of determining the resistance of fluids by theory and analytical caleulus. He says analytical calculus; for all the physical principles on which the calculus proceeds are rigorously demonstrated, and vill not admit of a doubt. There is only one hypothesis introduced in his investigation, and this is not a physical hypothesis, but a hypothesis of caleulation. It is, that the quantities which determine the ratios of the second fluxions of the velocities, estimated in the directions parallel and perpendicular to the axis AC (Fig. 16.) are funetions of the abscissa AP, and ordinate PM of the curve. Any person, in the least acquainted with mathematical analysis, ill see, that without this supposition no analysis or calculus whatever can be instituted. But let us see vhat is the physical meaning of this hypothesis. It is simply this, that the motion of the particle M depends on its situation only. It appears impossible to form any other opinion; and if we could form such an opinion, it is as clear as day-light that the case is desperate, and that we must renounce all hopes. We are sorry to bring our labours to this conclusion; but we are of opinion, that the only thing that remains is, for mathematicians to attach themselves with ſirmness and vigour to some simple cases; and, without aiming at generality, to apply M. dAlemberts or Bernoulli's mode of procedure to the particular circumstances of the case. It is not improbable but that, in the solutions which may be obtained of these particular cases, circumstances may occur which are of a more general naturee These vill be so many laws of hydraulies to be added to our present very scanty stock; and these may have points of resemblance, which will give birth to laws of still greater generality. And vwe repeat our expression of hopes of some success, by endeavouring to determine, in some simple cases, the minimum possibile of motion. The attempts of the Jesuit commentators on the Principia to ascertain this on the Nevtonian hypothesis do them honour, and have really given us great assistance in the particular case which came through their hands. And we should multiply experiments on the resistance of bodies. Those of the French academy are undoubtedly of inestimable value, and vill always be appealed to. But there are circumstances in those experiments whith render them more complicated than is proper for a general theory, and which thereſore limit the conclusions which we vish to drav from them. The bodies were floating on the surface. This greatly modifies the deflections of the filaments of ater, causing some to deſlect laterally, which would otherwise have remained in one vertical plane; and this cireumstance also necessarily produced what the academicians called the remou, or accumulation on the anterior part of the body, and depression behind it. This produced an additional resistance, which was meàsured with great diſficulty and uncertainty. The effect of adhesion must also have been very considerable, and very diſferent in the diſferent cases; and ĩt is oſ diſficult caleulation. It cannot perhaps be totally removed in any experiment, and it is necessary to consider it as making part of the resistance in the most important practical cases, viz. the motion of ships. Here we see that its effect is very greatt. Every seaman knows that the speed, even of a copper-sheathed ship, is greatly increased by greasing her bottom. The difference is too remarkable to admit of a doubt: nor should ve he surprised at this, vhen we attend to the diminution of the motion of water in long pipes. A smooth pipe ſour and a half inches diameter, and 500 yards long, yields but onefifth of the quantity which it ought to do independent of frietion. But adhesion does a great deal which cannot be compared with ſriction. We see that water flowing through a hole in a thin plate will be increased in quantity fully one-third, by adding a little tube whose length is about twice the diameter of the hole The adhesion therefore vill greatly modiſy the action of the filaments both on the solid body and on each other, and vill change both the forms of the curves and the velocities in diſferent points; and this is a sort of objection to the only hypothesis introduced by dAlembert. Yet it is only a sort of objection; for the effect of this adhesion, too, must undoubtedly depend on the situation of the particle. The form of these experiments of the academy is illsuited to the examination of the resistance of bodies wholly immersed in the fluid. The form of experiment adopted by Robins for the resistance oſ air, and aſterwards by the Chevalier Borda for water, is ſree ſfrom these inconvenien- ces, and is susceptible of equal accuracy The great advantage of both is the exact knowledge which they give us of the velocity of the motion; a circumstance essentially necessary, and but imperfectly known in the experiments of Mariotte and others, vho examined quiescent bodies exposed to the action of a stream. It is extremely diſſicult to measure the velocity of a stream. It is very different in its different parts. It is swiftest oſ all in the middle superficial filament, and diminishes as we recede ſrom this towards the sides or bottom, and the rate of diminution is not precisely known. Could this be ascertained with the necessary precision, e should recommend the following form of experiment as the most simple, easy, economical, and accurate: Let a, b, c, d, Fig. 19.) be four books placed in a horizontal plane at the corners of a rectangular parallelogram, the sides a b, cd being parallel to the direction of the stream ABCD, and the sides a b, c d being perpendicular to it. Let the body G be fastened to an axis æf oſ stiſſtempered steel- wire, s0 that the surſace on which the fluid is to act may be inclined to the stream in the precise angle we desire Let this axis have hooks at its extremities, which are hitched into the loops of four equal threads, suspended from the hook a, b, c, d; and let H æ be a fifth thread, suspended from the middle of the line joining the points of suspension a, 5b. Let HIK be a graduated arch, vhose centre is H, and whose plane is in the direction of the stream. It is evident that the impulse on the body G vill be measured (by a process well known to every mathematician) by the deviation of the thread H e from the vertical line H I; and this will be done without any intricacy oſ calculation, or any attention to the centres of gravity, of oscillation, or of percussionn. These must be accurately ascertained with respect to that form in which the pendulum has always been employed for measuring the impulse or velocity of a stream. These advantages arise ſrom the circumstance, that the axis e ſ remains always parallel to the horizonn. We may be allowed to observe, by the bye, that this would have been a great improvement oſ the beautiful experiments of Mr Robins and Dr Hutton on the velocities of cannon-shot, and would have saved mueh intricate calculation, and been attended with many important advantages. The great diſficulty is, as we have observed, to measure the velocity oſ the stream. Even this may be done in this way with some precisionn. Let two floating bodies be dragged along the surface, as in the experiments of the acade.my, at some distance from each other laterally, so that the water between them may not be sensibly disturbed. Let a horizontal bar be attached to them, transverse to the direction of their motion, at a proper height above the surface, and let a spherical pendulum be suspended from this, or let it be suspended from four points, as here described.. Now let the deviation of this pendulum be noted in a variety of velocitiess This will give us the law of relation between the velocity and the deviation of the pendulum. Nov, in making experiments on the resistance of bodies, let the velocity of the stream, in the very filament in which the resistance is measured, be determined by the deviation of this pendulum. It were greatly to be wished that some more palpable argument could be found for the existence of a quantity oſ stagnant fluid at the anterior and posterior parts oſ the body. The one already given, derived from the consideration that no motion changes either its velocity or direetion by fſinite quantities in an instant, is unexceptionablee But it gives us little informationn The smallest conceivable extent of the curve FM in Fig. 18, vill answer this condition, provided only that it touches the axis in some point F, and the body in some point M, so as not to make a finite angle with cithe. But surely there are circumstances vhich rigorously determine the extent oſ this stagnant fluid. And it appears, without doubt, that if there were no cohesion or friction, this space will have a determined ratio to the size of the body (the figures of the bodies being supposed similar). Suppose a plane surface AB, as in Fig. 11, there can he no doubt but that the figure AaDMB vill in every case be similar. But if we suppose an adhesion or tenacity which is constant, this may make a change both in its extent and its form: for its constaney of form depends on the disturbing forces being alvays as the squares of the velocity; and this ratio of the disturbing forces is preserved, while the inertia of the fluid is the only agent and patient in the processs But when we add to this the constant (that is, invariable) disturbing force of tenacity, a change oſ form and dimensions must happen. In like manner, the friction, or something analogous to friction, vhich produces an effeet proportional to the velocity, must alter this necessary ratio oſ the whole disturbing forces We may conclude, that the effect oſ both these circumstances ill be to diminish the quantity oſ this stagnant fluid, by licking it avay externally; and to this ve must ascribe the fact, that the part FAM is never perſectly stagnant, but is generally disturbed by a whirling motion. We may also conclude, that this stagnant fluid will be more incurvated between F and M than it would have been, independent of tenacity and frietion; and that the arch LR vill, on the contrary, be less incurvated.And, lastly, we may conclude, that there will be something opposite to pressure, or something which we may eall abstraction, exerted on the posterior part of the body which moves in a tenacious fluid, or is exposed to the stream of such a fluid; for the stagnant fluid LCR adheres to the surſace LC; and the passing fluid tends to drav it away both by its tenacity and by its frictionn. This must augment the apparent impulse of the stream on such a body; and it must greatly augment the resistance, that is, the motion lost by this body in its progress through the tenacious fluid: for the body must drag along vith it this stagnant fluid, and drag it in opposition to the tenacity and friction of the surrounding fluid. The effect of this is most remarkably seen in the resistances to the motion of pendulums; and the Chevalier Buat, in his examination of Newtons experiments, clearly shews that this constitutes the greatest part of the resistance. This most ingenious writer has paid great attention to this part of the process of nature, and has laid the foundation of a theory of resistance entirely different ſrom all the preceding. We cannot abridge it; and it is too imperfect in its present condition to be oſfered as a body of doctrine: but we hope that the ingenious author ill prosecute the subject. WEe camnot conclude this dissertation (Which we acknowledge to be very unsatisſfactory and imperfſect) better, than by giving an account of some experiments of the Chevalier Buat, which seem oſ immense consequence, and tend to give us very new views of the subject. Mr Buat observed the motion of water issuing from a glass eylinder through a narrow ring formed by a bottom of smaller diameter; that is, the eylinder was open at both ends, and there was placed at its lower end a circle oſ smaller diameter, by way of bottom, which left a ring all aroundc. He threW some powdered sealing-wax into the water, and observed with great attention the motion of its small particless He saw those which huppened to be in the very axis oſ the cylinder descend along the axis with a motion pretty uniform, till they came very near the bottom; from this they continued to descend very slowly, till they were almost in contact with the bottom; they then deviated from the centre, and approached the orifice in straight lines and with an accelerated motion, and at last darted into the oriſice l vith great rapidity. He had observed a thing similar to this in a horizontal canal, in which he had set up a small board like a dam or bar, over which the water flowed. He had thrown a gooseberry into the water, in order to measure the velocity at the bottom, the gooseberry heing a small matter heavier than water. It approached the dam uniformly till about threè inches from itt. Here it almost stood still, but it continued to advance till almost in contactt. It then rose from the bottom along the inside of the dam vith an accelerated motion, and quickly escaped over the top Hence he concluded, "that the water which covers the anterior part of the body exposed to the stream is not perfectly stagnant, and that the filaments recede from the axis in curves, hich converge to the surface of the body as difſerent hyperbolas converge to the same assymptote, and that they move with a velocity continually increasing, till they escape round the sides of the body. He had established (by a pretty reasonable theory, confirmed by experiment) a proposition concerning the pressure which water in motion exerts on the surface along vhich it glides, viæ. that the pressure is equal to that which it would evert if at rest minus the weight of the column whose height would produce the velocity of the pussing stresm. Consequently the pressure which the stream exerts on the surſace perpendicularly exposed to it will depend on the velocity with which it glides along it, and ill diminish from the centre to the circumferencee This, says he, may be the reason why the impulse on a plane wholly immersed is but one halſ oſ that on a plane which defleets the whole stream. He contrived a very ingenious instrument for examining this theory. A square brass plate ABGF (Fig. 20.) vas pierced with a great number of holes, and fixed in the front oſ a shallow box represented edgevise in Fig. 2. The back of this box was pierced with a hole C, in which vas E - inserted the tube of glass CDE, bent square at D. This instrument was exposed to a stream of water, which beat on the brass plate. The vater having filled the box through the holes, stood at an equal height in the glass tube when the surrounding water was stagnant; but when it was in motion, it always stood in the tube above the level of the smooth water without, and thus indicated the pressure occasioned by the action of the stream. When the instrument was not wholly immersed, there was always a considerable accumulation against the front of the box, and a depression behipd it. The water before it was by no means stagnant: indeed it should not be, as Mr Buat observes; for it consists oſ the water which was escaping on all sides, and therefore upwards from the axis of the strenm, which meets the plate perpendicularly in C considerably under the surface It eseapes upwards; and if the body were sufficiently immersed, it would escape in this direction almost as easily as laterallyy. But, in the present circumstances, it heaps up, till the elevation occasions it to fall oſf sidevise as fast as it is renevedc. When the instrument was immersed more than its semidiameter under the surface, the water still rose above the level, and there was a great depression immediately behind this elevation. In consequence of this diſficulty oſ escaping upwards, the vater flows oſf laterally; and if the horizontal dimensions oſ the surſace is great, this lateral efflux becomes more diſficult, and requires a greater accumulationn. From this it happens, that the resistance oſ broad surfaces equally immersed is greater than in the proportion of the breadth. A plane of two ſeet wide and one foot deep, when it is not completely immersed, will be more resisted than a plane two feet deep and one foot wide; for there wiil be an accumulation against both; and even if these were equal in height, the additional surſace will be greatest in the widest hody; and the elevation will be greater, hecause the lateral escape is more diſſicult. The circumstances chiefly to be attended to are these: The pressure on the centre was much greater than towards the border, and, in general, the height of the water in the tube DE was more than à of the height necessary for producing the velocity when only the central hole was open. When variòus holes were opened at different distances ſrom the centre, the height of the vater in DH (Fig. 2.) contimally diminished as the hole was nearer the border. At a certain distance from the border the water at E was level with the surrounding vater, so that no pressure was exerted on that hole. But the most unexpeeted and remarkable circumstance was, that in great velocities, the holes at the very border, and even to a small distance ſrom it, not only sustained no pressure, but even gave out water; for the water in the tube vas lower than the surrounding vater. Mr Buat calls this a non-pression. In a case in which the velocity of the strenam was three feet, and the pressure on the central hole caused the water in the vertical tube to stand 33 lines or jꝗᷓ of an inch above the level of the surrounding smooth water, the action on a hole at the lower corner of the square caused it to stand I2 lines lower than the surrounding water. Now the velocity of the stream in this experiment was 36 inches per second. This requires 214 lines for its productive fall; whereas the pressure on the central hole vas 38. This approaches to the pressure on a surface which deſlects it wholly. The intermediate holes gave every variation of pressure, and the diminution vas more rapid as the holes were nearer the edge; but the lav of diminution could not be observed. This is quite a new and most unexpeceted circumstance in the action of fluids on solid bodies, and renders the subject more intricate than ever; yet it is by no means inconsistent with the genuine principles of hydrostaties or hydraulicss In as far as M. Buats proposition concerning the pressure of moving ſluids is true, it is very reasonuble to say, that when the lateral velocity with which the fluid tends to escape exeeeds the velocity of percussion, the height necesssary ſor producing this velocity must exceed that which would produce the other, and a non-pression must he observedl. And if we consider the forms of the lateral ſilaments near the edge of the body, we see that the concavity of the curve is turned towards the body, and that the centrifugal forces tend to diminish their pressure on the body. If the middle alone were struck with a considerable velocity, the water might even rebound, as is frequently observed. This actual rebounding is here prevented hy the surrounding water, which is moving with the same velocity: but the pressure may be almost annihilated by the tendency to rebound of the inner filaments. Part (and perhaps a considerable part) of this apparent non-pression is undoubtedly produced by the tenacity oſ the water, which licks off with it the water lying in the hole But, at any rate, this is an important fact, and gives great value to these experiments. It gives a key to many curious phenomena in the resistance of fluids; and the theory of Mr Buat deserves a very serious consideration. It is all contained in the two following propositions: 1.  If by any cause whatever, a column of fluid, whether making port of an indefinite sluid, or contained in solid canals, come to move with a given velocity, the pressure which it exerted laterally before its motion, either on the adjoining fluid or on the sides of the canal, is diminished by the weight of a column having the height necessary sor communicating the velocity of the motion. 2.  The pressure on the centre of a plane surfuce, perpendiculur to the stream, and wholly immersed in it, is 7 &f the weight of a column having the height necessury Jor communicatiug the velocity. For 88 is ꝗ of 2l3 He attempted to ascertain the medium pressure on the whole surſace, by opening 625 holes dispersed all over it. With the same velocity oſ current, he found the height in the tube to be 2 lines, or 74 more than the height necessary for producing the velocity. But he justly concluded this to be too great a measure, because the holes were 4 of an inch from the edge: had there been holes at the very edge, they would have sustained a non-pression, which would have diminished the height in the tube very considerably. He exposed to the same stream a conical funnel, vhich raised the water to 34 lines. But this could not be considered as a measure of the pressure on a plane solid surface; for the central water was undoubtedly scooped out, as it were, and the filaments much more deflected than they would have been by a plane surface. Perhaps something of this happened even in every small hole in the former experiments. And this suggests some doubt as to the accuracy of the measurement of the pressure, and of the velocity oſ a current by Mr Pitots tube. It surely renders some corrections absolutely necessary. It is a faet, that when exposed to a vein of fluid coming through a short passage, the water in the tube stands on a level with that in the reservoi. Now we know that the velocity of this stream does not exceed what would be produced by a fall equal to ſꝗ of the head of water in the reservoir. Mr Buat made many valuable observations and improvements on this most useſul instrument, which will be taken notice of in the articles RtvERS and Waræ:R- WoREs. Mr Buat, by a serupulous attention to all the circumstances, concludes, that the medium of pressure on the vhole surſace is equal ꝶ of the weight oſ a column, having the surſace for its base, and the productive fall for its height. But we think that there is an uncertainty in this conclusion; because the height of the water in the vertical tube was undoubtedly augmented by an hydrostatieal pressure arising from the accumulation of water above the body, which was ex posed to the stream. Since the pressures are as the squares of the velocities, or as the heights h which produce the Jcitie we may exnoh or I.186 n, or m h, the value of m being I. 186. This exceeds considerably the results of the experiments of the French academy. In these it does not appear that m sensibly exceeds unity. Note, that in these experiments the body was moved through still water; here it is exposed to a stream. These are generally supposed to be equivalent, on the authority oſ the third law of motions We shall by and by see some causes of difference. The vriters on this subject seem to think their task completed vhen they have considered the action of the fluid on the anterior part of the body, or that part of it which is before the broadest section, and have paid little or no attention to the hinder part. Yet those vho are most interested in the subject, the naval architects, seem convinced that it is of no less importance to attend to the form of the hinder part of a ship. And the universal practice of all nations has been to make the hinder part more acute than the fore-part. This has undoubtedly been deduced from experience; ſor it is in direct opposition to any notions which a person would naturally form on this subjecet. Mr Buat therefore thought it very necessary to examine the action of the water on the hinder part of a body by the same method. And previous to this examination, in order to acquire some scientiſic notions of the subjeet, he made the following very curious and instructive experiment: To little conical pipes AB (Fig. 22.) were inserted into the upright side of a prismatic vessel. They were an inch long, and their diameters at the inner and outer ends were ſive and four lines. A was 57 lines under the surface, and B was 78. A glass syphon was made of the shape represented in the figure, and its internal diameter vas 13 lines. Tt was placed with its mouth in the axis, and even with the base oſ the conical pipee The pipes being shut, press this pressure by the symbol the vessel was ſilled with water, and it was made to stand on a level in the two legs of the syphon, the upper part being full of airr When this syphon was applied to the pipe A, and the water running freely, it rose 32 lines in the short leg, and sunk as much in the other. When it was applied to the pipe B, the water rose 41 lines in the one leg of the syphon, and sunk as much in the other. He reasons in this manner from the experiment. The ring comprehended between the end of the syphon and the sides of the conical tube being the narrowest part oſ the orifice, the water issued with the velocity corresponding to the height of the water in the vessel above the orifice, diminished for the contraction. If therefore the cylinder of water immediately before the mouth of the syphon issued with the same velocity, the tube would be emptied through a height equal to this HEAD OF WATER (charge.) If, on the contrary, this cylinder oſ water, immediately before the mouth of the syphon, vere stagnant, the water in it would exert its full pressure on the mouth of the syphon, and the vater in the syphon would be level with the water in the vessel. Between these extremes we must find the real state of the case, and we must measure the foree of non-pressure by the rise of the water in the syphon. We see that in both experiments it bears an accurate proportion to the depth under the surfacee For 57: 7T / 82: 41 very nearly. He thereſore estimates the non-pressure to be ſ; of the height of the water above the oriſice. We are disposed to think that the ingenious author has not reasoned accurately from the experiment. In the first place, the force indicated by the experiment, whatever be its origin, is certainly double of what he supposes; for it must be measured by the sum of the rise of the water in one leg, and its depression in the other, the weight of the air in the bend of the syphon being neglected. It is precisely analogous to the force acting on the water oscillating 6 in a syphon, which is acknowledged to be the sum oſ the elevation and depression. The foroe indicated by the experiment therefore is ;45 oſ the height of the water above the orificee The force exhibited in this experiment hears a still greater proportion to the produetive height; ſor ĩt is certain that the water did not issue with the velocity aequired by the fall from the surſace, and probably did not exceed ĩ oſ it. The eſfect of contraction must have been considerable and uncertaim. The velocity should have been measured both by the amplitude of the jet and by the quantity of water discharged. In the next place, we apprehend that much of the effet is produced by the tenacity of the water, which drags along with it the vater which would have slowly issued ſrom the syphon, had the other end not dipped into the water oſ the vessel. We know, that if the horizontal part of the syphon had been continued ſar enough, and if no retardation were occasioned by ſrietion, the column of water in the upright leg would have accelerated like any heavy body; and when the last of it had arrived at the bottom of that leg, the vhole in the horizontal part would be moving vith the velocity acquired by falling from the surfacee The water of the vessel whieh issues through the surrounding ring very quickly, acquires a much greater velocity than what the water descending in the syphon would acquire in the same time, and it drags this last water along with it both by tenacity and friction, and it drags it out till its aetion is opposed by the want of equilibrium produced in the syphon, by the elevation in the one leg and the depression in the othe. We imagine that little can be coneluded ſrom the experiment with respect to the real non-pressure Nay, iſ the sides of the syphon be supposed inſinitely thin, o that there would he no curvature of the ſilaments of the surrounding vater at the mouth of the syphon, we do not very distinetly see any source of non-pressure: For ve are not altogether satisſied with the proof which Mr Buat oſfers for this measure of the pressure of a stream of fluid gliding along a surface, and obstructed by friction or uny other cause. We imagine that passing water in the present experiment would be a little retarded by accelerating continually the water descending in the syphon, and renewed a-top, supposing the upper end open; because this water would not of itselſ acquire more than half this veloeity. It however drags it out, till it not only resists with a forcœ equal to the weight oſ the whole vertical column, but even exceeds it by /'ſ. This it is able to do, because the whole pressure by which the water issues from an oriſice has been shown (by Daniel Bernoulli) to be equal to twiee this weight. We therefore consider this beautiful experiment as chieſly valuable, by giving us a measure oſ the tenacity of the water; and we wish that it were repeated in a variety of depths, in order to discover what relation the force exerted bears to the depth. It would seem that the tenacity, being a certain determinate thing, the proportion of 1I00 to 112 would not be constant; and that the observed ratio vould be made up of two parts, one of them constant, and the other proportional to the depth under the surface. But still this experiment is intimately connected with the matter in hand; and this apparent non-pressure on the hinder part of a body exposed to a streum, from whatever causes it proceeds, does operate in the action of water on this hinder part, and must be taken into the account. We must therefore follow the Chevalier de Buat in his discussions on this subject. A prismutic body, having its prow and poop equal and parallel surſaces, and plunged horizontally into a fluid, will require a force to keep it firm in the direction of its axis precisely equal to the diſference between the real pressures exerted on its prow and poop. If the fluid is at rest, this difference will be nothing, because the opposite dead pressures of the fluid will be equal: but in a stream, there is superadded to the dead pressure L on the prow the active pressure arising from the deflections of the filaments of this fluid. If the dead pressure on the poop remained in its full intensity by the perfect stagnation of the water behind it, the whole sensible pressure on the body would be the active pressure only on the prow, represented by m h. If, on the other hand, we could suppose that the water behind the body moved continually away from it (being renewed laterally) with the velocity of the stream, the dead pressure would be entirely removed ſrom its poop, and the whole sensible pressure, or what must be opposed by some external force, vould be m h-+h. Neither of these can happen; and the real state of the case must be between these extremes. The following experiments were tried: The perforated box vith its vertical tube was exposed to the stream, the brass plate being turned down the stream. The velocity as again 6 inches per second. The central hole A alone being opened, gave a nonpressure of - - 13 lines. A hole B, j oſ an inch from the edge, gave 15 A hole C near the surface - 15.7 A hole D, at the lower angle - 15.3 Here it appears that there is a very considerable nonpressure, increasing from the centre to the borde. This increase undoubtedly proceeds from the greater lateral velocity with which the water is gliding in from the sides. The vater behind was by no means stagnant, although moving oſf with a much smaller velocity than that oſ the passing stream, and it was visibly removed from the sides, and gradually licked avay at its further extremity. Another box, having a greater number of holes, all open, indicated a medium of non-pressure equal to 183 lines. Another of larger dimensions, but having ſewer holes, indicated a non-pressure of 12. But the most remarkable, and the most important phenomena, vere the following: The first box was ſixed to the side oſf another box, so that, when all was made smooth, it made a perfect cube, of which the perforated brass plate made the poop. The apparatus being now exposed on the stream, with the perforated plate looking down the stream, The hole A indicated a non-impression-æT2 B - - - 8 . C i i i i 6 Here was a great diminution of the non-pressions produced by the distance beteen the prow and the poop. This box was then fitted in the same manner, s0 as to make the poop of a box three feet long. In this situation the non- pressures were as follow: Hole A . - - L.5 B - - - - 8.29 The non-pressions were still farther diminished by this increase of length. The box was then exposed with all the holes open, in three different situations: Ist, Single, giving a non- pressure - 18.1 2d, Making the poop of a eube - - 5.8 d, Making the poop of a box three ſeet long 8.0 Another larger box: Ist, Single - - - 122 2d, Poop of a cube - - - 5. d, Poop of the long box - - 8.2 These are most valuable experiments. They plainly show how important it is to consider the action on the hinder part of the body. For the whole impulse or resistance, which must be withstood or overcome by the external force, is the sum oſ the active pressure on the forepart, and of the non-pressure on the hiMer-part; and they show that this does not depend solely on the form of the prow and poop, but also, and perhaps chieſly, on the length of the body. We see that the non-pressure on the hinder- part was prodigiously diminished (reduced to onefourth) by making the length of the body triple oſ the breadth. And hence it appears, that merely lengthening a ship, without making any change in the form either of her prow or her poop, will greatly diminish the resistance to her motion through the water; and this increase of length may be made by continuing the ſorm of the midship frame in several timbers along the keel, by which the capacity of the ship, and her power oſ carrying sail, will be greatly increased, and her other qualities improved, while her speed is augmented. It is surely of importance to consider a little the physical cause of this change. The motions are extremely complicated, and we must be contented if we ean but pereeive a few leading circumstances. The vater is turned aside by the anterior part of the body, and the velocity oſ the filaments is increased, and they nequire a divergent motion, by which they also push aside the surrounding vater. On each side of the hody, thereſore, they are moving in a divergent direction, and vith an incrensed velocity. But as they are on all sides pressed by the fluid without them, their motions gradually approach parallelism, and their velocities to an equality vith the stream. The progressive velocity, or that in the direction of the stream, is checked, at least at first But since we observe the filaments constipated round the hody, and that they are not deflected at right angles to their former direction, it is plain that the real velocity oſ a filament in its oblique path is augmented. We always observe, that a stone lying in the sand, and exposed to the wash of the sea, is laid bare at the bottom, and the sand is generally vashed avay to some distance all round. This is oving to the increased velocity of the water which comes into contact with the stone. It takes up more sand than it can keep floating, and it deposites it at a little distance all around, forming a little bank, which surrounds the stone at a small distance: When the filuments of water have passed the body, they are pressed by the amhient fluid into the place which it has quitted, and they glide round its stern, and fill up the space behind. The more divergent and the more rapid they are, when about to fall in behind, the more of the circumambient pressure must be employed to turn them into the trough behind the body, and less oſ it will remain to press them to the body itself. The extreme of this must obtain when the stream is obstrueted by a thin plane only. But when there is some distance between the prow and the poop, the divergency of the filaments which had been turned aside by the prow is diminished by the time that they have ecome abreast of the stern, and should turn in behind it. They are therefore more readily made to converge behind the body, and a more considerable part of the surrounding pressure remains unexpended, and therefore presses the water against the stern; and it is evident that this advantage must be 30 much the greater as the body is longer But the advantage vill soon be susceptible oſ no very considerable increase: for the lateral, and divergent, and aceelerated filaments, will so0on become so nearly parallel and equally rapid with the rest of the stream, that a great increase of length ill not make any considerable change in these particulars; and it must be accompanied with an increase oſ friction. These are very obvious reflectionss And if we attend minutely to the way in which the almost stagnant fluid behind the body is expended and renewed, we shall see all these effects confirmed and augmented. But as we cannot say any thing on this subjeet that is precise, or that can be made the subject of computation, it is needless to enter into a more minute discussion. The diminution oſ the non-pressure towards the eentre most probably arises from the smaller force which is necessary to be expended in the inflection of the lateral filaments, already infleeted in some degree, and having their velocity diminished. But it is a subject highly deserving the attention of the mathematicians; and we presume to invite them o the study oſ the motions of these lateral filaments, passing the hody, and pressed into its wake by forces which are suscęptible oſ no difficult investigation. It seems highly probable, that iſ a prismatic box, with a square stern, were ſitted with an addition precisely shaped like the water which would (abstracting tenacity and frietion) have been stagnant hehind it, the quantity of non-pression would be the smallest possiblee The mathematician would surely discover circumstances vhich would furnish some maxims oſ construction for the hinder part as well as for the prow. And as his speculations on this last have not been wholly fruitless, ve may expect advantages from his attention to this part, so much neglected. In the meantime, let us attend to the deductions which Mr de Buat has made from his few experiments. When the velocity is three feet per second, requiring the productive height 21.5 lines, the heights corresponding to the non-pressure on the poop oſ a thin plane is 1441 lines (taking in several cireumstances of judicious correction, vhich we have not mentioned), that of a foot cube is 5.83, and that of a box of triple length is 3.31. Let ꝗ express the variable ratio of these to the height producing the velocity, so that  h may express the nonpressure in every case; we have, For a thin plane - - - DO.67 a cube - - - - 0.27 a box =/23 cubes - - - 0.158 It is evident that the value o  has a dependence on the proportion of the length, and the transverse section of the hody. A series of experiments on prismatic bodies showed Mr de Buat that the deviation of the filaments vas similar in similar bodies, and that this obtained even in dissimilar prisms, vhen the lengths were as the squareroots of the tranverse sections. Although therefore the experiments vere not suſſiciently numerous for deducing the precise law, it seemed not impossible to derive from them a very useſul approximation. By a dexterous comparison he ſound that if I expresses the length of the prism, and s the area oſ the transverse section, and L expresses the common logarithm of the quantity to which it is prefixed, we shall express the non-pressure pretty acI l curately by the ſormulaL (1a Hence arises an important remark, that when the height corresponding to the non-pression is greater than 4/5, and the body is little immersed in the fluid, there will be a void behind it. Thus a surface of a square inch, just immersed in a currrent of three feet per second, will have a void behind it. A foot square will be in a similar condition when the velocity is 12 feet. We must be careſul to distinguish this non-pressure from the other causes of resistance, which are always necessarily combined with it. It is superadditive to the active impression on the prow, to the staſical pressure of the accumulation a-head of the body, the statical pressure arising from the depression behind it, the effects of frietion, and the effeets of tenacity. It is indeed next to impossible to estimate them separately, and many of them are actually combined in the measures now given. Nothing can determine the pure non-pressures till we can ascertain the motions of the filaments. Mr de Buat here takes occasion to controvert the universally adopted maxim, that the pressure occasioned by a strenm of fluid on a fixed body is the same vith that on a body moving vith equal velocity in a quiescent fluid. He repeated all these experiments with the perforated box in still waterr. The general distinction was, that both the pressures and the non-pressure in this case were less, and that the odds were chiefly to be observed near the edges of the surface. The general factor of the pressure of a stream on the anterior surſace vas mæ I. I8ũ; but that on a moving hody through a still fluid is only m1 Fe observed no non-pressure even at the very edge oſ the prow, but even a sensible pressuree The pressure, ſherefore, or resistance, is more equally difſused over the surface of the prow than the impulse isſe also ſound that the resistances diminished in a less ratio than the squares of the velocities, especially in small velocities. The non-pressures increased in a greater ratio than the squares of the velocities. The ratio of the velocities to a small velocity of 2; inches per second increased geometrically, the value of q inerensed arithmetically; and we may determine ꝗ for any velocity V by this proportion L 55 vV a1 : L 92L 'm 0.5: . and qæ 45 That is, let the common logarithm of the velocity, divided by 23, be considered as a common numher; divide this common number by 2%, the quotient is q, hich must be multiplied by the productive height. The produet is the pressure. When Pitot's tube was exposed to the strenm, we had m=1I; but when it is carried through still water, m is = 1.22. When it was turned from the stream, we had 7 0.157; but when carried through still water, ꝗ is  O. 138. A remarkable experiment. When the tube was moved laterally through the water, so that the motion was in the direction of the plane of ils mouth, the non-pressure was = I. This is one of his chief arguments for his theory of non-pression. He does not give the detail of the experiment, and only inserts the result in his table. As a hody exposed to a stream deflects the fluid, heaps it up, and increases its velocity; so a body moved through l a still fluid turns it aside, causes it to swell up before it, and gives it a real motion alongside of it in the opposite direction. And as the body exposed to a stream has a quantity of fluid almost stagnant both before and behind, s0 a body moved through a still fluid carries before it and drags aſter it a quanity of fluid, which accompanies it with nearly an equal velocity. This addition to the quantity of matter in motion must make a diminution of its velocity; and this forms a very considerable part oſ the observed resistance. We cannot, however, help remarking, that it would require very distinct and strong proof indeed to overturn the common opinion, which is founded on our most certain and simple conceptions of motion, and on a lav of nature to which we have never observed an exception. M. de Buat's experiments, though most judiciously contrived, and executed with scrupulous care, are by no means of this kind. They were, of absolute necessity, very complicated; and many circumstances, impossible to avoid or to appreciate, rendered the observation, or at least the comparison, of the velocities, very uncertain. We can see but two circumstances which do not admit of an easy or immediate comparison in the two states of the problem. When a body is exposed to a stream, in our eæperiments, in order to have an impulse made on it, there is a force tending to move the body backwards, independent oſ the real impulse or pressure occasioned by the deflection of the stream. We cannot have a stream except in consequence of a sloping surface. Suppose a body floating on this stream. It vill not only sail down along ith the stream, but it will sail down the stream, and will therefore go ſaster along the canal than the stream does; for it is floating on an inclined plane; and if ve examine it by the laws of hydrostatics, we shall find, that, besides its own tendeney to slide down this inclined plane, there is an odds of hydrostatical pressure, which pushes it down this plane. voL. II. La It vill thereſore go along the canal ſaster than the stream. For this acceleration depends on the diſference of pressure at the two ends, and will be more remarkable as the body is larger, and especially as it is longer. This may be distinetly observed. All floating bodies go into the stream of the river, because there they ſind the smallest obstruction to the acquisition oſ this motion along the inclined plane: and when a number of bodies are thus ſloating down the strenm, the largest and longest outstrip the rest. A log of wood floating down in this manner may be ohserved to make its way very fast among the chips and sav-dust which float alongside of it. Now when, in the course of our experiments, a body is supported against the action of the stream, and the impulse is measured by the foree employed to support it, it is plain that part of this force is employed to act against that tendency which the hody has to outstrip the stream. This does not appear in our experiment, vhen we move a body vith the velocity of this stream through still water having a horizontal surſace. The other distinguishing circumstance is, that the retardations of a stream arising from frietion are found to be nearly as the velocitie When, thereſore, a stream moving in a limited canal is checked by a body put in ĩts vay, the diminution of velocity decasioned by the ſriction oſ the stream having already produced its effect, the impulse is not affected by it; but when the body puts the still water in motion, the ſriction of the hottom produces some effect, by retarding the recess of the water. This, however, must be next to nothing. The chieſ differenee will arise from its being almost impossible to make an exact comparison of the velocities: for vhen a hody is moved against the stream, the relative velocity is the same in all the filaments. But when we expose a body to a stream, the velocity of the diſferent fila- ments is not the same; hecause it decreases ſfrom the middie of the stream io the sides. M. Buat found the total sensible resistance of a plate 12 inches square, and measured, not by the height of water in the tube of the perforated box, hut by weights aeting on the arm of a balance, having its centre 15 inches under the surface of a stream moving three feet per second, to be 19.46 pounds; that of a cube of the same dimensions was 15.22; and that oſ a prism three feet long was 13.57: and that oſ a prism six feet long was 14.27. The three first agree extremely well with the determination of m and q, by the experiments with the perſorated box. The total resistance of the last vas undoubtedly much increased by friction, and by the retrograde foree of so long a prism ſloating on an inclined stream. This last by computation is 0.223 pounds; this added to h nu + q), whieh is 13.39, gives 13.81, leaving 0.46 for the effeet of frietion. If the same resistances be computed on the supposition that the body moves in still water, in which case we have m æI, and q for a thin plate =0.433; and if ꝗ be computed ſor the lengths of the other two hodies hy the formula : =L 1.42 + we shall get for the resistances H.94; 12.22; and IL49. Hence M. Buat eoncludes, that the resistances in these two states are nearly in the ratio oſ I8 to 10. This, he thinks, will account ſor the difference observed in the experiments of difſerent authors M. Buat next endeavours to ascertain the quantity oſ vater which is made to adhere in some degree to a body vhieh is carried along through still water, or which remains nearly stagnant in the midst o a stream. He takes the sum oſ the motions in the direction of the stream, viz. the sum of the aetual motions oſ all those porticles which have lost part oſ their motion, and he divides this sum by the general velocity of the stream. The quotient is equivalent express its weight in vacuo, and iE vill be the ratio P of these veight. We shall thereſore have2 —r and I5 Let n express the sum of the fluid displaced, and the ſluid dragged along, n being a greater number than unity, to be determined by experiment. The mass in motion is no longer P+ p, but P + n ꝑ, vhile its weight in the ſluid is still J. Thereſore we must have xaP nP+) 4 P )  m4 l p A prodigious number of experiments made by M. Buat on spheres vibrating in water gives values of n, which were very constant, namely, from I.5 to 1.7; and by considering the circumstances which accompanied the variations of n (which he found to arise chieſly from the curvature of the path described by the ball), he states the mean value of the number n at 1.588. So that a sphere in motion drags along vith it about oſ its ovn bulk of fluid with a velocity equal to its own. He made similar experiments ith prisms, pyramids, and other bodies, and found a complete confirmation of his assertion, that prisms of equal lengths and sections, though dissimilar, dragged equal quantities of ſluid; that similar prisms and prisms not similar, but whose lengths were as the square root of their sections, dragged quantities proportional to their bulks. He found a general value of n for prismatic bodies, which alone may be considered as a valuable truth; namely, that n — ono; - + L.18. From all these circumstances, ve see an intimate con- say nothing suſficiently precise on the subject. Persons not accustomed to the discusions in the physico-mathematical sciences, are apt to entertain doubts or ſalse notions connected with this circumstance, which ve shall attempt to remove; and vith this we shall conclude this dissertation. If a fluid vere perſectly incompressible, and were contained in a vessel incapable of extension, it is impossible that any void could be formed behind the body; and in this case it is not very easy to see how motion could be perſormed in it. A sphere moved in such a medium eould not advance the smallest distance, unless some particles oſ the ſluid, in filling up the space left by it, moved with a velocity next to infinite. Some degree of compressibility, however small, seems necessary If this be insensible, it may be rigidly demonstrated, that an external force of compression will make no sensible change in the internal motions, or in the resistances. This indeed is not obvious, but is an immediate consequence of the quaquaversum pressure of fluids. As much as the pressure is augmented by the external compressions in one side of a body, so much is it augmented on the other side; and the same must be said of every particlee Nothing more is necessary for securing the same motions by the same partial and internal forces; and this is fully verified by experimentt. Water remains equally fluid under any compressions. In some of Sir Isaac Newton's experiments, balls of four inches diameter vere made so light as to preponderate in vater only three grains These balls descended in the same manner as they would have descended in a fluid where the resistance as equal in every part; yet, hen they were near the bottom of a vessel nine feet deep, the compres sion round them was at least 2400 times the moving force; vhereas, when near the top oſ the vessel, it was not abovæ 50 or 60 times. But in a fluid sẽnsibly compressible, or which is not con fined, a void may be leſt behind the body. Its motion may be so swift that the surrounding pressure may not suffice for ſilling up the deserted space; and, in this case, a statical pressure will be added to the resistancee This may be the case in a vessel or pond oſ water having an open surface exposed to the finite or limited pressure of the atmospheree. The question now is, whether the resistance vill be increased by an increase of external pressure ? Supposing a sphere moving near the surface of water, and another moving equally fast at four times the depth. If the motion be so sviſt that a void is formed in both cases, there is no doubt but that the sphere which moves at the greatest depth is most resisted by the pressure of the water. If there is no void in either case, then, because the quadruple depth would cause the vater to flow in with only a double velocity, it would seem that the resistance would be greater; and indeed the water flowing in laterally with a double velocity produces a quadruple non-pressureDBut, on the other hand, the pressure at a small depth may be insuſficient for preventing a void, while that below effectually prevents it; and this was observed in some experiments oſ Chevalier de Borda. The effect, therefore, of greater immersion, or of greater compression, in an elastic fluid, does not ſollow a precise ratio of the pressure, but depends partly on absolute quantities. It cannot, therefore, be stated by any very simple formula what increase or diminution of resistance will result from a greater depth; and it is chieſly on this account that experiments made with models of ships and mills are not conclusive vith respect to the performance of a large machine of the same proportions, without corrections, sometimes pretty intricate. We assert, however, vith great confidence, that this is of all methods the most exact, and infinitely more certain than any thing that can be deduced from the most elaborate calculation from theory. If the resistances at all depths be equal, the proportionality of the total resistance to the body is exact, and perſectly conformable to observation. It is only in great velocities vhere the depth has any material influence, and the influence is not near so0 considerable as ve should, at first sight, suppose; for, in estimating the effect of immersion, which has a relation to the difference of pressure, we must always take in the pressure of the atmosphere; and thus the pressure at 3 feet deep is not 83 times the pressure at one foot deep, but only double, or twice as great. The atmospheric pressure is omitted only when the resisted plane is at the very surfacee D'Ulloa, in his Examino Maritimo, has introduced an equation expressing this relation; but, except with very limited conditions, it will mislead us prodigiously To give a general notion of its foundation, let AB (Fig. 23.) be the section of a plane moving through a fluid in the direction CD, with a known velocity. The fluid will be heaped up before it above its natural level CD, because the water will not be pushed before it like a solid body, but will be pushed asidee And it cannot acquire a lateral motion any other way than by an accumulation, which will diffuse itself in all directions by the law of undulatory motion. The water will also be left lower behind the plane, because time must elapse beſore the pressure of the water behind can make it fill the space. We may acquire some notion of the extent of both the accumulation and depression in this vay. There is a certain depth CF & where v is the velocity, and o the ac celerating pover of gravity) under the surface, such that water would flow through a hole at F vith the velocity of the planes motion. Drav a horizontal line FG. The water will certainly touch the plane in G, and ve may suppose that it touches it no higher up. Therefore there vill be a hollow, such as CGE. The elevation HE ill be regulated by considerations nearly similar. ED must be equal to the velocity of the plane, aud HE must be its productive height. Thus, if the velocity of the plane be one foot per second, HE and EG vill be ; oſ an inch. This is suſficient (though not exact) for giving us a notion of the thing. We see that from this must arise a pressure in the direction DC, viz. the pressure of the whole column HG. Something of the same kind vill happen although the plane AB be wholly immerged, and this even to some depth. We see such elevations in a sviſt running stream, vhere there are large stones at the bottom.This oceasions an excess of pressure in the direction opposite to the planes motion; and ve see that there must, in every case, be a relation between the velocity and this excess oſ pressure. This DUlloa expresses by an equation. But it is very exceptionable, not taing properly into the account the comparative facility with which the water can heap up and diffuse itself. It must always heap up till it acquires a suſficient head of water to produce a lateral and progressive diffusion suſficient for the purpose. It is evident, that a smaller elevation will suffice when the body is more immersed, because the check or impulse given by the body below is propagated, not vertically only, but in every direction; and thereſore the elevation is not confined to that part of the surſace which is immediately above the moving body, but extends so much further laterally as the centre of agitation is deeper: Thus, the elevation necessary for the passage of the body is so much smaller; and it is the height only of this accumulation or wvave which determines the backward pressure on the body. D'Ulloa's equation may happen to quadrate with two experiments at diſferent depths, without being nearly just; ſor any tuo points may be in a curve, without exhibiting its equation. Three points vill do it with some approach to precision; but four, at least, are necessary for giving any notion of its nature. DUlloa has only given two experiments, which we mentioned in another place. We may here observe, that it is this circumstance which immediately produces the great resistance to the motion of a body through a ſluid in a narrow canalThe fluid can- not pass the body, unless the area of the section be suſficiently extensivee A narrow canal prevents the extension sidewisee. The water must therefore heap up, till the sætion and velocity of diffusion are suſficiently enlarged, and thus a great backward pressure is produced. (See the oond series of Experiments by the French Academicians; see also Franklin's Essays). TnUS have we attempted o give our readers some account oſ one of the most interesting problems in the whole of mechanical philosophy. We are sorry that 0 little advantage can be derived from the united efforts of the first mathematicians oſf Europe, and that there is so little hope of greatly improving our scientific knowledge of the subject. What we have delivered will, however, enable our readers to peruse the writings of those vho have applied the theories to practical purposes. Such, for instance, are the treatises of John Bernoulli, of Bougner, and of Euler, on the construetion and working of ships, and the occasional dissertations of different authors on water-mills In this last application the ordinary theory is not without its value, for the impulses are nearly perpendicular; in which case they do not materially deviate from the duplicate proportion of the sine oſ incidence. But even here this theory, applied as it commonly is, misleads us exceedingly. The impulse on one float may be accurately enough stated by it; but the authors have not been attentive to the motion of the water aſter it has made its impulse; and the impulse on the next float is stated the same as if the parallel filaments of water, which were not stopped by the preceding float, did impinge on the opposite part of the second, in the same manner, and vith the same obliquity and energy, as if it were detached from the rest. But this does not in the least resemble the real process of nature. Suppose the floats B, C, D, H (Fig. 24.) of a wheel immersed in a stream whose surſace moves in the direetion AK, and that this surſface meets the float B in E. The part BE alone is supposed to be impelled; whereas the water, checked by the float, heaps up on it to eThen draving the horizontal line BF, the part CF of the next float is supposed to be all that is impelled by the parallel filaments of the stream; whereas the water bends round the lower edge of the ſloat B by the surrounding pressure, and rises on the ſloat c all the way to 7 In like manner, the float D, instead of receiving an impulse on the very small portion DG, is impelled all the way from D to g, not much below the surface of the stresm. The surſaces impelled at once, thereſore, greatly exceed what this slovenly application of the theory supposes, and the whole impulse is much greater; but this is a fault in the application, and not in the theory. RIV E R, Is a current of fresh water, flowing in a BED or CHANNEL, from its source to the sea. I. The term is appropriated to a considerable colleetion of waters, formed by the conflux of two or more Brooxs, which deliver into its channel the united streams of several RivuLETS, which have collected the supplies of many RiLLs trickling down from numberless springs, and the torrents which carry off from the sloping grounds the surplus oſ every shower. 2. Rivers form one of the chief features of the surface of this globe, serving as voiders oſ all that is immediately redundant in our rains and springs, and also as boundaries and barriers, and even as highways, and in many countries, as plentiful storehousess. They also fertilize our soil by laying upon our warm fields the richest mould, brought ſrom the high mountains, where it would have remained useless ſor vant of genial heat. 3S. Being such interesting objects of attention, every branch acquires a proper name, and the whole acquires a sort of personal identity, of which it is ſrequently diſficult to find the principle; for the name of the great body of waters which discharges itself into the sea is traced backwards to one of the sources, while all the contributing streams are lost, although their waters form the chief part of the collection. And sometimes the feeder in which the name is preserved is smaller than others which are united to the current, and which, like a rich but ignoble alliance, lose their name in that oſ the more illustrious family. Some rivers indeed are respectable even at their birth, coming at once in force from some great lake. Such is the Rio de la Plata, the river St Laurence, and the mighty streams vhich issue in all directions from the Baical lake But, like the sons of Adam, they are all oſ equal descent, and should take their name from one of the feeders oſ these lakes. This is indeed the case with a few, such as the Rhone, the Rhine, the Nile These, aſter having mixed their waters with those of the lake, resume their appearance and their name at its outset. 4. But in general their origin and progress, and even the features of their character, bear some resemblance (as has been prettily observed by Pliny) to the life of man. The river springs from the earth; but its origin is in heaven. Its beginnings are insigniſicant, and its infancy is frivolous; it plays among the flowers oſ a meadow; it waters a garden, or turns a little mil. Gathering strength in its youth, it becomes wild and impetuous. Impatient of the restraints which it still meets with in the hollows among the mountains, it is restless and fretful; quick in its turnings, and unsteady in its course. Now it is a roaring cataract, tearing up and overturning whatever opposes its progress, and it shoots headlong down from a rock; then it becomes a sullen and gloomy pool, buried in the bottom of a glenn. Recovering breath by repose, it agnin dashes along, till, tired of the uproar and mischief, it quits all that it has swept along, and leaves the opening of the valley strewed with the rejected waste. Now, quitting its retirement, it comes abroad into the world, journeying with more prudence and diseretion through cultivated fields, yielding to circumstances, and winding round what would trouble it to overwhelm or remove. It passes through the populous cities and all the busy haunts of man, tendering its services on every side, and becomes the support and ornament of the country. Now increased by numerous alliances, and advanced in its course oſ existence, it becomes grave and stately in its motions, loves peace and quiet; and 5 in majestic silence rolls on its mighty waters, till ĩt is laid to rest in the vast abyss. The phiſosopher, the real lover of wisdom, sees much to admire in the economy and mechanism of running waters; and there are few operations of nature which give him more opportunities of remarking the nice adjustment oſ the most simple means for attaining many purposes of most extensive beneficence. All mankind seem to have felt this The heart of man is ever open (unless perverted by the habits of selfish indulgence and arrogant slf-concœit) to impressions of gratitude and lovee He who aseribes the religious principle (debased though it be by the humbling abuses oſ superstition) to the workings oſ fear alone, may betray the slavish meanness of his own mind, but gives a very unſuir and a false picture of the hearts of his neighbours. Lucretius was but half a philosopher vhen he penned his often-quoted apothegm. Indeed his own invoeations show how much the animal was blended vith the sage. We apprehend, that whoever vill read with an honest and candid mind, unbiassed by licentious wishes, the accounts of the ancient superstitions, will acknowledge that the amiable emotions of the human soul have had their share in creating the numerous divinities vhose worship filled up their ealendars. The sun and ſhe host of heaven have in all ages and nations been the objects of a sincere worship. Next to them, the rivers seem to have attracted the grateful acknowledgments oſ the inhabitants of the adjacent countries. They have everywhere been considered a sort of tutelar divinities; and each little distriet, every retired valley, had its river god, vho was preſerred to all others vith a partial fondness. The expostulation of Naaman the Syrian, vho was offended with the prophet for enjoining him to wash in the river Jordan, vas the natural effusion oſ this attachment.  What (said he), are not Abana and Pharphat, rivers o?f Damascus, more excellent than all the to heaven for the * early and the latter rains, without which all their labours are ſruitless. extrema per illos Numenque excedens terris vestigia fecil. And among the husbandmen and the shepherds of all nations and ages, we ſfind the same ſond attachment to their springs and rivulets. Fortunate senex, hic inter flumina nota Et fontes sacros ſrigus captabis opacum, was the mournful ejaculation of poor Melibœus. We hardly know a river of any note in our own eountry whose source is not looked on with some respect. We repeat our assertion, that this worship was the oſspring of affection and gratitude, and that it is giving a very unfair and false picture of the human mind to aseribe these superstitions to the working of fear alone. These would have represented the river-gods as seated on ruins, brandishing rooted-up trees, with angry looks, pouring out their sweeping torrentss. But no such thingg. The lively imagination of the Greeks felt, and expressed with an energy unknown to all other nations, every emotion of the human soul. They figured the Naiads as beautiful nymphs, patterns of gentleness and oſ elegancee They are represented as partially attached to the children of men; and their interference in human affairs is always in acts of kind assistance and protection. They resemble, in this respect, the rural deities of the northern nations, the fairies, but vithout their caprices and resentmentss And, if we attend to the descriptions and representations of their RivER-Gobs, beings armed with power, an attribute which slavish fear never ſails to couple with cruelty and vengeance, we find the same expression of affectionate trust and confidence in their kind dispositions. They are generally called by the respectable but endearing name of suther.  Da Tyberi VOL. II. 25 pater, says Virgi. Mr Bruce says that the Nile at its source is called the abay or è father.We observe this word, or its radix, blended with many names of rivers of the east; and think it probable, that when our traveller got this name from the inhabitants of the neighbourhood, they applied to the stream what is meant to express the tutelar or presiding spiritt. The river-gods are always represented as venerable old men, to indicate their being coeval vith the world. But it is always a cruda viridisque senectus, and they are never represented as oppressed with age and decrepitudee. Their beards are long and flowing, their looks placid, their attitude easy, reclined on a bank, covered as they are crowned, with never-fading sedges and bulrushes, and leaning on their urns, from which they pour out their plentiful and fertilizing streamsMr Bruce's description of the sources of the Nile, and of the respect paid to the sacred waters, has not a frowning feature; and the hospituble old man, vith his fair daughter Irepone, and the gentle priesthood which peopled the little village of Geesh, forms a contrast with the neighbouring Galla (among vhom a military leader was called the Iumb, because he did not murder pregnant vomen), which very distinctly paints the inspiring principle oſ this superstitionn. Pliny says (viii. 8.) that at the source of the Clitumnus there is an ancient temple highly respected. The presence and the power of the Divinity are expressed by the fates which stand in the vestibulee Around this temple are several little chapels, each oſ which covers a sacred fountain; for the Clitumnus is the ſather of several little rivers which unite their streams vith him. At some distance below the temple is a bridge which divides the sacred waters from those which are open to common use. No one must presume to set his foot in the streams above this bridge; and to step over any of them is an indignity which renders a person infamous. They can only be visited in a consecrated boatt. Below the bridge we are permitted to bathe, and the place is in- cessantly occupied by the neighbouring villagerss. (See als0 Vibius Sequestr. Orbelini, p. 101108, and 221223; also Sueton. Caligula, c. 43; Virg. Georg. II. 146.) What is the cause oſ all this? The Clitumnus ſlows (near its source) through the richest pastures, through which it was earefully distributed by numberless drains; and these nourished cattle of such spotless whiteness and extraordinary beauty, that they were sought ſor with eagerness over all Italy, as the most acceptable vietims in their sacriſices. Is not this superstition then an effusion of gratitude? Such are the dictates of kind-hearted nature in our breasts, before it has been vitiated by vanity and self-conceit, and we should not be ashamed of feeling the impression. We hardly think of making any apology for dvelling a little on this incidental cire umstance of the superstitious veneration paid to riverss. We cannot think that our readers will be displeased at having agreeable ideas excited in their minds, being always of opinion that the toreh of true philosophy will not only enlighten the understanding, but also wvarm and cherish the affections of the heart. With respect to the origin oſ rivers, ve have very little to offer in this place. It is obvious to every person, that besides the torrents which carry down into the rivers what part oſ the rains and melted snows is not absorbed by the soil, or taken up by the plants which cover the earth, they are fed either immediately or remotely by the springs. A fev remarkable streams rush at once out of the earth in force, and must be considered as the continuation oſ subterraneous rivers, hose origin we are thereſore to seek out; and ve do not know any circumstance in which their first beginnings diſfer ſrom those of other rivers, which are formed by the union of little streams and rills, each of which has its own source in a spring or ſountain. This question, therefore, What is the process oſ nature, and l from the same head, and with a steeper and shorter course find their way to the sea through valleys of less breadth and length. On the west side oſ the valleys oſ the Rhine and the Rhone the ground rises pretty ſast, so that few tributary streams come into them from that side; and from this gentle elevation France slopes to the westward. If a line nearly straight, but bending a little to the northward, be dravn from the head of Savoy and Svitzerland all the way to Solikamskoy in Siberia, it will nearly pass through the most elevated part of Europe; for in this tract most oſ the rivers have their rise On the leſt go oſf the various feeders of the Elbe, the Oder, the Wesel, the Niemen, the DuDna, the Neva, the Dvina, the Petzora. On the right, aſter passing the feeders of the Danube, ve see the sources of the Sereth and Pruth, the Dniester, the Bog, the Dnieper, the Don, and the mighty Volga. The elevation, however, is extremely moderãte; and it appears ſrom the levels taken vith the barometer by the Abbè Chappe d' Auteroche, that the head of the Volga is not more than 470 feet above the surface of the ocean. And we may observe here by the bye, that its mouth, where it discharges its waters into the Caspian Sea, is undoubtedly lower, by many ſeet, than the surſace o the oceann See PNEUMATIOS, vol. iii Spain and Finland, vith Lapland, Norway, and Sweden, form two detached parts, which have little symmetry with the rest of Europe. A chain oſf mountains begins in Nova Zembla, and stretches due south to near the Caspian Sea, dividing Europe from Asi. About three or ſour degrees north of the Caspian Sea, it bends to the south-east, traverses western Tartary, and passing between the Tengis and Zaizan lakes, it then branches to the east and south. The eastern branch runs to the shores of Korea and Kamtschatka. The southern branch traverses Turkestan and Thibet, separating them from India, and at the head of the kingdom of Ava joins an arm stretching ſrom the great eastern to the north. On the other side we have the great river Amur, and many smaller rivers, vhose names are not familiar. The Hoangho, the great river of China, rises on the south side of the great eastern ridge we have ), oſten mentionedc This elevation, which is a continuation of the former, is somewhat of the same complexion, being very sandy, and at present is a desert oſ prodigious extent. It is described, however, as interspersed with vast tracts of rich pasture; and we know that it was formerly the residence of a great nation, vho came south by the name of Turks, and possessed themselves of most of the richest kingdoms of Asia. In the south-western extremity of this country are found remains not only of barbaric magniſicence, but even of cultivation and elegance It was a profitable privilege granted by Peter the Great to some adventurers to search these sandy deserts for remains of former opulence, and many pieces of delicate workmanship, (though not in a style which we would admire) in gold and silver, were found. Vaults were ſound buried in the sand filled with written papers, in a character wholly unknown; and a vall was discovered extending several miles, built with hewn stone, and ornamented with corniche and battlements. But we are forgetting ourselves, and return to the consideration of the distribution of the rivers on the surface of the earth. A great ridge of mountains begins at the south-east corner of the Euxine Sea, and proceeds eastward, ranging along the south side of the, Caspian, and still advancing, unites with jthe mountains first mentioned in Thibet, sending off some branches to the south, which divide Persia, India, and Thibet. From the south side of this ridge flow the Euphrates, Tigris, Indus, Ganges, &e. and from the north the ancient Oxus and many unknown streams. There is a remarkable circumstance in this quarter of the globe. Although it seems to be nearest to the greatest elevations, it seems also to have places of the greatest down from Senaar to the cataraets of Syene in a boat, and that it is navigable for boats far above Sennaar. He came from Syene to Cairo by water. We apprehend that no boat would venture down a stream moving even six feet in a second, and none could row up if the velocity was three feett. As the waters begin to decrease about the I0th of September, ve must conclude that the water then ſlowing past Cairo had leſt Abyssinia vhen the rains had greatly abatedl. Judging in this way, ve must still allow the strenm a velocity oſ more than six feet. Had the first swell at Cairo been noticed in 1770 or 1771, we might have guessed better. The year that Thevenot was in Egypt, the first swell of 8 peeks was observed January 28. The calish was opened for 14 peeks on August 14th, and the waters began to decrease on September 23d, having risen to 213 peekss We may suppose a similar progress at Cairo corresponding to Mr Bruces observations at Gondar, and date every thing five days earlier. We understand that some of our gentlemen stationed far up the Ganges have had the curiosity to take notes oſ the swellings oſ that river, and compare them vith the overſlowings at Calcutta, and that their observations are about to be made public. Such accounts are valuable additions to our practical knowledge, and we shall not neglect to insert the information in some kindred article of this work. The same mountains which attract the tropical vapours, and produce the fertilising inundations oſ the Nile, perform the same oſfice to the ſamous Niger, whose existence has oſten been accounted ſabulous, and with whose courseæ vwe have very little acquaintancee. The researches of the gentlemen of the African association render its existence no longer doubtſul, and have greatly excited the publie curiosity. For a farther account of its track, see NięEꝶE. From the great number, and the very moderate size, of the rivers which ſall into the Atlantic Ocean all the way south of the Gambia, we conclude that the western shore is the most elevated, and that the mountains are at no great distance inland. On the other hand, the rivers at Melinda and Soſala are of a magnitude which indicate a much longer coursee But of all this we speak with much uncertainty. The frame-work (so to call it) of America is better known, and is singular. A chain of mountains begins, or at least is found, in longitude 110° west of London, and latitude 4° north, on the northern confines of the kingdom of Mexico, and stretching southward through that kingdom, forms the ridge of the neck of land which separates North from South America, and keeping almost close to the shore, ranges along the whole western coast of South America, terminating at Cape Horn. In its course it sends off branches, which, aſter sepurating from it for a few leagues, rejoin it again, enclosing valleys of great extent ſrom north to south, and of prodigious elevationn. In one of these, under the equatorial sun, stands the city oſ Quito, in the midst of extensive fields of barley, oats, heat, and gardens, containing apples, pears, and gooseberries, and, in short, all the grains and ſruits of the cooler parts of Europe; and although the vine is also there in perfection, the olive is wanting. Not a dozen miles from it in the low countries, the sugar-cane, the indigo, and all the ſruits oſ the torrid zone, find their congenial heat, and the inhabitants swelter under a burning sun. At as small a distance on the other hand, tower aloſt the pinnacles of Pichincha, Corambourou, and Chimboracò, erowned with never- melting snOWS. The individual mountains oſ this stupendous range not only exceed in height all others in the world (if we except the Peak of Teneriffe, Mount tna, and Mount Blanc), but they are set down on a base incomparably more elevated than any other country. They cut off thereſore all communication between the Pacific Ocean and the inland continent; and no rivers are to be found on the west coast of South America which have any considerable length of course or body of waterss The country is drained like Africa, in the opposite directionn. Not 100 miles from the city of Lima, the eapital of Peru, which lies almost on the sea shore, and just at the foot of the high Cordilleras, arises out of a small lake the Maragnon or Amazon's river, which, aſter running northward for about I00 miles, takes an easterly direction, and crosses nearly the broadest part oſ South America, and ſalls into the great western ocean at Para, aſter a course of not less than 8500 miless. In the first halſ of its descent it receives a ſew middle-sized rivers from the north, and from the south it receives the great river Combos, springing ſrom another little lake not 50 miles distant from the head of the Maragnon, and enclosing between them a wide extent of country Then it receives the Yuta, the Yuerva, the Cuchivara, and Parana Mire, each of which is equal to the Rhine; and then the Madeira, vhich has ſflowed above I300 miless At their junction the breadth is so great, that neither shore can be seen by a person standing up in a eanoe; so that the united stream must be about six miles broad. In this majestic form it rolls along at a prodigious rate through a flat country, covered with impenetrable forests, and most of it as yet untrodden by human feet. Mr Condamine, who came down the stream, says, that all is silent as the desert, and the wild beasts and numberless birds crowd round the boat, eyeing it as some animal of which they did not seem afraidc. The bed was cut deep through an equal and yielding soil, which seemed rich in every part, if he could judge by the vegetation, which was rank in the extreme. What an addition this to the possible population of this globe A narrow slip along each bank of this mighty river would equal in surſace the whole of Europe, and would probably exceed it in general fertility: 'and although had only to compute the time of high water at a particular spot, on the day he observed it at another; allowing, as usual, for the moons change of position. The result of his observations thereſore was, that the surface of the river was not an inclined plane vhose slope was lessened by the tide of flood at the mouth of the river, but that it vas a waving line, and that the propagation of the tide up the river was nothing different from the propagation of any other wave. We may conceive it clearly, though imperfſectly, in this way. Let the place be noted where the tide happens 12 hours later than at the mouth of the river. It is evident that there is also a tide at the very mouth at the same instant; and, since the ocean tide had withdrawn itself during the time that the former tide had proceeded so far up the river, and the tide of ebb is successively felt above as well as the tide of flood, there must be a low water between these two high waters. Nevton had pointed out this curious fact, and observed that the tide at London- Bridge, which is 4 feet above the sen, is not the same vith that at Gravesend, but the preceding tide (8ee Phil. Trans. 67.) This will be more particularly insisted on in another place. Not ſar from the head of the Maragnon, the Cordilleras send off a branch to the north-east, vhich reaches and ranges along the shore oſ the Mexican Gulf, and the Rio Grande de Sta Martha occupies the angle between the ridges. Another ridge ranges with interruptions along the east coast of Terra Firma, 50 that the whole waters oſ this country are collected into the Oroonoko. In like manner the north and east of Brasil are hemmed in by mountainous ridges, through which there is no considerable passage; and the ground sloping backwards, all the waters of this immense track are collected from both sides by many considerable rivers into the great river Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata, hich runs down the middle of this country for more than 1400 miles, and falls into the sea through a vast mouth in latitude 850. Thus the whole of South America seems as if it had been formerly surrounded by a mound, and been a great basin. The ground in the middle, where the Parama, the Madeira, and the Plata, take their rise, is an immense marsh uninhabitable for its exhalations, and quite impervious in its present state. The manner in which the continent of North America is watered, or rather drained, has also some peculiarities. BY looking at the map, one vill observe first of all a general division of the whole of the best known part into two, by the valleys in which the beds of the river St Laurence and Mississippi are situated. The head of this is occupied by a singular series of fresh-water seas or lakes, viz. the lake Superior and Michigan, which empty themselves into lake Huron by two cataractss. This again runs into lake Erie by the river Detroit, and the Erie pours its waters into the Ontario by the famous ſall of Niagara, and from the Ontario proceeds the great river St Laurence. i The ground to the south-west of the lakes Superior and Erie is somewhat lower, and the middle of the valley is occupied by the Mississippi and the Missouri, which receive on both sides a number of smaller streams, and having joined, proceed to the south, under the name Mississippi. In latitude 87, this river receives into its bed the Ohio, a river of equal magnitude, and the Cherokee river, which drains all the country lying at the back of the United States, separated from them by the ranges of the Apalachian mountainss The Mississippi is now one of the chief rivers on the globe, and proceeds due south, till it falls into the Mexican bay through several shifting mouths, vhich greatly resemble those of the Danube and the Nile, having run above 1200 miles. The elevated country between this hed of the Mississi ppi and St Laurence and the Atlantic Ocean is drained on the east side by a great number of rivers, some of which are very considerable, and of long course; because, instead of being nearly at right angles to the coast, as in other countries, they are in a great measure parallel to it. This is more remarkably the case with Hudsons river, the Delaare, Patomack, Rapahanoc, &e. Indeed the whole of North America seems to consist of ribs or beams laid nearly parallel to each other from north to south, and the rivers occupy the interstices. All those which empty themselves into the bay oſ Mexico are parallel and almost perfectly straight, unlike what are seen in other parts of the world. The westermost of them all, the North River, as it is named by the Spaniards, is nearly as long as the Mississippi. We are very little informed as yet of the distribution of rivers on the north-west coast oſf America, or the course of those which run into Hudson's and Baſſins Bay. The Maragnon is undoubtedly the greatest river in the world, both as to length of run and the vast body of water which it rolls along. The other great rivers succeed nearly in the following order: Maragnon, Amur, Senegal, Oroonoko, Nile, Ganges, St Laurence, Euphrates, Hoangho, Danube, Rio de la Plata, Don, Yenisey, Indus, Mississippi, Dnieper, Volga, Duina, Oby, &e. We have been much assisted in this account of the course of rivers, and their distribution over the globe, by a beautiſul planisphere, or map of the orld, published by Mr Bode, astronomer royal at Berlin. The ranges of mountains are there laid down with philosophical discernment and precision; and ve recommend it to the notice of our geographerss We oannot divine what has caused Mr Bufſfon to say that the course of most rivers is from east to west, or from west to east. No physical point of his system seems to require it, and it needs only that we look at his own map to see its falsity We should naturally expect to find the general course oſ rivers nearly perpendicular to the line oſ sea-coast; and ve find it so3 and the chief exceptions are in opposition to Mr Buſffons assertion. The structure of America is so particular, that very few of its rivers have their general course in this directionn. We proceed now to consider the motion of rivers; a subject which naturally resolves itself into two parts, theoretical and practical. Panr I. THEORY OF THE MOTION OF RIVERS AND CANALS. Tnæ importance of this subject needs no commentary Every nation, every country, every city, is interested in itt. Neither our wants, our comforts, nor our pleasures, can dispense with an ignorance of it. We must conduct their waters to the centre oſ our dvellings; ve must secure ourselves against their ravages; we must employ them to drive those machines which, by compensating for our personal weakness, make a ſew able to perform the work oſ thousands; we employ them to water and fertilize our fields, to decorate our mansions, to cleanse and embellish our cities, to preserve or extend our demesnes, to transport from county to county every thing which necessity, convenience, or luxury, has rendered precious to man: for these purposes we must confine and govern the mighty rivers, e must preserve or change the beds of the smaller streams, draw off from them what shall water our fields, drive our machines, or supply our houses. We must keep up their waters ſor the purposes of navigation, or supply their places by canals; wve must drain our fens, and defe nd them when drained; we must understand their motions, and their mode of secret, slow, but unceasing action, that our bridges, our wharſs, our dikes, may not become heaps of ruins. Ignorant how to proceed in these daily-recurring cases, how often do we see projects oſ high expectation and heavy expense ſail of their object, leaving the state burdened with works not only useless but frequently hurtful? This has long been a most interesting subject oſ study in Italy, where the ſertility of their fields is not more indebted to their rich soil and happy climate, than to their numerous derivations from the rivers which traverse them: and in Holland and Flanders, where their very existence requires unceasing attention to the waters, which are every moment ready to swallow up the inhabitants, and where the inhabitants, having once subdued this formidable enemy, have maãde those very waters their indeſatigable drudges, transporting through every corner of the country the materials of the most extensive commerce on the face of this globe. Such having been our incessant occupations with moving vaters, we should expect that while the operative artists are continually furnishing facts and experiments, the man of speculative and scientific curiosity, excited by the importance oſ the subject, would ere now have made considerable progress in the science; and that the professional engineer would be daily acting from established principle, and be seldom disappointed in his expectationss Unſortunately the reverse of this is nearly the true state of the case; each engineer is obliged to collect the greatest part of his knowledge ſrom his own experience, and by many dear- bought lessons, to direet his future operations, in which he still voL. II. . c proceeds with anxiety and hesitation: ſor we have not yet acquired principles of theory, and experiments have not yet been collected and published, by which an empirienl practice might be saſely formed. Many experiments oſ inestimable value are daily made; but they remain vith their authors, who seldom have either leisure, ability, or generosity, to add them to the public stock. The motion of waters have been really s little investigated as yet, that hydraulies may still be called a ne studly. We have merely skimmed over a few common notions concerning the motions of water; und the mathematicians of the first order seem to have contented themselves vith such views as allowed them to entertain themselves with elegant applications of calouluss This, however, has not been their fault. They rarely had any opportunity of doing more, for wunt of a knowledge of ſuetss They have made excellent use of the few which have been given them; but it required much labour, great variety of opportunity, and great expense, to learn the multiplicity of things which are combined even in the simplest cases of water in motion. These are seldom the lot of the mathematician; and he is without blame when he enjoys the pleasures within his rench, and cultivates the science oſ geometry in its most abstracted form. Here he makes a progress which is the boast of human reason, being almost ensured from error by the intellectual simplicity of his subject. But when we turn our attention to material objects, and without knowing either the size and shape of the elementary particles, or the laws which nature has preseribed for their action, presume to foresee their effects, calculate their exertions, direct their actions, what must he the eonsequence? Nature shows her independence with respoot to our notions, and, always faithful to the laws which are enjoined, and of vhich ve are ignorant, she never ſails to thwart our views, to disconcert our projects, and render useless all our efforts. To wish to know the nature of the elements is vain, and our gross organs are insufficient for the study. To suppose vhat we do not know, and to fancy shapes and sizes at will; this is to raise phantoms, and vill produce a ystem, but will not prove a foundation, for any science. But to interrogate Nature herself, study the laws which she s0 faithfully observes, catch her, as we say, in the fact, and thus wrest from her the secret; this is the only way to become her master, and it is the only procedure consistent vith good sense. And we see, that s0on aſter Kepler detected the laws of the planetary motions, vhen Galileo discovered the umform acceleration of gravity, when Paschal discovered the pressure of the atmosphere, and Newton discovered the laws of attraction and the track of a ray oſ light; astronomy, mechanics, hydrostatios, chemistry, opties, quickly beeame bodies of sound doetrine; and the deductions from their respective theories were found fair representations of the phenomena of naturee Whenever a man has discovered a law of nature, he has laid the foundation of a science, and he has given us a new mean of subjecting to our service some element hitherto independent: and so long as groups of natural operations follow a route which appears to us whimsical, and will not admit our calculations, ve may be assured that we are ignorant oſ the principle which connects them all, and regulates their procedure. This is remarkably the ease with several phenomena in the motions of fluids, and particularly in the motion of vater in a bed or conduit of any kind. Although the first geniuses of Europe have for this century past turned much of their attention to this subject, we are almost ignorant of the general laws which may be observed in their motions. We have been able to seleet very ſew points of resemblance, and every case remains nearly an individua. About 150 years ago we discovered, by experience only, the quantity and velocity of water issuing ſrom a small oriſice, and, aſ- ter much labour, have extended this to any orifice; and this is almost the whole of our confidential knowledge. But as to the uniform course of the streams which water the face of the earth, and the maxims which vill certainly regulate this agreeably to our wishes, we are in a manner totally ignorant. Who can pretend to say what is the velocity of a river of which you tell him the breadth, the depth, and the declivity? Who can say what swell ill be produced in different parts of its course, if a dam or veir of given dimensions be made in it, or a bridge be thrown across it? or how much its aters ill be raised by turning another stream into it, or sunk by taking off a branch to drive a mill? Who can say with confidence what must be the dimensions or slope of this branch, in order to furnish the water that is vanted, or the dimensions and slope of a canal which shall effectually drain a fenny distriet ? Who can say what form vill cause or will prevent the undermining of banks, the forming of elbows, the pooling of the bed, or the deposition of sands? Yet these are the most important questions. The causes oſ this ignorance are the want or uncertainty of our principles; the falsity of our only theory, which is belied by experience; and the small number of proper observations or experiments, and diſficulty of making such as shall be serviceable We have, it is true, made a few experiments on the efflux of water from small orifices, and from them we have deduced a sort of theory, dependent on the fall of heavy bodies and the laws of hydrostatic pressuree Hydrostatics is indeed founded on very simple principles, which give a very good account of the laws of the quiescent equilibrium of fluids, in consequence of gravity and perſeet ſluidity. But hy what train of reasoning can we connect these with the phenomena of the uniform motion of the waters oſ a river or open stream, which can derive its motion only from the slope of its surface, and the modiſications oſ this motion or its velocity only ſrom the i vidth and depth of the stream? These are the only circumstances which can distinguish a portion of a river from a vessel of the same siææ and shape, in which, however, the vater is at rest. In both, gravity is the sole cause of pressure and motion; but there must be some circumstance peculiar to running waters, hich modiſies the exertions of the active principle, and which, when discovered, must be the basis of hydraulics, and must oblige us to reject every theory founded on fancied hypotheses, and which can unly lead to absurd conclusions: and surely absurd consequences, vwhen legitimately drawn, are complete evidence of improper principles. When it was discovered experimentaly that the veIocities of water issuing from orifices at various depths un, der the surſace were as the square roots of those depths, and the ſact was verified by repeated experiments, this principle was immediately and without modification applied to every motion of water. Mariotte, Varignon, Guglielmini, made it the basis of complete systems of hydraulies, which prevail to this day, aſter having received various amendments and modifications. The same reasoning obtains through them all, though frequently obscured by other circumstances, which are more conspicuously expressed by Guglielmini in his Fundamental Theorems. He considers every point P (Plate IX. Fig. 1.) in a mass oſ fluid as an orifice in the side of a vessel, and conceives the particle as having a tendency to move vith the same velocity with which it would issue from the oriſice. Therefore, if a vertical line APC be drawn through that point, and if this be made the axis of a parabolic ADE, of which A at the surface of the fluid is the vertex, and AB (four times the height through which a heavy body would fall in a second) is the parameter, the velocity of this particle will be represented by the ordinate PD of this parabola; that is, PD is the space which it would uniſormly describe in a second. From this principle is derived the following theory of ruming waters: Let DC (Fig. 2.) be the horizontal bottom oſ a reservoir, 10 which is joined a sloping channel CK oſ uniform breadth, and let AB be the surface of the standing water in the reservoir. Suppose the vertical plane BC pierced ith an infinity of holes, through each of which the water issues. The velocity of each filament vill be that which is aequired by falling from the surface AB.  The filament C, issuing with this velocity, will then glide down the inclined plane like any other heavy body; and (by the common doctrine of the motion down an inclined plane) when it has arrived at F, it will have the same velocity which it would have acquired by falling through the height OF, the point O being in the horizontal plane AB produced. The same may be said of its velocity when ĩt arrives at H or K. The filament immediately above C vill also issue with a velocity which is in the subduplicate ratio of its depth, and will then glide down above the first filament. The same may be aſfirmed of all the filaments; and of the superſicial filument, which vill ocoupy the surface of the descending stream. From this acoount of the genesis of a ruming stream of water, ve may fairly drav the following consequences: I. The velocity of any particle R, in any part of the stream, is that acquired by falling from the horizontal plane AN. 2. The velocity at the bottom of the stream is everyvhere greater than anywhere above it, and is least of all at the surſace. S. The velocity of the stream increases continually as the stream recedes from its source. 4. The depths EF, GH, e. in different parts of the stream, will be nearly in the inverse subduplicate ratio of the depths under the surface AN: for since ſhe same quanlity oſ water is running through every section EF and T See Guglielmin?s Hydruulies. GH, and the channel is supposed of uniform breadth, the depth of each section must be inversely as the velocity of the water passing through it. This velocity is indeed different in different ſilaments of the section; but the mean velocity in each seotion is in the subduplicate ratio of the depth of the filament under the surſace AB. Thereſore the stream becomes more shallow as it recedes ſrom the source; and in consequence oſ this the difference between LH and MG continually diminishes, and the velocities at the bottom and surface of the stream continually approach 1o equality, and at a great distance ſrom the source they differ insensibly. 5. If the breadth of the stream be contracted in any part, the depth of the running water vill be inereased in that part, because the same quantity must still pass through; but the velocity at the bottom vill remain the same, and that at the surſace vill be less than it was before; and the area of the seetion vill be increased on the whole. 6. Should a sluice he put across the stream, dipping a little into the water, the water must immediately rise on the upper side of the sluice till it rises above the level of the reservoir, and the smallest immersion of the sluice will produce this effect. For by lowering the sluice, the area of the section is diminished, and the velocity cannot be increased till the water heap up to a greater height than the surface of the reservoir, and this acquires a pressure which vill produce a greater velocity of efſlux through the orifice leſt below the sluice. 7. An additional quantity of water coming into this channel vill increase the depth of the stream, and the quantity of water which it conveys; but it will not increase the velocity of the bottom laments, unless it comes ſrom a higher source. All these consequences are contrary to experience, and show the imperſection, at least, of the explanation. The third consequence is of all the most contrary to ex- periencee If any one vill but take the trouble of ſollowing a single brook from its source to the sea, he vill find it most rapid in its beginnings among the mountains, gradually slackening its pace as it winds among the hills and gentler declivities, and at last creeping slowly along through the flat grounds, till it is checked and brought to rest by the tides of the ocean. Nor is the second consequence more ble to observation. It is universally found, that tle velocity of the surface in the middle of the stream is the greatest of all, and that it gradually diminishes from thence to the bottom and sides. And the first consequence, if true, would render the running vwaters on the surface of this earth the instruments of immediate ruin and devastation. If the waters of our rivers, in the cultivated parts of a country, which are two, three, and four hundred feęt lower than their sources, run vith the velocity due to that height, they would in a few minutes lay the earth bare to the very bones. The velocities of our rivers, brooks, and rills, being s greatly inferior to what this theory assigns to them, the other consequences are equally contrary to experience. When a stream has its section diminished by narrowing the channel, the current increases in depth, and this is alvays accompanied by an increase oſ velocity through the whole oſf the section, and most of all at the surface; and the area oſ the section does not increase; but diminishes, all the phenomena thus contradicting in every circumstance the deduetion from the theory; and when the section has been diminished by a sluice let down into the stream, the vater gradually heaps up on the upper side of the sluice, and, by its pressure, produces an acceleration of the stream below the sluice, in the same way as if it were the beginning of a stream, as explained in the theory The velocity now is composed of the velocity preserved from the source and the velocity produced by this subordinate accumulation; and this accumulation and velocity eontinually increase, till they become such that the whole supply is again discharged through this contracted section: any additional water not only increases the quantity carried along the stream, but also increases the velocity, and therefore the section does not increase in the proportion of the quantity. It is surprising that a theory really founded on a conceit, and which in every the most familiar and obvious eircumstance is contradicted by facts, should have met ith s0 much attentionn. That Varignon should immediately cateh at this notion of Guglielmini, and make it the subject of many elaborate analytical memoirs, is not to be wondered at. This author only wanted donner prise au calcul; and it was a usual joke among the academicians of Paris, when any new theorem was invented, donnons le à Vaignon à generaliser. But his numerous theorems and corollaries were adopted by all, and still make the substance of the present systems of hydrauliess Gravesande, Mushenbrock, and all the elementary treatises of natural philosophy, deliver no other doctrines; and Belidor, who has been considered as the first of all the scientific engineers, details the same theory in his great work the Architecture Hydroulique. Guglielmini was, however, not altogether the dupe of his own ingenuity. He was not only a pretty good mathematician, but an assiduous and sagacious observerr. He had applied his theory to some important cases which occurred in the course of his profession as inspector of the rivers and camls in the Milanese, and to the course of the Danube; and could not but perceive that great corrections were necessary for making the theory quadrate in some tolerable manner with observation; and he immediately sav that the motion was greatly obstructed by inequalities of the canal, which gave to the contiguous filaments of the stream transverse motions, which thwarted and confused the re- gular progress of the rest of the stream, and thus checked its general progresss These obstructions, he observed, were most effectual in the beginning of its course, while yet a small rill, ruming among stones, and in a very unequal bed. The whole stream being small, the inequalities bore a great proportion to it, and thus the general eſfect was great. He also saw that the same causes (these tranvers] motions produced by the unequal bottom) chieſly aſfeoted the contiguous filaments, and were the reasons vhy the velocity at the sides and bottom was 50 much diminished as to be less than the superſicial velocity, and that even this might come to he diminished by the same cause For he observed, that the general stream of a river is frequently composed of a sort of boiling or tumbling motion, by which masses oſf water are brought up to the surface and again descend. Every person must recollect such appearances in the freshes of a muddy river; and in this way Guglielmini was enabled to account in some measure for the disagreement of his theory with observation. Mariotte had observed the same obstructions even in the smoothest glass pipess Here it could not be ascribed o the checks occasioned by tranverse motions He thereſore aseribed it to ſrietion, which he supposed to diminish the motion of fluid bodies in the same manner as of solids: and he thence concludes, that the filaments which immediately rub on the sides oſ the tube have their velocity gradually diminished; and that the filaments immediately adjoining to these, being thus obliged to pass over them or outstrip them, rub upon them, and have their own velocity diminished in like manner, but in a smaller degree; and that the succeeding filaments towards the axis of the tube suſfer similar but smaller diminutions By this means the vhole stream may come to have a smaller velocity; and, at any rate, the medium velocity by which the quantity discharged is determined, is smaller than it would have been independent of ſrietion. Guglielmini adopted this opinion of Mariotte, and in his next work, on the Motion of Rivers, considered this as the chigf cause of the retardation; and he added a third circumstance, vhich he considered as of no less consequence, the viscidity or tenacity oſ water. He observes that syrup, oil, and other ſiluids, where this viscidity is more remarkable, have their motions prodigiously retarded by it, and supposes that water differs from them only in the degree in which it possesses this quality: and he says, that by this means not only the particles which are moving more rapidly have their motions diminished by those in their neighbourhood which move slover, but that the ſilaments also which would have moved more slowly are acc]elerated by their more active neighbours; and that in this manner the superſicial and inferior velocities are brought nearer to an equality. But this ill never account for the universal fact, that the superficial particles are the swiſtest of al. The superſicial particles, says he, aequire by this means a greater velocity than the parabolic law allows them; the medium velocity is oſten in the middie oſ the depth; the numerous obstacles, continually multiphied and repeated, cause the current to lose the velocity acquired by the ſall; the slope of the bottom then diminishes, and often becomes very small, 50 that the force remuining is hardly able to overeome the obstacles which are still repeated, and the river is reduced almost to a state of stagnationn. He observes, that the Rheno, a river oſ the Milanese, has near ĩts mouth a slope of no more than 507, which he considers as quite inadequate to the task; and here he introduces another principle, which he considers as an essential port of the theory of open currents This is, that there arises ſrom the very depth of the stream a propelling ſorce which restores a part of the lost velocity. He offers nothing in proof of this prineiple, but uses it to account ſor and explain the motion of waters in horizontal canalss The principle has been adopted by the numerous Italian writers on hydraulies; and, by various contrivances, interwoven vith the parabolic theory, as it is called, of Guglielmini. Our reader may. see it in various modifications in the Idrostatica e Idroulica of P. Lecchi, and in the Sperienxe Idrauliche of Michelotti. It is by no means distinct either in its origin or in the manner of its application to the explanation of phenomena, and seems only to serve for giving something like consistency to the vague and obscure discussions which have been published on this subject in Italy. We have already remarked, that in that country the subject is particularly interesting, and has been much commented upon. But the writers of England, France, and Germany, have not paid so much attention to it, and have more generally occupied themselves with the motion of water in close conduits, which seem to admit oſ a more precise application of mathematical reasoning. Some of those have considered with more attention the effects of frietion and viscidity Sir Isaac Newton, with his usual penetration, had seen distinetly the manner in which it behoved these circumstances to operatee. He had occasion, in his researches into the mechanism of the celestial motions, to examine the ſfamous hypothesis of Descartes, that the planets were carried round the sun by fluid vortices, and saw that there would be no end to uncertainty and dispute till the modus operandi of these vortices was mechanically considered He therefore employed himselſ in the investigation of the manner in which the acknowledged powers of natural bodies, acting according to the received laws of mechanics, could produce and preserve these vortices, and restore that motion which was expended in carrying the planets round the sun. He therefore, in the second book of the Principles of Natural Philosophy, gives a series oſ beautiful propositions, viz. 51, 52, &e. vith their corollaries, showing how the rotation of a eylinder or sphere round its axis in the midst of a ſluid will excite a vortical motion in this fluid; and he ascertains with mathematical precision the motion of every filament of this vortex. He sets out from the supposition that this motion is excited in the surrounding stratum of fluid in consequence of a want of perfect lubricity, and assumes as an hypothesis, that the initial resistance (or diminution of the motion of the cylinder) which arises from this want oſ lubricity, is proportional to the velocity with which the surface of the cylinder is separated ſrom the contiguous surface of the surrounding fluid, and that the whole resistance is proportional to the velocity with which the parts oſ the fluid are mutually separated from each other. From this, and the equality of action and re-action, it evidently follows, that the velocity of any stratum of the vortex is the arithmetical medium between the velocities of the strata immediately within and without it. For the intermediate stratum cannot be in equilibrio, unless it is as much pressed forward by the superior motion of the stratum vithin it as it is kept back by the slower motion of the stratum vithout it. This beautiful investigation applies in the most perfect manner to every change produced in the motion of a fluid filament, in consequence oſ the viscidity and friction of the adjoining filaments; and a filament proceeding along a tube at some small distance from the sides has, in like manner, a velocity which is the medium between those of the filaments immediately surrounding it. It is thereſore a problem of no very difſficult solution to assign the law by vhich the velocity will gradually diminish as the filament recedes ſrom the axis of a eylindrical tube. It is somevhat surprising that so neat a problem has never occupied the attention oſ the mathematicians during the time that these subjects were so assiduously studied; but o it is, that nothing precise has been published on the subjeet The only approach to a discussion of this kind is a Memoir of Mr Pitot, read to the academy of Paris in 1726, where he considers the velocity of eſſlux through a pipe. Here, by attending to the comparative superiority of the quantity of motion in large pipes, he aſirms, that the total diminutions arising from ſriction will be (cæteris poribus) in the inverse ratio oſ the diameterss This was thankfully received by other riters, and is now a part of our hydraulie theories. It has not, however, been attended to by thos who rite on the motion of rivers, though it is evident that it is applicable to these with equal propriety; and had ĩt been ntroduced, it would at once have solved all their di: fieulties, and particularly would have shown how an almost imperceptible declivity would produce the gentle motion of a great river, without having recourse to the unintelligible principle oſ Guglielmini. Mr Couplet made some experiments on the motion of the water in the great main pipes of Versailles, in order to obtain some notions of the retardations occasioned by ſrietion. They were found prodigious; but were so irregular, and unsusceptible of reduetion to any general principle, (and the experiments were indeed so ſe that they vere unfit for this reduetion), that he conld establish no theoryWhat Mr Belidor established on them, and makes a sort of system to direct future engineers, is quite unvorthy of attention. Upon the whole, this branch of hydraulies, although oſ much greater practical importance than the conduct of water in pipes, has never yet obtained more than a vague, and, we may eall it, slovenly attention from the mathematicians; and we ascribe it to their not having taken the pains to settle its first principles with the same precision as had been done in the other branch. They were, from the beginning, satisfied with a sort oſ applicability of mathematieal principles, without ever making the application. Were it not that some would aceuse us of national partiality, we would ascribe it to this, that Newton had not pointed out the way in this as in the other brunch. For any intelligent reader of the performances on the motions of ſluids in close vessels, ill see that there has not a principle, nay hardly a step of investigation, been added to those which were used or pointed out by Sir Isanc Newton. He has no where touched this question, the motion of water in an open cnal. In his theories of the tides, and of the propagation of waves, he had an excellent opportunity for giving at once the fundamental principles of motion in a free fluid whose surface vas not horizontal. But, by means oſ some of those happy and shrewd guesses, in which, as Daniel Bernoulli says, he exeelled all men, he sav the undoubted consequences of some palpable phenomenon which would answer all his present purposes, and thereſore entered no farther into the investigation. The original theory of Guglielmini, or the principle adopted by him, thut each particle of the vertical section of a running strenm has a tendency to move as iſ it were issuing from an orifice at that depth under the surſace, is false; and that it really does so in the face of a dam when the flood-gate is tuken awny, is no less 50; and if it did, the subsequent motions would hardly have any resemblance to those which he assigns them. Were this the case, the exterior form of the caseade would he something like what is sketched in Plate IX. Fig. S. with an abrupt angle at B, and a concave surface BEG. This will be evident to every one who combines the greater veloeity of the lower filuaments with the slower motion of those vhich must slide down above them. But this greater advance of the lower filaments cannot take place without an expenditure of the water under the surface AB. Th surface therefore sinks, and B instantly ceases to retain its place in the horizontal plane. The water does not suecessively flow forward from A to B, and then tumble over the precipice; but immediately upon opening the flood- gate, the water wastes from the space immediately behind it, and the whole puts on the form represented in Fig. 4. consisting of the curve A a P c EG, convex from A toc, and concave from thence forvard. The superſicial water begins to accelerate all the way from A; and the particles may be supposed (for the present) to have acquired the velocity corresponding to their depth under the horizontal surface. This must be understood as nothing more than a vague sketch of the motions. It requires a very critical and intricate investigation to determine either the form of the upper curve or the motions of the different filaments. The place A, where the curvature begins, is of equally difficult determination, and is various according to the differences of depth and of inclination of the succeeding canal. We have given this sort of history of the progress which had been made in this part of hydraulies, that our readers might form some opinion of the many dissertations which have been written on the motion of rivers, and oſ the state oſ the arts depending on it. Much of the business of the civil engineer is intimately connected with it: and we may therefore believe, that since there was so little principle in the theories, there could be but very little certainty in the practical operations. The fact has been, that no engineèr could pretend to say, with any precision, hat would be the effect of his operations One whose business had given him many opportunities, and who kept accurate and judicious registers oſ his own works, could pronounce, with some probability, ho much water would be brought off by a drain of certain dimensions and a given slope, when the circumstances of the case happened to tally ith some former work in which he had succeeded or failed; but out of the pale of his owvn experience he could only make a sagacious guess. A remarkable instance oſ this occurred not long agoo. A small aqueduet was lately carried into Paris. It had been conducted on a plan presented to the academy, who had corrected it, and gave a report of what its perſormance would bee When executed in the most accurate manner, it was deficient in the proportion of five to ninee. When the celebrated Desaguliers vas employed by the city of Edinburgh to superintend the bringing in the water for the supply oſ the city, he gave a report on the plan which was to be followed. It was executed to his complete satisſaction; and the quantity of vater delivered was about one-sixth of the quantity which he promised, and about one-eleventh of the quantity which the no less celebrated M Laurin caleulated from the same plan. Such being the state of our theoretical knowledge ũſ it can be called by this name), naturalists began to be persuaded that it was but losing time to make any use of a theory so incongruous with observation, and that the only safe method of proceeding was to multiply experiments in every variety of circumstances, and to make a series of experiments in every important case, vhich should comprehend all the practicable modifications of that case. Perhaps circumstances o resemblance might occur, which would enable us to connect many of them together, and at last discover the principles which occasioned this connection; by which means a theory founded on science might be obtained. And if this point should not be gained, we might perhaps find a few general facts, which are modified in all these particular cases, in such a manner that ve can still trace the general facts, and see the part of the particular ease which depends on it. This would be the acquisition of what may be called an empirical theory, by which every phenomenon would be explained, in so far as the explanation of a phenomenon is nothing more than the pointing out the general fact or law under which it is comprehended; and this theory would answer every practical purpose, because we should confidently foresee what consequences would result from such and such premises; or, if we should ſail even in this, ve should still have a series of vOL. II. 20 experiments 50 comprehensive, that ve could tell what place in the series would correspond to any particular case vhich might be proposed. There are two gentlemen, whose labours in this respeet deserve very particular notice, professor Michelotti at Turin, and Abbò Bossut at Pariss. The first made a prodigious number of experiments both on the motion of water through pſpes and in open canals They were performed at the expense of the sovereign, and no expense was spared. A tower was built of the finest masonry, to serve as a vessel ſfrom which the water was to issue through holes oſ various sizes, under pressures from 5 to 22 feet. The water was received into basins constructed of masonry and nicely lined with stucco, from whence it was conveyed in canals of brick-work lined with stueeo, and of various ſorms and declivitie. The experiments on the expense of water through pipes are of all that have yet been made the most numerous and exact, and may be appealed to on every occasion. Those made in open canals are still more numerous, and are no doubt equally accurate; but they have not been so contrived as to be so generally useſul, being in general very unlike the important cases which will occur in practice, and they seem to have been contrived chiefly with the view of establishing or overturning cerain points of hydraulic doctrine which were probably prevalent at the tlime among the practical hydraulists. The experiments of Bossut are also oſf both kinds; and though on a much smaller scale than those oſ Michelotti, seem to deserve equal confidence. As far as they ſollo the same track, they perſectly coincide in their results, vhich should procure confidence in the other; and they are made in situations much more analogous to the usual practical cases. This makes them doubly valuable They are to be ſound in his two volumes entitled Hydrodynumique. He has opened this path of procedure in a man- ner so new and s0 judicious, that he has in some measure the merit of such as shall follow him in the same path. This has been most candidly and liberally allowed him by the chevalier de Buat, who has taken up this matter vwhere the Abbè Bossut leſt it, and has prosecuted his experiments with great assiduity; and we must now add vith singular success. By a very judicious consideration of the subject, he hit on a particular view of it, which saved him the trouble oſ a minute consideration of the small internal motions, and enabled him to proceed from a very general and evident propositicn, which may be received as the key to a complete system of practical hydraulics We shall follow this ingenious author in what we have farther to say on the subject; and we doubt not but that our readers vill think we do a service to the public by making these discussions of the chevalier de Buat more generally known in this country. It must not however be expected that we shall give more than a synoptical view of them, connected by such familiar reasoning as shall be either comprehended or confided in by persons not deeply versed in mathematical science. SuCT. LTheory of Rivers. IT is certain that the motion oſ open streams must, in some respects, resemble that of bodics sliding down inclined planes perfectly polished; and that they would accelerate continually, were they not obstructed: but they are obstructed, and frequently move uniformly. This ean* only arise from an equilibrium between the forees which promote their descent and those which oppose it. M. Buat, therefore, assumes the leading proposition, that When uater flows uniformly on any chunnel or bed, the accelerating force which obliges it to move is equal to the sum of all the resistances which it meets with, whether arising from its own viscidity, or from the friction of its bed. This lav is as old as the formation of rivers, and should be the key of hydraulic science. Its evidence is clear; and it is, at any rate, the basis of all uniform motionn. And since it is so, there must be some considerable analogy between the motion in pipes and in open channels. Both owe their origin to an inequality of pressure; both would accelerate continually, if nothing hindered; and both are reduced to uniformity by the viscidity of the fluid and the frietion of the channel. It will therefore be convenient to examine the phenomena of water moving in pipes by the action of its eight only along the sloping channel. But previous to this, e must take some notice of the obstruction to the entry of water into a channel of any kind, arising from the defletion of the many different filaments which press into the channel from the reservoir ſfrom every sidee Then we shall be able to separate this diminution of motion from the sum total that is observed, and ascertain what part remains as produced by the subsequent obstructions. We then shall consider the principle of uniform motion, the equilibrium between the power and the resistance. The power is the relative height oſ the column of fluid vhich tends to move along the inclined plane of its bed; the resistance is the friction of the bed, the viscidity of the fluid, and its adhesion to the sides Here are necessarily combined a number of circumstances which must be gradually detached that we may see the effect of each, viz. the .xtent of the bed, its perimeter, and its slope. By examining the effects produced by variations of each of these separately, we discover what share each has in the general effect; and having thus analysed the complicated phenomenon, ve shall be able to combine those its elements, and ſrame a ſormula which shall comprehend every circumstance, from the greatest velocity to the extinction oſ all 6 motion, and from the extent of a river to the narrow dimensions oſ a quil. We shall compare this formula with a series of experiments in all this variety of circumstances, partly made by M. Buat, and partly collected from other authors; and we shall leave the reader to judge of the agreement. Conſident that this agreement will be ſound most satisfactory, we shall then proceed to consider very cursorily the chief varieties which nature or art may introduce into these beds, the diſferent velocities of the same stream, the intensity of the resistance produced by the inertia of the materials oſ the channel, and the force of the current by which it continually acts on this channel, tending to change cither its dimensions or its form We shall endeavour to trace the origin of these great rivers which spread like the branches of a vigorous tree, and occupy the surface even of a vast continentt. We shall follow them in their course, unfold all their windings, study their train, and regimen, and point out the lav of its stability; and ve shall investigate the causes of their deviations and wanderings. The study of these natural laws pleases the mind: but it answers a still greater purpose; it enables us to assist nature, and to hasten her operations, which our wants and our impatience often find too slow. It enables us to command the elements, and to force them to administer to our wants and our pleasures. We shall therefore, in the next place, apply the knowledge which ve may acquire to the solution of the most important hydraulic questions which occur in the practice of the civil engineer. We shall consider the effeets produced by a permanent addition to any river or stream by the union of another, and the opposite effect produced by any draught or offset, showing the elevation or depression produced up the stream, and the change made in the depth and velocity below the addition or offæt. We shall pay a similar attention to the temporary svells produced by freshes. We shall ascertain the effects of straightening the course of a strenam, which, by increasing its slope, must increase its velocity, and thereſore sink the waters above the place where the curvature vas removed, and diminish the tendency to overflow, hile the same immediate consequence must expose the places ſarther down to the risk of floods from which they would otherwise have been ſree. The effects oſ dams or weirs, and of bars, must then be considered; the gorge or swell which they produce up the stream must be determined ſor every distance from the weir or bar. This will furnish us vith rules for rendering navigable or floatable such waters as have too little depth or too great slope. And it will appear that immense advantages may be thus derived, with a moderate expense, even from trifling brooks, if ve will relinquish all prejudices, and not imagine that such conveyance is impossible, because it cannot be carried on by such boats and small craſt as we have heen accustomed to look at. The effects of canals of derivation, the rules or maxims of draining, and the general maxims of embankment, come in the next place; and our discussions will conelude vith remarks on the most proper forms for the entry to canals, locks, docks, harbours, and mouths of rivers, the best shape for the starlings of bridges and of boats for inland navigations, and such like subordinate but interesting particulars, vhich will be suggested by the general thread of discussion. It is considered as physically demonstrated, that water issuing from a small orifice in the bottom or side of a very large vessel, almost instantly acquires and maintains the velocity which a heavy body would acquire by falling to the orifice from the horizontal surſace of the stagnant water. This we shall call its NATuRAL VELOCITY. Thereſore if we multiply the area oſ the oriſice by this velocity, the product vill be the bulk or quantity of the water which is discharged. This ve may call the NATURAL EXPENSE Of water, or the NaTuR AL DiscHARGE. Let O represent the area or section of the oriſice expresed in some known measure, and h its depth under the surface. Let 4 express the velocity acquired by a heavy body during a second by ſalling Let V be the medium velocity of the water's motion, Qthe quantity of water discharged during a second, and N the natural expense. We know that Vis equal to Vãę x ,/ h Thereſore NæO. Vẽ g. /h. If these dimensions be all taken in English feet, we have have V2  very nearly equal to 8; and thereſore Væ 8 /h, and NæDO. 8/ h. But in our present business it is much more convenient to measure every thing by inches. Therefore since a body acquires the velocity oſ 82 ſeet 2 inches in a second, ve have 2 g2  64 feet 4 inches, or 772 inches, and v 585 27,78 inches, nearly 273 inches. Thereſore VV Tiẽ / h, =1,78 / h, and N=O.  Tẽ  h, = O.21,8/h But it is also well known, that iſ we were to ealculatæ the expense or discharge for every orifice by this simple rule, we should in every instance find it much greater than nature really gives us. When vater issues through a hole in a thin plate, the lateral columns, pressing into the hole from all sides, causæ the issuing fſilaments to converge to the axis of the jet, and contract its dimensions at a little distance from the hole. And it is in this place of greatest contraction that the vater acquires that velocity which we observe in our experiments, and which we assume as equal to that acquired by ſalling ſrom the surfacee Therefore, that our computed discharge may best agree with observation, it must be oulculated on the supposition that the orifice is diminished to the size of this smallest section. But the contraction is subject to variations, and the dimensions of this smallest section are at all times difficult to ascertain with precision. It is therefore much more convenient to compute from the real dimensions of the oriſice, and to correct this computed discharge, by means of an actual comparison of the computed and effective discharges in a series of experiments made in situations resembling those cases which most frequently occur in practic. This correction or its cause, in the mechanism of those internal motions, is generally called CoNTRACTION by the writers on hydraulies; and it is not conſined to a hole in a thin plate: it happens in some degree in all cases where fluids are made to pass through narrow places.. It happens in the entry into all pipes, canals, and sluices; nay even in the passage of water over the edge of a board, such as is usually set up on the head of a dam or veir, and even when this is immersed in vater on both sides, as in a bar or keep, frequently employed for raising the vaters of the level streams in Flanders, in order to render them navigablee We mentioned an observation* of M. Buat to this effeet, when he saw a gooseberry rise up ſrom the bottom of the canal along the face of the bar, and then rapidly fly over its top. We have attempted to represent this motion of the filaments in these different situations. Fig. 5. A shows the motion through a thin plate. B shows the motion when a tube of about twodiameters long is added, and when the water flows with a full mouth. This does not always happen in so short a pipe (and never in one that is shorter), but the water frequently detaches itself from the sides of the pipe, and flows with a contracted jet. C shows the motion when the pipe projects into the inside of the vessel. In this case it is difficult to make it flow full. * Sec Resistance of Fluids. D represents a mouth-piece fitted to the hole, and formed agreeably to that shape which a jet would assume of itself. In this case all contraction is avoided, because the mouth of this pipe may be considered as the real orifice, and nothing now diminishes the discharge but a trifling friction of the sides. E shows the motion of water over a dam or weir, where the ſall is free or unobstructed; the surface of the lower stream being lower than the edge or sole of the wasteboard. F is a similar representation of the motion of water over vwhat we would call a bar or keep. It was one great aim of the experiments of Michelotti and Bossut to determine the effects of contraction in these cases. Michellotti, after carefully observing the form and dimensions of the natural jet, made various mouth-pieces resembling it, till he obtained one which produced the smallest diminution of the computed discharge, or till the discharge computed for the area of its smaller end approached the nearest to the effective discharge And he at last obtained one which gave a discharge of one 9òJ, vhen the natural discharge would have been 1000. This piece was formed by the revolution of a trochoid round the axis of the jet, and the dimensions were as follow: Diameter of the outer orifico / 36 inner orificoe  46 Length of the axis  96 The results of the experiments of the Abbè Bossut and of Michelotti scarcely differ, and they are expressed in the following table: N or the natural expense 10,000  0.27,78 / : Q for the thin plate, Fig. 5. A. almost at the surface J 65620 O.I8,13 / A Q for ditto at the depth of 8 feet 6195 O0.17,21 / : Q ſor ditto at the depth of 16 feet 617 O.1,15/h Q for a tube two diameters long, J l 2 . Fig. b. B. 512 0O.47 /*h Q for ditio projecting inwards j 651 O0.18,98 /à and flowing full Q for ditto with a contracted ĩet, Fig 5. C. 518 O0.1420/h Q for the mouth-piece, Fig. 5.. D. 9831 0.7,81 /h Q for a veir, Fig. 5. E. 9536 0.296,49 / h Q for a bur, Fig. 5. F. 9780. 0.27,08 /h The numbers in the last column of this little table are the cubical inches of water discharged in a second when the height h is one inch. It must be observed that the discharges assigned here for the weir and bar relate only to the contractions occasioned by the passage over the edge of the boardc The weir muy also suffer a diminution by the contractions at its two ends, if it should be narrower than the stream, is generally the case, because the two ends are commonly of square masonry or wood-work. The contraction there is nearly the same vith that at the edge of a thin plate. But this could not be introduced into this table, because its effect on the expense is the same in quantity whatever is the length of the waste-board of the veir. In like manner, the diminution oſ diseharge through a sluice could not be expressed here When a sluice is drawn up, but its lower edge still remains under vater, the discharge is contracted both above and at the sides, and the diminution of discharge by each is in proportion to its extent. It is not easy to reduce either of these contractions to computation, but they may be very easily observed. We ſrequently can observe the water, at coming out of a sluice into a mill-course, quit the edge of the aperture, and show a part of the bottom quite dry. This is alays the case when the velocity of efſlux is considerablee. When it is very moderate, this place is occupied by an eddy va- ter almost stagnantt. When the head of water is 8 or 10 inches, and runs off ſreely, the space leſt beteen it and the sides is about I3 inches. If the sides of the entry have a slope, this void space can never appear; but there is always this tendency to convergence, which diminishes the quantity of the discharge. It will frequently abridge computation very much to consider the water discharged in these different situations as moving with a common velocity, which we conceive as produced not by a fall from the surface of the ſluid (which is exact only when the expense is equal to the natural expense,) but by a ſall  accommodated to the discharge: or it is convenient to know the height which would produce that very velocity which the water issues with in these situations. And also when the water is observed to be actually moving with a velocity V, and we know whether it is coming through a thin plate, through a tube, over a dam, &e. it is necessary to know the pressure or HEAD OF vATER h which has actually produced this velocity. It is convenient thereſore to have the following numbers in readiness: v: h for the natural expense 3 I. for a thin platt -= Li . vi h for a tube 2 diam. long / 505 h for a dam i or a or weir -—% h ſor a bar - Li 746 It was necessary to premise these ?AcTs in hydraulios, that we may be able in every case to distinguish between the force expended in the entry of the water into the conduit or canal, and the force employed in overcoming the resistance along the canal, and in preserving or accelerating ĩts motion in it. The motion of running water is produced by two causes; I. The action of gravity; and, 2. The mobility of the particles, which makes them assume a level in confined vessels, or determines them to move to that side where there is a defect of pressuree When the surface is level, every particle is at rest, being equally pressed in all directions; but if the surface is not level, not only does a particle on the very surface tend by its own weight towards the lower side, as a body would slide along an inclined plane, but there is a force, external to itself, arising from a superiority of pressure on the upper end of the surface, which pushes this superficial particle towards the lower end; and this is not peculiar to the superficial particles, but affects every particle within the mass oſ water. In the vessel ACDE (Fig. 6.), containing water with an inclined surface AE, if we suppose all frozen but the extreme columns AKHB, FGLE, and a connecting portion HECDLG, it is evident, from hydrostatical laws, that the water on this connecting part will be pushed in the direction CD; and if the frozen mass BHGF were moveable, it would also be pushed along. Giving it fluidity vill make no change in this respect; and it is indifferent vhat is the situation and shape of the connecting column or columns. The propelling force (MNF being horizontal) is the weight oſ colummn AMNB. The same thing vill obtain wherever we select the vertical columns. There vill always be a force tending to push every particle of vater in the direction of the declivity. The consequence vill be, that the water will sink at one end and rise at the other, and its surface will rest in the horizontal position a Oe, cutting the former in its middle O. This cannot be unless there be not only a motion of perpendicular descent and ascent of the vertical columns, hut also a real motion oſ translation from X towards L. It perhaps exceeds our mathematical skill to tell what will be the motion of each purticlee. Newton did not attempt it in his investigation of the motion of waves, nor is it at all necessary heree We may, however, acquire a very distinet notion of its general effect. Let OPQ be a vertical plane passing through the middle point O. It is evident that every particle in PQ, such as P, is pressed in the direction QD, vith a force equal to the weight oſf a single row of particles, vhose length is the diſference between the columns BH and FG. The force acting on the particle Q is, in like manner, the weight oſ a row of particles =AC—ED. Nov if OQ, OA, OE, be divided in the same ratio, so that all the figures ACDE, BHGF, &e. may be similar, ve see that the force arising solely from the declivity, and acting on each particle on the plane OQ, is proportional to its depth under the surſace, and that the row of particles ACQDE, BHPGVF, &c. which is to be moved by it, is in the same proportion. Hence it unquestionably follows, that the accelerating force on each particle of the row is the same in al. Thereſore the whole plane OQ tends to advance forward together with the same velocity; and in the instant immediately succeeding, all these particles would be found again in a vertical plane indefſinitely near to OQ; and if we sum up the forces, ve shall find them the same as if OQ were the opening oſ a sluice, having the water on the side of D standing level with O, and the water on the other side standing at the height AC. This result is extremely diſferent from that of the hasty theory of Guglielmini. He considers each particle in OQ as urged by an accelerating force proportional to its depth, it is true; but he makes it equal to the weight of the row OP, and never recollects that the greatest part of it is balanced by an opposite pressure, nor perceives that the force which is not balanced must be distributed among a row oſ particles which varies in the same proportion with itsel. When these two circumstances are neglected, the result must be incompatible with observation. When the balanced ſorces are taken into the account of pressure, ĩt is evident that the surface may be supposed horizontal, and that motion should obtain in this case as well as in the case of a sloping surface: and indeed this is Guglielminis professed theory, and what he highly values himself onn. He announces this discovery of a new principle, which he ealls the energy of deep waters, as an important addition to hydraulics It is owing to this, says he, that the great rivers are not stagnant at their mouths, where they have no perceptible declivity oſ surſace, but, on the contrary, have greater energy and velocity than farther up, where they are shallower. This principle is the basis oſ his improved theory of rivers, and is insisted on at great length by all the subsequent vriters. Buffon, in his theory of the earth, makes much use of itt. We cannot but wonder that it has been allowed a place in the theory of rivers given in the great Encyclopcdie of Paris, and in an article having the signature (O) oſf D'Alembertt. We have been very anxious to show the falsity of this principle, because we consider it as a mere subterfuge of Guglielmini, by which he was able to pateh up the mathematical theory which he had so hastily taken from Newton or Galileo; and we think that we have secured our readers from being misled by it, vhen we show that this energy must be equally operative when the surface is on a dead level. The absurdity of this is evident. We shall see by and by, that deep waters, when in actual motion, have an energy not to be found in shallow running waters, by which they are enabled to continue that motion: but this is not a moving principle; and it will be fully explained, as an immediate result oſ principles, not vaguely conceived and indistinetly expressed, like this of Guglielmini, but easily understood, and appreciable with the greatest precision. It is an energy common to all great bodies. Although they lose as mueh momentum in sur- mounting any obstacle as small ones, they lose but a small portion oſ their velocity. At present, employed only in considering the progressive motion oſ an open stream, whose surface is not level, it is quite enough that we see that such a motion must obtain, and that we see that there are propelling ſorces; and that those forces arise solely from the want of a level surface, or from the slope of the surfauce; and that, with respeet to any one particle, the foree acting on it is proportional to the difference of a level between each of the two columns (one on each side of the particle) which produee it. Were the surſace level, there would be no motion; if it is not level, there will be motion; and this motion will proportional to the want of level or the declivity of the surface: it is of no consequence whether the bottom be level or not, or what is its shape. Hence we draw a fundamental principle, that the motion of rivers depends entirely on the slope of the surface. The sLoPE or declivity oſ any inclined plane is not properly expressed by the diſference of height alone of its extremities; we must also consider its length: and the measure of the slope must be such that it may be the same vhile the declivity is the same. It must thereſore be the same over the whole of any one inclined planee We shall answer these conditions exactly, if e take for the measure of a slope the fraction which expresses the elevation of one extremity ibor _e other divided by the length of the plane. Thus a M express the declivity of the plane AF. If the water met with no resistance ſfrom the bed in which it runs, if it had no adhesion to its sides and hottom, and if its ſluidity were perſect, its gravity would accelerate its course continually, and the earth and its inhabitants would be deprived oſ all the advantages which they derive from its numberless streams. They would run off  quickly, that our fields, dried up as soon as va- measure of the extent of this action. In a pipe, circular or prismatical, the whole cireumſerence is acted on; but in a river or canal ACDE (Fig. 6.) the horizontal line AOE, which makes the upper boundary of the section ACDE, is ſree from all action. The action is confined to the three lmes AC, CDO, DE. We shall call this line ACDE the norDER Of the seetion. The MEAN vELOCITY is that with which the whole seetion, moving equally, would generate a solid equal to the expense of the stream. This velocity is to be found perhaps but in one filament of the stream, and we do not know in which filament it is to be found. Since ve are attempting to establish an empirical theory of the motion of rivers, ſounded entirely on experiment and palpable deduetions from them; and sinee ĩt is extremely diſficult to make experiments on open streams which shall have a precision sufſficient for such an important purposeit would be a most desirable thing to demonstrate an exact analogy between the mutual balancing of the acceleration and resistance in pipes and in rivers; for in those we can not only make experiments vith all the desired accuracy, and admitting precise measures, but we can make them in a number of cases that are almost impracticable in riverss We can inerease the slope of a pipe from nothing to the vertical position, and we can employ every desired degree oſ pressure, so as to ascertain its effect on the velocity in degrees which open streams will not admit. The Chevalier de Buat has most happily suceeeded in this demonstration; and it is here that his good ſortune and his penetration have done so much service to practical science. Let AB (Fig. 7.) be a horizontal tube, through which the water is impelled by the pressure or HEAD DA. This head is the moving power; and it may be conceived as consisting of two parts, performing two distinct oſfices. One oſ them is employed in impressing on the water that voI.. II. RE velocity with which it actually moves in the tubee Were there no obstructions to this motion, no greater head would be wanted; but there are obstructions arising from frietion, adhesion, and viscidity. This requires force. Let this be the office of the rest of the head of water in the reservoir. There is but one allotment, appropriation, or repartition, of the whole head which vill answer. Suppose E to be the point of partition, so that DE is the head necessary for impressing the actual velocity on the water (a head or pressure which has a relation to the form or circumstance of the entry, and the contraction which takes place there)) The rest EA is wholly employed in overcoming the simultaneous resistances which take place along the whole tube AB, and is in equilibrio with this resistance. Therefore if we apply at E a tube EC of the same length and diameter vith AB, and having the same degree of polish or roughness; and if this tube be inclined in such a manner that the axis of its extremity may coincide with the axis of AB in the point Ce affirm that the velocity vill be the same in both pipes, and that they will have the same expense; for the moving force àn the sloping pipe EC is composed of the whole weight oſ the column DE and the relative weight of the column EC; but this relative weight, by which alone it descends along the inclined pipe EC, is precisely equal to the weight of a vertical column EA of the same diameter. Every thing therefore is equal in the two pipes, viZ. the lengths, the diameters, the moving forces, and the resistances; therefore the velocities and discharges vill also be equal. This is not only the case on the whole, but also in every part of itt. The relative weight of any part oſ it EX is precisely in equilibrio with the resistanees along that part of the pipe; for it has the same proportion to the whole relative weight that the resistance has to the whole resistancee. Thereſore (and this is the most important circumstance, and the basis of the whole theory) the pipe EC may be cut shorter, or may be lengthened to infinity, without making any change in the velocity or expense, so long as the propelling head DE remains the same. Leaving the whole head DA as it is, if we lengthen the horizontal pipe AB to G, it is evident that ve increase the resistance without any addition of force to overcome it. The velocity must therefore be diminished; and it will now be a velocity which is produced by a smaller head than DE: thereſore if we were to put in a pipe of equal length at E, terminating in the horizontal line AG, the water vill not run equally in both pipes. In order that it may, e must discover the diminished velocity with which the water now actually runs along AG, and we must make a head DI capable of impressing this velocity at the entry of the pipe, and then insert at I a pipe IH of the same length vith AG. The expense and velocity oſ both pipes will now be the same.*  We recommend it to the reader to make this distribution or allotment of the different portions oſ the pressure very familiar to his mind. It is of the most extensive influence in every question of hydraulies, and will on every occasion give him distinet eonceptions of the internal procedure. Obvious as the thought seems to be, it has escaped the attention of all the writers on the subjeet. Lecchi, in his Hydraulics, published in 1766, aseribes something like it to Daniel Bernoulli; but Bernoulli, in the passage quoted, only speaks of the partition of pressure in the instant of opening an orifice. Part of it, says he, is employed in accelerating the quiescent water, and producing the velocity of efflux, and the remainder produces the pressure (now diminished) on the sides of the vessel. Bernoulli, Bossut, and all the good writers, make this distribution in express terms in their explanation of the motion of water through successive orifices; and it is surprising that no one before the Chevalier de Buat saw that the resistance arising from friction required a similar partition of the pressure; but though we should call this good fortune, we must aseribe to his great sagacity und justness oſ conception the beautiſul use that he has made of it. What has now been said of a horizontal pipe AB would have been equally true of any inclined pipe AB, AB Fig. 5.) Draving the horizontal line CB, we see that DC is the whole head or propelling pressure ſor either pipe AB or 'B; and if DE is the head necessary ſor the actual velocity, EC is the head necessary for balancing the resistances; and the pipe EF of the same length with AB, and terminating in the same horizontal line, will have the same velocity; and its inclination being thus determined, it will have the same velocity and expense whatever be its length. Thus we see that the motion in any pipe, horizontal or sloping, may be referred to or substituted for the motion in another inclined pipe, whose head of water, above the place of entry, is that productive oſ the actual velocity oſ the water in the pipe. Now, in this case, the accelerating force is equal to the resistance: we may thereſore consider this last pipe as a river, of which the bed and the slope are uniform or constant, and the current in a state of permanency; and we now may clearly draw this important conclusion, that pipes and open streams, when in a state oſ permanency, perſectly resemble each other in thecircumstances which are the immediate causes of this permanency. The equilibrium between the accelerating foree obtains not only in general, but takes place through the whole length of the pipe or stream, and is predicable of every individual transverse section of either. To make this more palpably evident if possible, let us consider a sloping cylindrical pipe, the current oſ which is in a state oſ permanency. We can conceive it as consisting of two half cylinders, an upper and a lower. These are running together at an equal pace; and the filaments of each immediately contiguous to the separating plane and to each other, are not rubbing on each other, nor affecting each other's motions in the smallest degree. It is true that the upper halſ is pressing on the lower, but in a direction perpendicular to the motion, 4 and therefore not aſfeeting the velocity; and we shall see presently, that although the lower side of the pipe bears somewhat more pressure than the other, the resistances are not changed. (Indeed this odds of pressure is accompanied vith a difference of motion, which need not he considered at present; and ve may suppose the pipe s0 small or 5 far below the surface, that this shall be insensible) Now let suppose, that in an instant the upper half cylinder is amihilated: ve then have an open stream; and every circumstance of accelerating force and of resistance remains precisely as it vass. The motion must therefore continue as it did; and in this state the only accelerating foree is the slope of the surfacee The demonstration therefore is complete. From these observations and reasonings, we draw a general and important conclusion,  That the same pipe will be susceptible of different velocities, which it will preserve uniform to any distance, according as it has different inclinations; and each inclination of a pipe of given diameter has a certain velocity peculiar to itself which will be maintained uniform to any distance whatever; and this velocity increases continually, according to some lav, to be discovered by theory or experiment, as the position of the pipe changes, from being horizontal till it becomes vertical; in which position it has the greatest uniform veloeity possible relative to ĩts inclination, or depending on inelination alone. Let this velocity be called the TrAIN, or the RATE of each pipe. It is evident that this principle is of the utmost consequence in the theory of hydraulies; for by experiment we can ſind the train of anypipe. It is in train when an increase of length makes no change in the velocity. If lengthening the pipe increases the velocity, the slope of the pipe is too great, and vice versa. And having discovered the train oſ a pipe, and observed its velocity, and com- puted the head productive of this velocity with the contraction at the entry, the remainder oſ the head, that is, the slope (for this is equivalent to EA), is the measure of the resistance. Thus vwe obtain the measure of the resistance to the motion with a given velocity in a pipe of given diameter. If we change only the velocity, we get the measure oſ the new resistance relative to the velocity; and thus discover the law of relation between the resistance and velocity. Then, changing only the diameter of the pipe, we get the measure of the resistance relative to the diameter. This is the aim of a prodigious number of experiments made and cõllected by Buat, and which we shall not repeat, but only give the results oſ the different parts of his investigation. We may express the slope of a pipe by the symbol l being an inch, for instance, and æ being the slant length of a pipe which is one inch more elevated at one end than at the other. Thus a river which has a declivity of an inch and a half in I20 fathoms, or 8640 inches, has its slope 13 l  5650 5ũęò slope oſ a conduit pipe, the heights of the reservoir and place of discharge being given, we must subtract from the difference of elevation the height or head of water necessary for propelling the water into any pipe with the velocity V, which it is supposed actually to havee This But in order to obtain the hydraulie is nę The remainder d is to be considered as the height of the declivity, which is to be distributed equally over the whole length I of the pipe, and the slope is then ; l 5 There is another important view to be taken of the slope, hich the reader should make very ſamiliar to his thoughts. It expresses the proportion between the weight oſ the whole column which is in motion and the weight which is employed in overcoming the resistance; and the resistance to the motion of any column of water is equal to the weight of that column multiplied by the fraction L whichexpresses its slope. WE come now to consider more particularly the resistances which in this manner bring the motions to a state of uniformity. I we consider the resistances which arise from a cause analogous to ſriction, ve see that they must depend entirely on the inertia of the waterr. What we call the resistance is the diminution of a motion which mould have obtained but for these resistances; and the best way we have of measuring them is by the force which ve must employ in order to keep up or restore this motion. We estimate this motion by a progressive velocity, which we measure by the expense of water in a given timee We judge the velocity to diminish, vhen the quantity discharged diminishes; yet it may be otherwise, and probably is otherwise. The absolute velocity of many, if not all of the particles, may even be increased; but many of the motions, being transverse to the general direction, the quantity of motion in this direction may be less, while the sum of the absolute motions of all the particles may be greate. When we increase the general velocity, it is not unreasonable to suppose that the impulses on all the inequalities are increased in this proportion; and the number of particles thus impelling and deflected at the same time will increase in the same proportion. The whole quantity therefore of these useless and lost motions will increase in the duplicate ratio of the velocities, and the force necessary ſor keeping up the motion will do so also; that is, the resistances should increase as the squares of the velocities. t:, Or if we consider the resistances as arising merely from the curvature oſ the imperceptible internal motions ocasioned by the inequalities of the sides of the pipe, and as measured by the forces necessary ſor producing these curvilineal motions; then, because the curves will be the same whatever are the velocities, the deflecting forces will be as the squares of the velocities; but these deſlecting forces are pressures, propagated from the parts urged or pressed by the external ſorce, and are proportional to these external pressures by the principles oſ hydrostatics. Therefore the pressures or forces necessary for keeping up the velocities are as the squares of these velocities; and they are our only measures of the resistances which must be considered as following the same ratio. Whatever view therefore we take of the nature oſ these resistances, we are led to consider them as proportional to the squares of the velocities We may therefore express the resistances by the symbol m being some number to be discovered by experiment. Thus, in a particular pipe, the diminution of the motion or the resistance may be 1000th part of the square . V: of the velocity, and R 6 Nov if  be the accelerating power of gravity on any particle H vill be its accelerating power, by which it would urge it down the pipe whose slope is H Thereſore, by the principle of uniform motion, the equality oſ the acre celerating force, and ſhe resistance, we shall have h g and VV 5 æ Vſ g; that is, the produet oſ the velocity, and the reciprocal of the square root oſ the slope, or the quotient of the velocity divided by the slope, is a constant quantity V m g ſor any given pipe; and the pri- mary formula for all the uniſorm velocities oſ one pipe is vrnę s M. Buat therefore examined this by experiment, but found, that even with respect to a pipe or chammel, which was uniform throughout, this was not true. We eould give at once the ſinal formula which he found to express the velocity in every case whatever; but this would be too empirical The chieſ steps of his very sagacious investigation are instruetivee We shall therefore mention them brieſly, at least as ſar as they tend to give us any collateral information; and let ĩt always be noted, that the instruetion which they convey is not abstract speculation, but experimental truths, which must ever remain as an addition to our stock of knowledge, although M. Buat's deductions from them should prove false. He found, in the first place, that in the same channel the product of V and V5 increased as V5 increased; that is, the velocities increased faster than the square roots of the slope, or the resistances did not increase as fast as the squares of the velocities We beg leave to refer our readers to what ve said on the resistance of pipes to the motion of ſluids through them in the article PNEUMATICS, when speaking of bellowss They will there see very valid reasons (ve apprehend) for thinking that the resistances must increase more slowly than the squares of the velocities. It being found, then, that VV is not equal to a constant quantity V m g, it becomes necessary to investigate some quantity depending on V5, or, as it is called, some function of 5, which shall render V m  a constant quantity. Let X be this funetion of Y5, so that we shall always have VX equal to the constant quantity V m g, or æ equal to the actual velocity V oſ a pipe or channel is in train. M. Buat, ater many trials and reſlections, the chief of which will be mentioned by and by, found a value of X which corresponded with a vast variety of slopes and velocities, from motions almost impereeptible, in a bed nearly horizontal, to the greatest velocities which could be produced by gravity alone in a vertical pipe; and when he compared them together, he found a very discernible relation between the resistances and the magnitude of the seetion; that is, that in two channels vhich had the same slope, and the same propelling force, the velocity was greatest in the channel which had the greatest section relative to its border. This may reasonably be expected. The resistances arise from the mutual action of the water and this border. The water immediately contiguous to it is retarded, and this retards the next, and s6 on. It is to be expected, therefore, that if the border, and the velocity, and the slope, be the same, the diminution of this velocity ill be so much the less as it is to be shared among a greater number of particles; that is, as the area of the section is greater in proportion to the extent of its border. The diminution oſ the general or medium velocity must be less in a cylindrical pipe than i in a square one of the same area, because the border of its section is less. It appears evident, that the resistance of each particle is in the direct proportion of the whole resistance, and the inverse proportion of the number of particles which receive equal shares oſ it. It is therefore directly as the border, and inversely as the sectionn. Therefore in the expression Ai which we have given for the resistance, the quantity m cannot be constant, except in the same channel; and in diſferent channels it must vary along with the relation oſ the section to its border, because the resistances diminish in proportion as this relation increases. Without attempting to discover this relation by theoretical examination of the particular motions of the various filaments, M. Buat endeavoured to discover it by a comparison of experiments. But this required some manner of stating this proportion between the augmentation oſ the section and the augmentation of its border. His statement is this: He reduces every section to a rectangular parallelogram of the same area, and having its base equal to the border unfolded into a straight line. The produet of this base by the height of the rectangle will be equal to the area of the section. Therefore this height will be a representative of this variable ratio of the section to its border (We do not mean that there is any ratio between a surface and a line: but the ratio of section to section is different from that of border to border; and it is the ratio of these ratios which is thus expressed by the height of this rectangle). If S be the section, and B the border, is evidently a line equal to the height of this rectanglee. Every section being in this manner reduced to a reetangle, the perpendicular height of it may be called the HYDRAULIC MEAN DEPTH of the section, and may be expressed by the symhol dc. (Buat calls it the mean radius). If the channel be a cylindrical pipe, or an open half cylinder, it is evident that d is half the radiuss. If the section is a rectangle, - - . H h vhose width is w, and height h, the mean depth is Eæęn , &c. In general, if ꝗ represent the proportion oſ the breadth of a rectangular canal to its depth, that is, if ꝗ be made v ve shall have a or d A Nov, since the resistances must augment as the proportion of the border to the section augments, m in the for- : —— mulus Læ 8 and V/ s / m g, must ſollow the proportions of d, and the quantity Y m  must be proportionv mg a al to / d for different channels, and should be a constant quantity in every case. Our author vas aware, however, of a very specious objeetion to the close dependence of the resistance on the extent of the horder; and that it might be said that a double border did not occasion a double resistance, unless the pressure on all the parts was the same. For it may be naturally (and it is generally) supposed, that the resistance vill be greater when the pressure is greater. The frietion or resistance analogous to friction may thereſore be greater on an inch of the bottom than on an inch oſ the sides; but M. DAlembert and many others have demonstrated, that the paths of the filaments will be the same, whatever be the pressuress. This might serve to justify our ingenious author; but he was determined to rest every thing on experiment. He thereſore made an experiment on the oscillation of water in syphons, which we have repeated in the following ſorm, which is aſfected by the same cireumstances, and is susceptible of much greater precision, and of more extensive and important application: The two vessels ABCD, a b c d (Fig. 9.) were connected by the syphon EFG gfe, which turned round in the short tubes E and e, without allowing any water to escape; the axes oſ these tubes being in one straight line. The vessels about ten inches deep, and the branches FG, ſæ of the syphon were ahout five feet long. The vessels were set on two tables of equal height, and (the hole æ being stopped) the vessel ABCD, and the whole syphon, vere fſilled with water, and water was poured into the vessel a be d tll it stood at a certain height cM. The sy- phon was then turned into a horizontal position, and the plug drawn out of æ, and the time carefully noted which the water employed in rising to the level HKEh in both vesselss The whole apparatus was now inclined, so that the water run back into ABCD. The syphon was noW put in a vertical positiòn, and the experiment was repeated.No sensible or regular difference was observed in the time. Yet in this experiment the pressure on the part G ⸗ oſ the syphon was more than six times greater than before. As it was thought that the friction on this small part (only six inches) was too small a portion of the whole obstruetion, various additional obstruetions were put into this part of the syphon, and it vas even lengthened to nine feet; but still no remarkable difference was observed. It was even thought that the times were less when the syphon was vertical. Thus M. de Buats opinion is completely justiſied; and he may be alloed to assert, that the resistance depends chieſly on the relation between the section and its border; and that æ⸗ should be a constant quantity. To ascertain this point was the object oſ the next series of experiments; 0 see whether this quantity was really constant, and, iſ not, to discover the law of its variation, and the physical circumstances which accompanied the variations, and may therefore be considered as their eauses. A careſul comparison of a very great number of experiments, made with the same slope, and vith very different channels and velocities, showed that męg did not ſollow the proportion oſf V q  nor of any power of Yd. This quantity V m Z increased by smaller degrees in proportion as Vd was greater. In very great beds V m g was nearproportional to /ꝗ but in smaller channels, the velocities diminished much more than V ũ did. Casting about ſor some vay of aceommodation, M. Buat considered, that some approximation at least would be had by taking off ſfrom vV ũ some constant small quantity. This is evident: for such a diminution vill have but a trifling effeet vhen vd is great, and its effect will increase rapidly when V ũ is very small. He therefore tried various values for this subtraction, and compared the results with the former experiments; and he found, that if in every case Vũ be diminished by one- tenth of an inch, the calculated discharges would agree very exactly with the experiment. Therefore, instead oſ V ũ, he makes use of Y dDO, 1, and ſinds this quantity always proportional to V mg, or finds that  mg va—o, varied from 297 to 287 in all sections from that of a very small pipe to that of a little canal. In the large sections of canals and rivers it diminished still more, but never was less than 256. . This result is very agreeable to the most distinet notions that we can form of the mutual actions of the water and its bedc. We see, that when the motion of water is obstrueted by a solid body, which deflects the passing filaments, the disturbance does not extend to any considerable distance on the two sides of the body. In like manner, the small disturbances, and imperceptible curvilineal motions vhich are occasioned by the infinitesimal inequalities of the channel, must extend to a very small distance indeed from the sides and bottom of the channe. We know, too, that the mutual adhesion or attraction of water for the solid bodies which are moistened by it, extends to a very small distance; which is probably the same, or nearly so, in all cases. M. Buat observes, that a surface of 2 square inches, applied to the surface of stagnant water, liſied 1601 grains; another of 53 square inches liſted 65: this was at the rate of 65 grains per inch nearly, making a column of about one-sixth of an inch high. Now this effect is very 6 is a constant quantity, or very nearly so. It much analogous to a real contraction of the capacity of the channel. The water may be conceived as nearly stagnant to this small distance from the border of the seetion. Or, to speak more aceurately, the diminution of the progressive velocity occasioned by the friction and adhesion of the sides, decreases very rapidly as ve recede from the sides, and ceases to be sensible at a very small distance. The writer of this article verified this by a very simple and instructive experiment. He was making experiments on the production of vortices, in the manner suggested by Sir Isaac Newton, by whirling a very accurate and smoothly polished cylinder in water; and he found that the rapid motion of the surrounding water was confined to an exceeding small distance from the cylinder, and it was not till after many revolutions that it was sensible even at the distance of half an inch. We may, by the way, suggest this as the best form of experiments for examining the resistances of pipes. The motion excited by the whirling eylinder in the stagnant water is equal and opposite to the motion lost by water passing along a surface equal to that of the cylinder with the same velocity. Be this as it may, we are justiſied in considering, with M. Buat, the section of the stream as thus diminished by cutting off a narrow border all round the touching parts, and supposing that the motion anũ discharge is the same as if the root of the mean depth of the section were diminished by a small quantity, nearly constant. We see, too, that the eſfect of this must be insensible in great canals and rivers; so that, fortunately, its quantity is best ascertained by experiments made with small pipes. This is attended with another conveniency, in the opinion of M. Buat, namely, that the effect of viscidity is most sensible in great masses of water in slow motion, and is almost insensible in small pipes, so as not to disturb these experimentss. We may therefore assume 27 mg as the general value of LT3. va—o,1 express thus, V/ a we must admit that X is sensibly equal to VT vhen the slope is very small or s very great. But, that we may accurately express the velocity in proportion as the slope augments, ve must have X greater than F; and moreover, i5 must increase as /; diminishes. These conditions are necessary, that our values of V, deduced ſrom the ſormula V4, may agree vith the experiment. In order to comprehend every degree oſ slope, ve must particularly attend to the motion through pipes, because open canals will not furnish us with instances oſ exact TRAINS with great slopes and velocitie. We can make pipes vertical In this ease : 3, J and the velocity is the greatest possible for a train by the action of gravity: but we can give greater velocities than this by increasing the head oſ water beyond what produces the velocity of the train. Let AB (Fig. 10.) be a vertical tube, and let CA be the head competent to the velocity in the tube, which we suppose to be in train. The slope is , and the full weight of the column in motion is the precise measure of the resistancee The value of L considered as a slope, is now a maximum; but, considered as expressing the proportion oſ the weight oſ the column in motion to the weight which ĩs in equilibrio with the resistance, it may not be a maximum; it may surpass unity, and s may be less than I. For if the vessel be filled to E, the head of water is increased, and ill produce a greater velocity, and this will produce a greater resistance. The velocity being now greater, the head EF which imparts it must be greater than CA. But it will not be equal to EA, because the uniform velocities are found to increase ſaster than the square roots of VOL. II. 2rF the pressures. This is the general ſfact. Therefore F is above A, and the weight of the column FB, now employed to overcome the resistance, is greater than the weight oſ the column AB in motion. In such cases, therefore, l , greater than unity, is a sort of fictitious slope, and only represents the proportion of the resistance to the weight of the moving column. This proportion may surpass unity. But it cannot be infinite: ſor supposing the head of water infinite; if this produce a finite velocity, and ve deduet from the whole height the height corresponding to this finite velocity, there will remain an infinite head, the measure of an inſinite resistance produced by a finite velocity. This does not accord with the observed law of the velocities, where the resistances actually do not increase as fast as the squares of the velocitiess Therefore an infinite head would have produced an infinite velocity, in opposition to the resistances: taking off the head of the tube, competent to this velocity, at the entry oſ the tube, which head would also be infinite, the remainder would in all probability be finite, balancing a finite resistance. Therefore, the value of s may remain finite, although the velocity be inſinite; and this is agreeable to all our clearest notions of the resistances. Adopting this principle, ve must find the value of X which will answer all these conditions. 2. It must be sensibly proportional o ſ5, while s is great. It must always be less than Y5. S. It must deviate from the proportion of v 5, s0 much the more as V3 is smaller. 4. It must not vanish when the velocity is infinitee. 5. It must agree with a range of experiments with every variety of chaunel and of slope. We shall understand the nature oſ this quantity X better by representing by lines the quantities concerned in forming it. If the velocitios were exactly as the square roots oſ the slopes, the equilateral hyperbola NKS (Fig. 11.) between its assymptotes MA, AB, would represent the equation V/ The values of /5 would be represented by the abscissæ, and the velocities by the ordinates and V/ s A would be the pover of the hyperbola. But since these velocities are not sensibly equal to except vhen V5 is very great, and deviate the more ſrom this quantity as V5 is smaller; we may represent the velocities by the ordinates oſ another curve PGT, which approaches very near to the hyperbola, at a great distance from A along AB; but separates from it when the abscissa are smaller: s0 that if AQ represents that value of 4/ 5 (which we have seen may become less than unity), which corresponds to an infinite velocity, the line QO may be the assymptote of the new curve. Its ordinates are equal to æ vwhile those of the hyperbola are equal to Therefore the ratio of these ordinates or x- should be such that it shall be 50 much nearer to unity as Vã is greater, and shall surpass it so much the more as / ⸗ is smaller. To express X therefore as some function of,/ 5 50 as to answer these conditions, we see in general that X must be less than / 5 And it must not be equal to any power of  5 whose index is less than unity, because then x vould differ so much the more from unity as Vã is greater. Nor must it be any multiple of // 5 such as 7 /53, for the same reason. IF we make X—/ 3I, X being a constant quantity, ve may answer the first condition pretty wel. But K must be very small, that X may not m become equal to nothing, except in some exceedingly small value of / 5. Now the experiments will not admit of this, Ei because the ratio Ti—x correspond with the velocities which we observe in certain slopes, unless we make K greater than unity, which again is inconsistent with other experiments. We learn from such canvassing that it will not do to make  a constant quantity. If ve should make it any fractionary pover of  3, it would make X æO, that is, nothing, when s is =I, which is also contrary to experience It would seem, therefore, that nothing will answer for K but some power of,7 8 which has a variable index. The logarithm of has this property. We may therefore try to make Xæ s5Ilog.  . Accordingly iſ we try the equation A Vvqvm&5osſ7 7r57⸗ » we shall find a very great agreement with the experiments till the declivity becomes considerable, or about 4;, which is much greater than any river. But it will not agree with the velocities observed in some mill-courses, and in pipes of a still greater declivity, and gives a velocity that is too small; and in vertical pipes the velocity is not above one half oſ the true one. We shall get rid of most of these incongruities if we does not increase suſficiently to make X consist of the hyperbolic logarithm of V5 augmented by a small constant quantity, and by trying various values for this constant quantity, and comparing the results with experiments, ve may hit on one suſficiently exact for all practical purposes. M. de Buat, aſter repeated trials, found that he would have a very great conformity with experiment by making K æIog.  5+1, 6, and that the velocities exhibited in his experiments would be very well represented by the for) 5L V5FI, 6 There is a circumstance which our author seems to have mula V=/ overlooked on this occasion, and which is undoubtedly of great eſſect in these motions, viz. the mutual adhesion of the particles of water. This causes the water which is descending (in a vertieal pipe for example) to drag more vater aſter it, and thus greatly increases its velocity. We have seen an experiment in which the water issued from the bottom of a reservoir through a long vertical pipe having a very gentle taper. It was 15 feet long, one inch diameter at the upper end, and two inches at the lover. The depth of the water in the reservoir was exactly one foot; in a minute there were discharged 2, cubic feet of vater. It must therefore have issued through the hole in the bottom of the reservoir with the velocity of 8,85 feet per second. And yet we know that this head of water could not make it pass through the hole with a velocity greater than 6,56 feet per second. This increase must therefore have arisen from the cause we have mentioned, and is a proof of the great intensity of this foro. We doubt not but that the discharge might have been much more increased by proper contrivances; and we know many instances in water-pipes where this effect is produced in a very great degree. The following case is very distinet: Water is brought ito the town of Dunbar, in the county of East Lothian, from a spring at the distance of about 3200 yards. It is conveyed along the first 1100 yards in a pipe of two inches diameter, and the declivity is 12 feet ꝗ inches; from thence the water flows in a pipe oſ 13 diameter, vith a declivity of 44 feet S inches, making in all 57 ſeett. When the work as carried as far as the two-inch pipe reached, the discharge was found to be 27 Scoteh pints, of 1084 cubie inches each in a minute. When it was brought into the town, the discharge vas 28. Here it is plain, that the descent along the second stretch of the pipe could derive no impulsion from the first. This was only able to supply 27 piuts, and to deliver it into a pipe of equal bore It vas not equivalent to the ſorcing it into a smaller pipe, and almost doubling its velocity. It must, therefore, have been dragged into this smaller pipe by the weight of what was descending along it, and this water was exerting a force equivalent to a head of I6 inches, increasing the velocity from I4 to about 28. It must be observed, that if this formula be just, there can be no declivity so small that a eurrent of water will not take place in it. And accordingly none has been observed in the surface of a stream when this did not happen. But it also should happen vwith respect to any declivity oſ botom VYet we know that water will hang on the sloping surfaee oſ a board without proceeding further. The cause of this seems to be the adhesion of the water combined with its viscidity. The viscidity of a ſluid presents a certain ſorce which must be overcome before any current can take place. A series of important experiments were made by our author in order to ascertain the relation between the velocity at the surſace of any stream and that at the bottom. These are curious and valuable on many accounts. One crcumstance deserves our notice here, viz. that the difference betueen the superficial and bottom velocities of any stream are proportional to the square roots of the superficial velocities. From what has been already said on the gradual diminution of the velocities among the adjoining filaments, we must conclude that the same rule holds good vith respect to the velocity of separation of two filaments immediately adjoining. Hence we learn that this velocity oſ separation is in all cases indeſinitely small, and that we may, vithout danger of any sensible error, suppose it a constant quantity in all cases. We think, with our ingenious author, that on a review of these circumstances, there is a constant or invariable portion of the accelerating force employed in overcoming this viscidity and producing this mutual separation of the adjoining filaments. We may express this part oſ the accelerating force by a part : of that slope which constitutes the whole of it. If it were not employed in overcoming this resistance, it would produce a ; velocity which (on account of this resistance) is not produced, or is lost. : A This would he /SLs taken from the velocity exhibited by our general ſormula. When thus corrected, it would become Væ/ v/ng vn5 a—n(—/8XLE5) an (7/7tV/mm tæ m the term næ is compounded only of constant quantities, ve may express it by a single number. This has been collected from a scrupulous attention to the experiments (especially in canals and great bodies of water moving with very small velocities; in which case the effects of viscidity must become more remarkable), and it appears that it may be valued at / 0,09 inch, or 0,3 inch, very This must therefore be nearly. From the whole of the foregoing considerations, drawn from nature, supported by such reasoning as our most distinet notions of the internal motions will admit, and authorised by a very extensive comparison with experiment, we are nov in a condition to conclude a complete formula, expressive of the uniform motion of water, and involving every circumstance which appears to have any share in the operation. Therefore let V represent the mean velocity, in inches per second, of any current oſ water, running uniſormly, or which is I TRAIN, in a pipe or open channel, vhose section, figure, and slope, are constant, but ĩits length indefinite. d the hydraulic mean depth, that is, the quotient arising ſrom dividing the section of the channel, in square inches, by its border, expressed in linear inches. s the slope of the pipe, or of the surface of the current. It is the denominator of the ſraction expressing this slope, the numerator being always unity; and is had by dividing the expanded length of the pipe or channel by the diſference of height of its two extremities. g the velodity (in inches per second) which a heavy body acquires by falling during one second. n an abstract constant number, determined by experiment to be 243,7. L the hyperbolic logarithm of the quantity to which it is prefixed, and is had by multiplying the common logarithm of that quantity by 2, 30206. We shall have in every instance va—o,1) vVrę o8 a o8 ſaon This, in numbers, and English measure, is 83807 (Vao, ) Væm)F/-aA/A—/—47m3-32 VLVtTt 0,3 o,1) And in French measure 200  —o,1) iLV5FI6 0,8 ( ào,1) The following table contains the real experiments ſrom vhich this ſformula was deduced, and the comparison of the real velocities with the velocities computed by the formula. It consists of two principal sets of experiments. The ſirst are those made on the motion of water in pipes. The second are experiments made on open canals and rivers In the first set, column lst contains the number of the experiment; 2d, the length of the tube; Sd, the height of the reservoir; 4th, the values oſ S, deduced from column second and third; 5th, gives the observed velocities; and 6th, the velocities calculated by the formula. In the second set, column 2 gives the area of the section of the channel; 3d, the border of the canal or circumference of the section, deducting the horizontal width, vhich sustains no friction; 4th, the square root Vũ of the hydraulic mean depth; 5th, the denominator S of the slope; 6th, the observed mean velocities; and Tth, the mean velocities by the formula. In the last ten experiments on large canals and a natural river the Gth column gives the observed velocities at the surface. SET I.EXPERIMENTS ON PIPES. Eqæperiments by Chevalier DE Buar. Length Height Values Velocities] Velocities No Pe. n o ir. ofs. observed. ] calculated. Vertical Tube à of a Line in Diameter and ũ o,1171851. Imch. Imch. Inch. Inch. Inoh. l 12 16, 166 0, 75686 11,704 l 12,006 2 12 l 15,135 1 0,9807  9,738 1 10,576 Vertical Pipe 13 Lines Diameter, and ã æ 0,176776 Inch. S ] 34,166 42,166 O,9062 45,468 46,210 4 Do. 88,388 0,9951 48, 156 458,12l 5] Do. 36,666 1,0896  à2,385 42,612 6  Do. 85,388 1,0181 à1,614 41,714 7 Do.] 14,588  2,5888  26,2028] 25,523 8 Do. 9,202 4,0867 21,064 19,882 9 Do. 5,292 T,086 14,642 14, 447 10 Do. 2,088  17,6318 ,320 2,35 Experiments on the River Haine. 7,0897 6048 8,03879 6413 n,37632 82951] 13,61] 10,08 8,10108] 385728 15,96  10,53 Tnis comparison must be acknowledged to be most satisfactory, and shows the great penetration and address of the author, in so successfully sifting and appreciating the share which each co-operating circumstance has had in producing the very intricate and complicated effecetl. It adds some veight to the principles on which he has proceeded in this analysis of the mechanism oſf hydraulic motion, and must give us great confidence in a theory so fairly established on a very copious induetion. The author offers it only as a rational and vell-founded probability. To this character it is certainly entitled; for the suppositions made in it are agreeable to the most distinet notions we can form of these internal motions. And it must always be remembered, that the investigation of the formula, although it be rendered somewhat more perspicuous by thus having recourse to those notions, has no dependence on the truth oſ the principles. For it is, in fact, nothing but a classification of experiments, which are grouped together by some one circumstance of slope, velocity, form of section, &e. in order to discover the law oſ the changes which are induced by a variation of the circumstances which do not resemble. The procedure was precisely similar to that of the astronomer when he deduces the elements oſ an orbit from a multitude of observations This was the task of M. de Buat; and he candidly and modestly informs us, that the finding out analytical forms of expression which would exhibit these changes was the work of Mr Benzech de St Ho norè, a young officer of engineers, and his colleague in the ex perimental course It does honour to his skill and ad- dress; and we think the whole both a pretty and instructive specimen of the method of discovering the laws of nature in the midst of complicated phenomena. Daniel Bernoulli first gave the rules of this method, and they have been greatly improved by Lambert, Condorcet, and De la Grange. Mr Coulomb has given some excellent examples of their application to the discovery of the laws of frietion, of magnetical and electrical attraction, &e. But this present work is the most perspicuous and familiar of them all. It is the empirical method of generalizing natural phenomena, and of deducing general rules, of which we can give no other demonstration but that they are faithful representations of matters of factt. We hope that others, encouraged by the success of M. de Buat, vill follow this example, where public utility is preferred to a display of mathematical knowledge. Although the author may not have hit upon the precise modus operandi, ve agree with him in thinking that nature seems to act in a way not unlike what is here supposed. At any rate, the range of experiments is so extensive, and 30 multiſarious, that few cases can occur which are not included among them. The experiments vill always retain their value (as we presume that they are faithfully narrated), whatever may become of the theory; and we are confident that the formula will give an ansver to any question to which it may be applicable infinitely preferable to the vague guess of the most sagacious and experienced engineer. We must however observe, that as the experiments on pipes were all made with serupulous care in the contrivance and execution of the apparatus, excepting only those of Mr Couplet on the main pipes at Versailles, ve may presume, that the formula gives the greatest velocities which ean be expected. In ordinary works, where joints are rough or leaky, where drops of solder hang in the inside, where cocks intervene vith deficient water-ways, where pipes have awkward bendings, contractions, or enlargements, and where they may contain sand or air, we should reckon on a smaller velocity than vhat results from our calculation; and we presume that an undertaker may vith confidence promise 3 of this quantity without any risk of disappointing his employer. We imagine that the actual performance of canals vill be much nearer to the formula. We have made inquiry aſter works of this kind executed in Britain, that e might compare them vith the ſormula. But all our canals are locked and without motion; and we have only learned by an accidental information from Mr Weait, that a canal in his neighbourhood, which is 1I8 feet vide at the surface, and seven ſeet at the bottom, and four feet deep, and has a slope of one inch in a quarter of a mile, runs with the velocity of I7 inches per second at the surface, 10 at the bottom, and 14 in the middle. If we compute the motion of this canal by our formula, we shall find the mean velocity to be 183. No river in the world has had its motions so0 mush serutinized as the Po about the end of the last century. It had been a subject of 100 years continual litigation between the inhabitants of the Bolognese and the Ferrarese, whether the waters of the Rheno should be thrown into the Tronco de Venezia or Po Grande. This occasioned very numerous measures to be taken of its sections and declivity, and the quantities of water which it contained in its diſferent states oſ fulness. But, unfortunately, the long-established methods oſ measuring waters, hich were in ſorce in Lombardy, made no account of the velocity, and not all the entreaties of Castelli, Grandi, and other moderns, could prevail on the visitors in this process to deviate ſfrom the established methodss. We have thereſore no minute accounts of its velocity, though there are many rough estimates to be met with in that valuable collection published at Florence in 1728, of the vritings on the motion of riverss From them we have extracted the only precise observations which are to be found in the whole work. 5 The Po Grande receives no river from Stellata to the sea, and its slope in that interval is found most surprisingly uniſorm, namely, six inches in the mile (reduced to English measure). The breadth in its great freshes is 759 feet at Lago Scuro, with a very uniform depth of 81 feet. In its lowest state (in which it is called Po Magra), its breadth is not less than 700, and its depth about 104. The Rheno has a uniform declivity from the Ponte Enmilio to Vigarano of 15 inches per mile Its breadth in its greatest freshes is 189 ſeet, and its depth —. Signor Corrade, in his report, says, that in the state of the great freshes the velocity oſ the Rheno is most exactly 3 of that of the Po. Grandi says, that a great fresh in the Rheno employs 1I2 hours (by many observations of his own) to come from Ponte Emilio to Vigarano, which is S30 miles This is a velocity of 44 inches per second. And, by Corrades proportion, the velocity oſf the Po Grande must be 55 inches per second. Montanari's observation gives the Po Magra a velocity of 81 inches per second. Let us compare these velocities with the velocities caleulated by Buats formula. The hydraulic mean depths d and D of the Rheno and Po in the great freshes deduced from the above measures, are 98,6 and 344 inches; and their slopes 5 and S are 807 VD—o,1) 807 V àI—o,1) IVs.,0 a3uę and ,5355 This will give, VD—0, 1)=æ52,176 inches and VT—o,1)  46,127 inches. These results differ very little from the velocities abovementioned. And if the velocity corresponding to a depth of 31 feet be deduced from that observed by Montanari in the Po Magra 10 feet deep, on the supposition that they VOL. II. 2c are in the proportion of Vũ, it will be found to be about 533 inches per second. This comparison is therefore highly to the credit of the theory, and would have been very agreeable to M. de Buat, had he known it, as we hope it is to our readers. We have collected many accounts oſ water-pipes, and made the comparisons, and we ſlatter ourselves that these have enabled us to improve the theory. They shall appear in their proper place; and we may just observe here, that the two-inch pipe, which we formerly spoke of as conveying the water to Dunbar, should have yielded only 255 Scotch pints per minute by the formula, instead of 27; a small error. We have, therefore, no hesitation in saying, that this single formula of the uniform motion of vater is one of the most valuable presents which natural science and the arts have received during the course of this century. We hoped to have made this ſortunate investigation of the chevalier de Buat still more acceptable to our readers by another table, hich should contain the values oſ 307 TLVi58 ready calculated for every declivity that can occur in water-pipes, canals, or rivers. Aided by this, which supersedes the only difficult part of the computation, a person could calculate the velocity for any proposed case in less than two minutess But we have not been able to get it ready for its appearance in this article, but we shall not fail to give it when we resume the subject in the article WarER-Wonxs; and we hope even to give its results on a scale which may be carried in the pocket, and will enable the unlearned practitioner to solve any question ith accuracy in half a minute. WE have now established in some measure a TuEORY or HYDEAULICS, by exhibiting a general theorem which expresses the relation oſ the chief circumstances oſ all such motions as have attained a state of permanency, in so ſar as this depends on the magnitude, form, and slope of the channel. This permanency we have expressed by the term TRAIN, saying, that the stream is in train. We proceed to consider the subordinate circumstances contained in this theorem; such as, ls?t, The forms which nature or art may give to the hed of a running stream, and the manner of expressing this form in our theorem. 2d, The gradations of the velocity, by which it decreases in the different filaments, from the axis or most rapid filament to the border; and the connexion of this with the mean velocity, which is expressed by our formula. 84, Having acquired some distinet notions of this, we shall be able to see the manner in which undisturbed nature works in forming the beds of our rivers, the forms which she affects, and which we must imitate in all their lqpal modiſications, if ve would secure that permanency which is the evident aim of all her operationss We shall here learn the mutual action of the current and its bed, and the circumstances which ensure the stahility of both. These ve may call the regimen or the conservation of the stream, and may say that it is in regimen, or in conservation. This has a relation, not to the dimensions and thè slope alone, or to the accelerating force and the resistance arising from mere inertia; it respects immediately the tenacity of the bed, and is different from the train. 4th, These pieces oſ information vill explain the deviation of rivers from the rectilineal course; the resistance occasioned by these deviations; and the circumstances on which the regimen of a winding stream depends. SECT. L0  the Forms of the Channel. TuE numerator of the fraction which expresses the velocity of a river in train has VũT for one of its factors. That form, therefore, is most favourable to the motion, which 6 . gives the greatest value to what we have called the hydraulic mean depth d. This is the prerogative oſ the semicirele, and here d is equal to half the radius; and all other figures of the same area are the more favourable, as they approach nearer to a semicirclee. This is the form, therefore, oſ all conduit-ꝑipes, and should be taken for aqueducts which are built of masonry. Ease and accuracy of execution, however, have made engineers prefer a rectangular form; but neither of these vill do for a channel formed out of the groundc. We shall soon see that the semicircle is incompatible with a regimen; and, if ve proceed through the regular polygons, ve shall ſind that the half hexagon is the only one which has any pretensions to a regimen; yet experience shows us, that even its banks aro too steep ſor almost any soil. A dry earthen bank, not bound together by grass roots, will hardly stand with a slope of 43 degrees; and a canal which conveys running waters will not stand with this slope. Banks whose base is to their height as ſour io three ill stand very well in moist s0ils, and this is a slope very usually given. This form is even affected in the spontaneous operations oſ nature, in the channels which she digs ſor the rills and rivulets in the higher and steeper grounds. This form has some mathematical and mechanical properties which entitle it to some further notice. Let ABEC Fig. 12.) be such a trapezium, and AHGC the rectangle of equal width and depth. Biseet HB and EG by the verticals FD and XI, and drav the verticals b B, ? E. Because AH: HBæ/23: 4, we have AB =23, and BD /2, and FD æ3, and BD + DF BA. From these premises it follows, that the trapezium ABEC has the same area vith the rectangle; for HB being bisected in D, the triangles ACF, BCD are equal. Also the border ABEC, vhich is touched by the passing stream, is equal to FDIK. Therefore the mean depth, which is the quotient oſ the area divided by the border, is the same in both; and this is the case, whatever is the width BE at the bottom, or even though there be no rectangle such as b B E æ interposed between the slant sides. Of all rectangles, that whose breadth is twice the height, or vhich is half of a square, gives the greatest mean depth. If, therefore, F be double of FD, the trapezium ABEC, vhich has the same area, vill have ther largest mean depth of any such trapezium, and ill be the best form of a channel for conveying running waters. In this case, we have ACæ10, AH =3, and BE/2. Or we may say that the best form is a trapezium, whose bottom width is j of the depth, and whose extreme width is 3. This form approaches very near to that which the torrents in the hills naturally dig for themselves in uniform ground, where their action is not checked by stones which they lay bare, or which they deposit in their course.; This shows us, and it will be fully confirmed by and by, that the channel of a river is not a fortuitous thing, but has a relation to the consistency of the soil and velocity of the stream. A rectangle, whose breadth is 3 of the depth of water, vill therefore have the same mean depth with a triangle whose surface wide is à of its vertical depth; for this is the dimensions when the rectangle b B E è is taken avay. Let A be the area of the section of any chamel, w its width (hen rectangular), and h its depth of water. Then what we have called its mean depth, or d, will be A mh u+ 2”huDn+L & vidth to the depth of a rectangular bed; that is, if Or if q expresses the ratio of the §i we have a very simple and ready expression for the mean depth, either from the width or depthh For . 1 d or d 5 Therefore, if the depth were infinite, and the width ſinite, we should have d or if the width be inſi- nite, and the depth finite, ve have d =h. And these are the limits of the values of d; and therefore, in rivers whose vidth is always great in comparison of the depth, we may vithout much error take their real depth for their hydraulic mean depth. Hence we derive a rule of easy recollection, and which vill at all times give us a very near estimate of the velocity and expenæ of a running stream, viæ. that hæe velocities are nearly as the square roots of the depthc. We find this confirmed by many experiments of Michelotti. Also, when ve are allowed to suppose this ratio of the velocities and depths, that is, in a rectangular canal of great breadth and small depth, we shall have the quantities discharged nearly in the proportion of the cubes of the velocities. For the quantity discharged d is as the velocity and area jointly, that is, as the height and velocity jointly, because when the width is the same, the area is as the height. Thereſore, ve have d &h —But, by the above remark, h 2 9?. Thereſore, d 7v; and this is confirmed hy the experiments oſ Bossut, vol. ĩi. 236 Also, because d is as  h, when  is constant, and by the above remark (allowable vhen w is very great in proportion to h) vis as, h, ve have d as h  h, or hj, or the squares of the discharges proportional to the cubes of the heights in rectangular beds, and i in their corresponding trapeziums. I. Knowing the mean depth and the proportion of the width and real depth, ve can determine the dimensions of the bed, and we have w q d + 2, ?ænd h d 2d iiſũ 2. If ve know the area and mean depth, we can in like manner find the dimensions, that is, w and h; for JA? Au h, ond d 3 thereſore u 2a2A a iZ ꝗ. I d be known, and one of the dimensions be oae——+- given, ve can find the other; for d 5m gives 2hnd uDd nſa m23 l 4. If the velocity V and the slope S for a river in train be given, ve can ſind the mean depth; for V/ 297 ( STL6 03) VTO,1). Whence ve de5 v duce ,T—0,1 m ũ and JSLJ5T,6508 VũT æ to this quantity + O, I. 5. We can deduce the slope which will put in train a river whose channel has given dimensions. We make 27 (V—0. 1) ] li VF0, 55;757 ſ S This should be =4 8S L VS F7I, 6, which we correct by trials, which will be exemplified vhen we apply these doctrines to practice. Having thus established the relation between the diſferent circumstances of the form of the channel to our general formula, we proceed to consider, SECT. 2.The Gradations of Velocity from the Middle of the Streum to the Sides. TuE knowledge of this is necessary for understanding the regimen of a river; ſor it is the velocity of the filaments in contact with the bed which produces any change in it, and occasions any preference of one to another, in respect of regimen or stability. Did these circumstances not operate, the water, true to the laws of hydraulics, and confineds vithin the bounds which have been assigned them, would neither enlarge nor diminish the area of the channel. But this is all that we can promise of waters perfectly clear, running in pipes or hewn channelss But rivers, brooks, and smaller strèams, carry along waters loaded with mud or sand, which they deposite wherever their velocity is checked; and they tear up, on the other hand, the materials of the chanmel wherever their velocity is sufficiently great. Nature, indeed, aims continually at an equilibrium, and works without ceasing to perpetuate her own performances, by establishing an equality oſ action and reaction, and proportioning the forms and direction of the motions to her agents, and to local circmstancess Her work is slow but unceasing; and what she cannot accomplish in a year she vill do in a century. The beds of our rivers have acquired some stability, because they are the labour of ages; and it is to time that ve owe those deep and vide valleys which receive and confine our rivers in channels, which are now consolidated, and with slopes which have been gradually moderated, so that they no longer either ravage our habitations or confound our boundaries. Art may imitate nature, and by directin her operations (which she still carries on according to her own impreseriptible laws) according to our views, e can hasten her progress, and accomplish our purpose, during the short period of human lifee. But we can do this only by studying the unalterable laws of mechanism. These are presented to us by spontaneous nature. Frequently we remain ignorant of their foundation: but it is not necessary for the prosperity of the subject that he have the talents of the senator; he can profit by the statute without understanding its grounds. It is so in the present instance. We have not as yet been able to infer the law of retardation observed in the ſilaments of a running stream from any sound mechanical principlee. The problem, however, does not appear beyond our povers, if ve assume, vith Sir Isaac Newton, that the velocity oſ any particular filament is the arithmetical mean between those of ihe filaments immediately adjoining. We may be assured, that the filament in the axis of an inclined cylindrical tube, of which the current is in train, moves the ſustest, and that all those in the same cireumſerence round — it are moving with one velocity, and that the slowest are those which glide along the pipe. We may aſfirm the same thing of the motions in a semi-cylindrical inclined channel conveying an open stream. But even in these we have not yet demonstrated the ratio between the extreme velocities, nor in the different circles. This must be decided experimentallg. And here ve are under great obligations to M. de Buat. He has compared the velocity in the axis oſ a prodigious number and variety of streams, diſfering in size, form, slope, and velocity, and has computed in them all the mean velocity, by measuring the quantities of water discharged in a given time. His method of measuring the bottom veIocity was simple and just. He threw in a gooseberry, as nearly as possible, of the same specific gravity with the water. It was carried along the bottom almost without touching it. See RESISTANCE oF FLUIDS in this volume. He discovered the following laws: I. In small velocities the velocity in the axis is to that at the bottom in a ratio of considerable inequality. 2 This ratio diminishes as the velocity increases, and in very great velocities, approaches to the ratio of equality. 3. What was most remarkable was, that neither the magnitude of the channel, nor its slope, had any influence on changing this proportion, while the mean velocity remained the same. Nay, though the stream ran on a channel covered with pebbles or coarse sand, no difference worth minding was to be observed from the velocity over a polished channel. 4. And if the velocity in the axis is constant, the velocity at the bottom is also constant, and is not affected by the depth of water or magnitude of the stream. In some experiments the depth was thrice the width, and in others the width was thrice the depth. This changed the proportion of the magnitude of the section to the magnitude of the rubbing part, but made no change on the ratio of the velocities. This is a thing which no theory could point out. Another most important fact was also the result of his observation, viz. that the mean velocity in any pipe or open stream is the arithmetical mean between the velocity in the axis and the velocity at the sides of a pipe or botlom of an open stream. We have already observed, that the ratio of the velocity in the axis to the velocity at the bottom diminished as the mean velocity increased. This variation he was enabled to express in a very simple manner, so as to be easily remembered, and to enable us to tell any one of them by observing another. If we take unity from the square-root of the superficial velocity, expressed in inches, the square of the remainder is the velocity at the bottom; and the mean velocity is the half sum of these tuo. Thus, if the velocity in the middle of the stream be 25 inches per second, its square root is five; from which, if we take unity, there remains four. The square of this, or 16, is the velocity at the hottom, and 2 : 1 or 204, is the mean velocity. This is a very curious and most useful piece of information. The velocity in the middle of the stream is the easiest measured of all, by any light small body floating down it; and the mean velocity is the one which regulates the train, the discharge, the eſfect on machines, and all the most important consequences. l We may express this by a formula oſ most easy recollection. Let V be the mean velocity, v the velocity in the axis, and u the velocity at the bottom; ve have u Also vxmVV/3 +3);, and v/u + I) V=qv2~  +14, ad Vm"+) +1 u=VD—I)? and u=mVV—J2) Also v u 2 VV—/7 and V, mVu, vVV/7F: that is, the diſference between these velocities inereases in the ratio of the square roots of the mean velocities diminished by a small constant quantity. This may perhaps give the mathematicians some help in ascertaining the law oſ degradation from the axis to the sides. Thus, in a cylindrical pipe, ve may conceive the current as consisting of an infinite number of eylindrical shells sliding within each other like the draw-tubes oſ a spy-glass. Each of these is in equilibrio, or as much accelerated by the one vithin it as it is retarded by the one without; thereſore as the momentum of each diminishes in the proportion oſ its diameter (the thickness being supposed the same in all), the velocity oſ separation must increase by a certain law from the sides to the axis. The magnitude of the small constant quantity here spoken of seems to fix this law. The place of the mean velocity could not be discovered vith any precision. In moderate velocities it was not more than one-fourth or one-fifth of the depth distant from the bottom. In very great velocities it was sensibly higher, but never in the middle of the depth. The knowledge oſf these three velocities is of great importance. The superficial velocity is easily observed; hence the mean velocity is easily computed. This multiplied by the section gives the expense; and if we also measure the expanded horder, and then obtain the mean depth (or ũ), we can, by the formula of uniform motion, deduce the slope; or, knowing the slope, we can deduce any of the other circumstances. The ſollowing table of these three velocities will save the trouble of calculation in one of the most frequent questions of hydraulics. The knowledge of the velocity at the bottom is oſ the greatest use for enabling us to judge oſ the action of the stream on its bed; and we shall now make some observations on this particular. Every kind of soil has a certain velocity consistent with the stability of the channe. A greater velocity would enable the waters to tear it up, and a smaller velocity would permit the deposition of more moveable materials from above. It is not enough, then, for the stability of a river, that the aceelerating forces are s0 adjusted to the size and figure of its channel that the current may be in train: it must also be in equilibrio with the tenacity oſ the channel. We learn from observation, that a velocity oſ three inches per second at the bottom will just begin to work upon fine clay fit for pottery, and however firm and compact it may be, it will tear it up. Yet no beds are more stable than clay when the velocities do not exceed this: for the water soon takes away the impalpable particles of the superficial clay, leaving the particles of sand sticking by their lower half in the rest oſ the clay, which they now protect, making a very permanent hottom, if the stream does not bring down gravel or coarse sand, which ill rub oſf this very thin crust, and allow another layer to be worn off; a velocity of six inches vill lift fine sand; eight inches vill liſt sand as coarse as linseed; I2 inches will sweep along fine gravel; 24 inches ill roll along rounded pebbles an inch diameter; and it requires three feet per second at the bottom to sweep along shivery angular stones of the size of an egg. The manner in which unwearied nature carries on some oſ these operations is curious, and deserves to be noticed a littlee. All must recollect the narrow ridges or wrinkles which are left on the sand by a temporary fresh or stream. They are observed to lie across the stream, and each ridge consists of a steep ſace AD, BF (Fig. 24.) which looks down the stream, and a gentler slope DB, FC, which connects this with the next ridge As the stream comes over the first steep AD, it is directed almost perpendicularly against the point E immediately below D, and thus it gets hold oſ a particle of coarse sand, which it could not have detached from the rest had it been moving parallel to the surface of it. It easily rolls up the gentle slope EB; arrived there, the particle tumbles over the ridge, and lies close at the bottom of it at F, where it is protected by the little eddy, vhich is formed in the very angle; other particles lying about E are treated in the same vay, and, tumbling over the ridge B, cover the first particle, and now protect it eſfectually from any further disturbancee The same operation is going on at the bottom of each ridge. The brow or steep of the ridge gradually advances down the stream, and the whole set change their places, as represented by the dotted line a d bf; and after a certain time the particle which was deposited at F is found in an unprotected situation, as it was in E, and it now makes another step down the stream. The Abbè Bossut found, that when the velocity of the stream was just suſficient for lifting the sand (and a small excess hindered this operation altogether) a ridge advanced about 20 feet in a day. j Since the current carries off the most moveable matters of the channel, it leaves the bottom covered with the remaining coarser sand, gravel, pebbles, and larger stones. To these are added many which come down the stream vhile it is more rapid, and also many which roll in from the sides as the banks wear away. All these form a bottom much more solid and immoveable than a bottom of the medium s0il would have been. But this does not always maintain the channel in a permanent form; but frequently oceasions great changes, by obliging the current, in the event of any sudden fresh or swell, to enlarge its bed, and even to change it altogether, by working to the right and to the left, since it cannot work downwards. It is generally from sueh aceumulation of gravel and pebbles in the bot tom of the bed that rivers change their channels. It remains to ascertain, in absolute measures, the force vhich a eurrent really exerts in attempting to drag along vith it the materials of its channel; and which will produce this eſſect unless resisted by the inertia of these materials. It is thereſore of practical importance to know this foree. Nor is it abstruse or diſficultl. For when a current is in train, the accelerating force is in equilibrio with the resistance, and is therefore its immediate measure Now this accelerating force is precisely equal to the weight oſ the body of water in motion multiplied by the fraction which expresses the slopee The mean depth being equal to the quotient of the section divided by the border, the section is equal to the produet of the mean depth multiplied by the border. Therefore, calling the border b, and the mean depth d, we have the seetion  d b.. The body of water in motion is thereſore d bs (because  was the slant length of a part whose difference of elevation is I), and the accelerating force is dbæ x b or d b. But, if we would only consider this resistance as corresponding to an unit of the length oſ the channel, we must divide the quantity d b by 5, and the resistance is then &And ir we vould nsider the resistance only for an unit of the border, we must divide this expression by b; and thus this resistance (taking an inch for the unit) will be expressed for one square inch of the bed by the weight of a bulk of water which has a square inch for its base, ana è for it height. And, lastly, if E be taken for any given superſicial extent of the channel or bed, and F the obstruction, which we consider as a sort of friction, ve shall have F / ES Thus, let it be required to determine in pounds the resistance or friction on a square yard of a channel whose current is in train, which is 10 feet wide, four feet deep, and has a slope of one foot in a milee. Here E is nine feet. Ten foet width and ſour feet depth give a section of 40 feet. The border is 18 ſeet. Thereſore d = 2111 and 5 is 5280. Thereſore the friction is the weight of a column of water vhose base is nine feet, and height 9.11 udi nearly 8,f; ounces avoirdupois. SECT. 3.Settlement of the Beds of Rivers. HE who looks with a careless eye at a map of this world, is apt to consider the rivers which ramble over its surface as a chance-medley disposition oſ the drainers which carry off the waterss But it will afford a most agreeable object to a considerate and contemplative mind, to take it up in this very simple light; and having considered the many vays in which the drenched surſace might have been cleared of the superſluous waters, to attend particularly to the very way which nature has folloved. In following the troubled waters of a mountain torrent, or the pure streams vhich trickle from their bases, till he sees them swallowed up in the ocean, and in attending to the many varieties in their motions, he will be delighted with observing how the simple laws of mechanism are made so fruitful in good consequences, both by modiſying the motions of the waters themselves, and also by inducing new forms on the surface oſ the earth, fitted for re-acting on the vaters, and producing these very modifications of their motions which render them s0 beneficia. The permanent beds of rivers are by no means fortuitous gutters hastily scooped out by dashing torrents; but both they and the valleys through which they flow are the patient but unceasing labours of nature, prompted by goodness and directed by wisdom. n Whether we trace a river from the torrents which collect the superfluous waters oſ heaven, or from the springs which discharge what would otherwise be condemned to perpetual inactivity, each feeder is but a little rill which could not ramble far from its scanty source among growing plants and ahsorbent earth, without being sucked up and evaporated, did it not meet with other rills in its course. When united they form a body of water still inconsiderable, but much more able, by its bulk, to overcome the little obstacles to its motion; and the rivulet then moves with greater speed, as ve have now learned. At the same time, the surſace exposed to evaporation and absorption is diminished by the union of the rills. Four equal rills have only the surface of two when united. Thus the portion which escapes arrestment, and travels downwards, is continually increasing. This is a happy adjustment to the other operations of naturee. Were it otherwise, the lower and more valuable countries would be loaded with the passing waters in addition to their own surplus rains, and the immediate neighbourhood of the sea would be almost covered by the drains of the interior countries. But, fortunately, those passing waters occupy less room as they advance, and by this wise employment oſ the mbst simple means, not only are the superfluous waters drained off from our fertile fields, but the drains themselves become an useful part of the country by their magnitudee They become the hahitation of a prodigious number of fishes, which share the Creators bounty; and they become the means of mutual communication of all the blessings of cultivated society. The vagne ramblings of the rivers scatter them over the face of the country, and bring them to every door. It is not even an indifferent circumstance, that they gather strength to cut out deep beds for themselvess By this means they cut open many springs Without this, the produce of a heavy shower would make a swamp which would not dry up in many days. And it must be observed, that the same heat VOL. II. un which is necessary for the growth of useſul plants will produce a very copious evaporation. This must retum in showers much too copious for immediate vegetation, and the overplus would be destructivee Is it not pleasant to contemplate this adjustment oſ the great operations of nature, s50 diſſferent from each other, that if chance alone directed the detail, it was almost an infinite odds that the earth would be uninhabitable? But let us ſollow the waters in their operations, and nole the face of the countries through which they flow: attending to the breadth, the depth, and the slope of the valleys, we shall be convinced that their present situation is extremely different from what it was in ancient days; and that the valleys themselves are the works of the rivers, or at least of waters which have descended ſrom the heights, loaded vith all the lighter matters which they were able to bring away with them. The rivers flow now in beds which have a considerable permanency; but this has been the work of ages. This has given stability, both by filling up and smoothing the valleys, and thus lessening the changing causes, and also by hardening the beds themselves, which are now covered with aquatic plants, and lined with the stones, gravel, and coarser sand, out of which all the lighter matters have been washed away. The surface oſ the high grounds is undergoing a continual change; and the ground on which we now walk is by no means the same which was trodden by our remote ancestorss. The showers from heaven carry down into the valleys, or sweep along by the torrents, a part of the soil vwhich covers the heights and steeps The torrents carry this soil into the brooks, and these deliver part oſ it into the great rivers, and these discharge into the sea this fertilizing fat of the earth, where it is swallowed up, and ſorever lost for the purposes of vegetation. Thus the hillocks lose of their height, the valleys are filled up, and the mountains are laid bare, and show their naked precipices, which formerly were covered over vith a ſlesh and skin, but nov look like the skeleton of this globe. The low countries, raised and nourished for some time by the substance of the high lands, will go in their turn to be buried in the ocean; and then the earth, reduced to a dreary flat, ill become an immense uninhabitable masss This catastrophe is far distant, because this globe is in its youth, but it is not the less certain; and the united labours of the human race could not long protract the term. But, in the mean time, we can trace a beneſicent purpose, and a nice adjustment of seemingly remote cireumstances. The grounds near the sources of all our rivers are indeed gradually stripped oſ their most fertile ingredients. But had they retained them ſor ages, the sentient inhabitants of the earth, or at least the nobler animals, with man at their head, would not have derived much advantage from it. The general laws of nature produce changes in our atmosphere which must ever render these great elevations unfruitful. That genial varmth, which is equally necessary for the useful plant as for the animal which lives on it, is confined to the lower grounds. The earth, which on the top of mount Hæmus could only bring forth moss and dittany, when brought into the gardens of Spalatro, produced pot-herbs so luxuriant, that Dioclesian told his colleague Maximian that he had more pleasure in their cultivation than the Roman empire could confer. Thus nature not only provides us manure, but conveys it to our fields. She even keeps it safe in store for us till it shall be wanted. The tracts of country which are but newly inhabited by man, such as great part of America, and the nevly-discovered regions of Terra Australis, are still almost occupied by marshes and lakes, or covered with impenetrable forests; and they would remain long enough in this state, if population, continually increasing, did not increase industry, and multiply the hands of cultivators along with their necessities The Author of Nature was alone able to form the huge ridges of the mountains, to model the hillocks and the valleys, to mark out the ourses of the great rivers, and give the ſirst trace to every rivulet; but has leſt to man the task of draining his own hahitation and the fields which are to support him, because this is a task not beyond his powers. It was therefore of immense advantage to him that those parts of the globe into which he has not yet penetrated should remain covered with lakes, marshes, and forests, which keep in store the juice oſ the earth, which the influence of the air, and the viviſying warmth of the sun would have expended long ere now in useless vegetation, and which the rains oſ heaven would have swept into the sea, had they not been thus protected by their situation or their cover. It ĩs thereſore the business oſ man to open up these mines of hoarded wealth, and to thank the Author of all Good, who has thus husbanded them for his use, and left them as a rightſul heritage for those of aſter days. The earth had not in the remote ages, as in our day, those great canals, those capacious voiders, always ready to drain off the rain waters (of which only part is absorbed by the thirsty ground), and the pure waters of the springs from the foot oſ the hills The rivers did not then exist, or were only torrents, vhose waters, confined by the gulleys and glens, are searching ſor a place to escape. Hence arise those numerous lakes in the interior oſ great continents, of which there are still remarkable relies in North America, which in process oſ time vill disappear, and hecome champaign countries The most remote from the s23, unable to contain its waters, finds an issue through some gorge of the hills, and pours over its superfluous waters into a lower basin, which, in its turn, discharges its contents into another, and the last of the chain delivers its vaters by a river into the ocean. The communication was originally begun by a simple overſlowing at the lowest part of the marginn. This made a torrent, which quickly de”p- ened its bed; and this circumstance inereasing its velocity, as ve have seen, would extend this deepening backward to the lake, and draw oſf more of its waterss The work would go on rapidly at first, while earth and small stones only resisted the labours of nature; but these being washed avay, and the channel hollowed out to the firm rock on all sides, the operation must go on very slowly, till the immense cascade shall undermine what it cannot break off, and then a new discharge will commence, and a quantity of flat ground vill emerge all round the lake. The torrent, in the mean time, makes its vay down the country, and digs a canal, vhich may be ealled the ſirst sketch of a river, vhich vill deepen and widen its bed continually. The vaters of several basins united, and running together in a great body, vill (according to the principles we have established) have a much greater velocity, with the same slope, than those of the lakes in the interior parts of the continent; and the sum of them all united in the basin next the sea, aſter having broken through its natural mound, vill make a prodigious torrent, which will dig for itself a bed so much the deeper as it has more slope and a greater body of waters. The formation of the first valleys, by eutting open many springs, which were formerly concealed under ground, will add to the mass of running waters, aud contribute to drain off the waters oſ these basins. In course of time many of them vill disappear, and ſlat valleys among the mountains and hills are the traces of their former existence. When nature thus traces out the courses of future rivers, it is to be expected that those streams will most deepen their channels which in their approach to the sea receive into their bed the greatest quantities oſ rain and spring vaters, and that towards the middle of the continent they vill deepen their channels lesss In these last situations the natural slope of the fields causes the rain water, rills, and the little rivulets ſrom the springs, to seek their way o the riverss The ground can sink only by the flattening of the hills and high grounds; and this must proceed with extreme slowness, because it is only the gentle, though incessant work of the rains and springs. But the rivers, increasing in bulk and strength, and of necessity flowing over every thing, ſorm to themselves capacious beds in a more yielding soil, and dig them even to the level of the ocean. The beds of rivers by no means form themselves in one inclined plane. If we should suppose a canal AB (Fig13.) perfectly straight and horizontal at B, where it joins vith the sea, this canal would really be an inclined channel of greater and greater slope as it is farther from B. This is evident; because gravity is directed towards the centre of the earth, and the angle CAB contained between the channel and the plumb- line at A is smaller than the similar angle CBED; and consequently the inclination to the horizon is greater in A than in D. Such a canal, therefſore, would make the bed of a river; and some have thought that this was the real form of nature's work; but the supposition is a whim, and it is false. No river has a slope at all approaching to thiss. It would be 8 inches declivity in the mile next the ocean, 24 inches in the second mile, 40 inches in the third, and so on in the duplicate ratio (for the whole elevation) of the distances from the se Such a river would quickly tear up its bed in the mountains, (vere there any grounds high enough to receive it), and, except its first cuscade, would soon acquire a more gentle slope. But the ſact is, and it is the result of the imprescriptible laws of nature, that the continued track of a river is a succession of inclined channels, whose slope diminishes by steps as the river approaches to the sea. It is not enough to say that this results from the natural slope of the countries through which it flows, which we observe to increase in declivity as we go to the interior parts of the continent. Were it otherwise, the equilibrium to which nature aims in all her operations would still produee the gradual diminution of the slope of riverss Without it they could not be in a permanent train. That ve may more easily form a notion of the manner in which the permanent course of a river is established, let us suppose a stream or rivulet s a (Fig. 14.) far up the country, make its vay through a soil perfectly uniform to the sea, taking the course s a b c d e f, and receiving the permanent additions of the streams ga, h, ic, k d, le, and that its velocity and slope in all its parts are so suited to the tenacity of the soil and magnitude of its section, that neither do its waters during the annual freshes tear up its banks or deepen its bed, nor do they bring down from the high lands materials which they deposite in the channel in times of smaller velocity. Such a river may be said to be in a permanent state, to be in conservation, or to have stability. Let us call this state of a river its REGIMEN, denoting by the word the proper adjustment of the velocity of the stream to the tenacity of the channel. The velocity of its regimen must be the same throughout, because it is this vhich regulates its action on the bottom, which is the same from its head to the sea. That its bed may have stability, the mean velocity of the current must be constant, notvithstanding the inequality of discharge through its different sections by the brooks which it receives in its course, and notwithstanding the augmentation oſ its section as it approaches the sea. ] On the other hand, it behoved this exact regimen to commence at the mouth of the river, by the working of the vhole body of the river, in concert with the waters of the ocean, which always keep within the same limits, and make the ultimate level invariablee This working will begin to dig the bed, giving it as little breadth as possible: for this working consists chieſly in the efforts oſ falls and rapid streams, which arise oſ themselves in every channel which has t0 much slope. The bottom deepens, and the sides remain very steep, till they are undermined and crumble down; and being then diluted in the water, they are carried down the stream, and deposited where the ocean checks its speed. The banks crumble down anev, the valley or hollow ſorms; but the section, always confined to its bottom, cannot acquire a great breadth, and it retains a g00d deal of the ſorm of the trapezium formerly mentioned. In this manner does the regimen hegin to be established from ſ to e. With respect to the next part d ę, the discharge or produce is diminished by the want of the brook I.. It must take a similar ſorm, but its area will be diminished, in order that its velocity may be the same; and its mean depth d being less than in the portion ęf below, the slope must be greater. Without these conditions ve could not have the uniform velocity, which the assumed permanency in an uniform soil necessarily supposes. Reasoning after the same manner for all the portions c d, bc, a b, 5 a, we seæ that the regimen vill be successively established in them, and that the slope necessary for this purpose will be greater as we approach the river hend. The vertical section or proſile of the course of the river æa be d e f will therefore resemble the line SABCDEF which is sketched below, having its diſferent parts variously inclined to the horizontal line HF. Such is the process of nature to be observed in every river on the surface of the globe. It long appeared a kind of puzzle to the theorists; and it was this observation of the increasing, or at least this continued velocity with smaller slope, as the rivers increased by the addition of their tributary streams, which caused Guglielmini to have recourse to his new principle, the energy of deep waterss We have nov seen in vhat this energy consists. It is only æ greater quantity of motion remaining in the middle of a great stream of water aſter a quantity has heen retarded by the sides and bottom; and we see clearly, that since the addition of a new and perhaps an equal stream does not occu- Py a bæd of double surface, the proportion of the retardations to the remaining motion must continually diminish as a Tiver increases by the addition of new streams. If thereſore the slope were not diminished, the regimen would be destroyed, and the river would dig up its channel. We have a full confirmation of this n the many works which have been executed on the Po, which runs with rapidity through a rich and yielding soil. About the year 1600, the waters of the Panaro, a very considerable river, were added to the Po Grande; and although it brings along vith it in its freshes a vast quantity of sand and mud, it has greatly deepened the whole Tronco di Venezia from the confluence to the sea. This point was clearly ascertained by Manfredi about the year 1720, when the inhabitants of the valleys adjacent were alarmed by the projeet of bringing in the waters of the Rheno, which then ran through the Ferrarese. Their fears were overcome, and the Po Grande continues to deepen its channel every day vith a prodigious advantage to the navigations; and there are several extensive marshes which now drain off by it, aſter having been for ages under vater: and ĩt is to be particularly remarked, that the Rheno is the ſoulest river in iĩts freshes of any in that country We insert this remark, because it may be of great practical utility, as pointing out a method of preserving and even improving the depth of rivers or drains in flat countries, which ĩs not obvious, and rather appears improper: but it is strictly conformable to a true theory, and to the operations of nature, which never ſails to adjust every thing so as to bring about an equilibriumm. Whatever the deelivity of the country may have been originally, the regimen begins to be settled at the mouths of the rivers, and the slopes are diminisheũ in succession as ve recede from the coast. The original slopes inland may have been much greater; but they will (When busy nature has completed her work) be leſt somevhat, and only so much greater, that the velotity may be the same notwithstanding the diminution of the section and mean depth. Freshes vill disturb this methodical progress relative only to the successive permanent additions; but their effects chieſly accelerate the deepening oſ the bed, and the diminution of the slope, by augmenting the velocity during their continuance. But when the regimen of the permanent additions is once established, the freshes tend chieſly to widen the bed, without greatly deepening it: for the acquatic plants, vhich have been growing and thriving during the peaceable state of the river, are nov laid along, but not swept avay, by the freshes, and protect the bottom from their attacks; and the stones and gravel, vhich must have been leſt bare in a course of years, working on the soil, will also colleet in the bottom, and greatly augment its power of resistance; and even if the floods should have deepened the bottom some small matter, some mud vill be deposited as the velocity of the freshes diminishes, and this will remain till the next flood. VWe have supposed the soil uniform through the whole course: this seldom happens; thereſore the circumstances which ensure permanency, or the regimen of a river, may be very diſferent in its different parts, and in different rivers We may say in general, that the farther that the regimen has advanced up the stream in any river, the more slowly will it convey its waters to the seaThere are some general circumstances in the motion of rivers which it will be proper to take notice of just now, that they may not interrupt our more minute examination of their mechanism, and their explanations will then occur of themselves as corollaries of the propositions which we shall endeavour to demonstrate. In a valley oſ small width the river always occupies the Iowest part of it; and it is observed, that this is seldom in the middle oſ the valley, and is nearest to that side on vhich the slope from the higher grounds is steepest, and this without regard to the line of its course. The river generally adheres to the steepest hills, vhether they advance into the plain or retire from it. This general feature may be observed over the whole globe. It is divided into copartments by great ranges of mountains; and it may be observed, that the great rivers hold their course not very far from them, and that their chief feeders come from the other side. In every copartment there is a swell of the low country at a distance from the bounding ridge of mountains; and on the summit of this swell the principal feeders of the great river have their sources. The name valley is given with less propriety to these immense regions, and is more applicable to tracks of champuign land which the eye can take in at one view. Even here ve may observe a resemblance. It is not always in the very lowest part of this valley that the river has its bed; although the waters of the river flow in a channel below its immediate banks, these banks are ſrequently higher than the grounds at the foot of the hills. This is very distinctly seen in Lower Egypt, by means of the canals which are carried backward from the Nile for accelerating its fertilizing inundations When the calishes are opened to admit the waters, it is always observed that the districts most remote are the first covered, and it is several days before the immediately adjoining fields partake of the blessing. This is a consequence of that general operation of nature by vhich the valleys are formed. The river in its floods is Ioaded with mud, whieh it retains as long as it rolls rapidly along its limited bed, tumbling its waters over and over, and taking up in every spot as much as it deposites: but as s00n as it overſlows its banks, the very enlargement of its section diminishes the velocity of the water; and it may be observed still running in the track of its bed with great velocity, while the waters on each side are stagnant at a very small distance: therefore the water, on getting over the banks, must deposite the heaviest, the firmest, and even the greatest part oſ its burden, and must become gradually clearer as it approaches the hills. Thus a gentle slope is given as the valley in a direction which is the reverse oſ vhat one would expeet. It is, however, almost always the ease in wide valleys, especially if the great river comes through a soft country. The banks of the brooks and ditches are observed to be deeper as they approach the river, and the merely superficial drains run backwards from it. We have already observed, that the enlargement of the bed of a river, in its approach to the sea, is not in proportion to the increase of its waterss. This would be the case even if the velocity continued the same: and thereſore, since the velocity even increases, in consequence oſ the greater energy oſ a large body of water, which we now understand distinetly, a still smaller bed is suſficient for conveying all the water to the sea. This general law is broken, however, in the immediate neighbourhood of the sea; because in this situation the veIocity of the water is checked by the passing flood- tides of the ocean. As the whole waters must still be discharged, they require a larger bed, and the enlargement vill be chieſly in width. The sand and mud are deposited when the motion is retardedl. The depth of the mouth of the channel is therefore diminished. It must thereſore hecome wider. If this be done on a coast exposed to the foree of a regular tide, which carries the waters of the ocean across the mouth of the river, this regular enlargement of the mouth vill be the only consequence, and it will generally viden till it washes the foot of the adjoining hills; but if there be no tide in the sea, or a tide which does not set across the mouth of the river, the sands must be deposited at the sides of the opening, and become additions to the shore, lengthening the mouth of the channel. In this sheltered situation, every trivial ciroumstance will eause the river 1o work more on partieular parts oſ the bottom, and deepen the channel theree This keeps the mud suspended in such parts of the channel, and it is not deposited till the stream has shot ſarther out into the sea. It is deposited on the sides of those deeper parts oſ the channel, andq, increases the velocity in them, and thus still further protracts the deposition. Rivers s0 situated will not only lengthen their channels, but vill divide them, and produce islands at their mouthss A bush, a tree torn up by the roots by a mountain torrent, and floated down the stream, vill thus inevitably produce an island; and rivers in which this is common vill be continually shifting their mouths. The Mississippi is a most remarkable instance of thiss It has a long course through a rich il, and disembogues itself into the bay of Mexico, in a place where there is no passing tide, as may be seen by comparing the hours of high vater in diſferent placess. No river that ve know carries down its stream such numbers of rooted-up trees: they frequently interrupt the navigation, and render it always dangerous in the night-time. This river is s0 beset vith flats and shiſting sands at its mouth, that the most experienced pilots are puzzled; and it has protruded its channel above 50 miles in the short period that we have known it. The discharge of the Danube is very similar: s0 is that of the Nile; for it is discharged into a still corner oſ the Mediterranean. It may now be said to have acquired considerable permanency; but much of this is owing to human industry, which strips it as much as possible of its subsideable matter. The Ganges too is in a situation pretty similar, and exhibits similar phenomena. The Maragnon might be noticed as an exception; but it is not an exception. It has flowed very far in a level bed, and its vaters come pretty clear to Para; but besides, there is a strong tranverse tide, or rather current, at its mouth, setting to the south-east hoth during flood and ebb. The mouth of the Po is perhaps the most remarkable of any on the surface oſ this globe, and exhibits appearances extremely sinn gular. Its discharge is into a sequestered corner oſ the Adriatic. Though there be a more remarkable tide in this gulſ than in any part of the Mediterranean, it is still but triſling, and it either sets directly in upon the mouth of the river, or retires straight away from it. The river has many mouths, and they shift prodigiously. There has been a general increase of the land very remarkablee The marshes where Venice now stands were, in the Augustan age, everywhere penetrable by the fishing-boats, and in the 5th century could only bear a few miserable huts; now they are covered with crowds of stately buildings. Ravenna, situated on the southernmost mouth of the Po, was, in the Augustan age, at the extremity oſ a svamp, and the road to it was along the top of an artificial mound, made by Augustus at immense expense. It was, however, a ſine city, containing extensive docks, arsenals, and other massy buildings, being the great military port oſ the empire, vhere Augustus laid up his great ships of war. In the Gothic times it became almost the capital of the Western empire, and was the seat of government and of luxury. It must, therefore, be supposed to have every accommodadation of opulence, and ve cannot doubt of its having paved streets, wharſs, &c.; so that its wealthy inhabitants vere at least walking dry-footed from house to house. But nov ĩit is an Italian mile from the sen, and surrounded vith vineyards and cultivated fields, and is accessible in every direetion. All this must have been formed by depositions from the Po, ſlowing through Lombardy loaded vith the spoils oſ the Alps, which were here arrested by the reeds and bulrushes of the marsh. These things are in common course; but when vells are dug, we come to the pavements of the ancient city, and these pavements are all on one exact level, and they are eight feet below the sursace of the sea at low water. This cannot be aseribed to the subsiding of the ancient city. This would be irregular, and greatest among the heavy buildingss The tomb of Theodoric remains, and the pavement round it is on a level with all the others. The lower story is always full oſ vater; s0 is the lower story of the cathedral to the depth of three feet. The ornaments of both these buildings leave no room to doubt that they were formerly dry; and such a building as the cathedral eould not sink without crumbling into pieces. It is by no means easy to account for all thiss The depositions of the Po and other rivers must raise the ground; and yet the rivers must still ſ=low over al. We must conclude that the surſace of the Adriatic is by no means level, and that it slopes like a river ſfrom the Lagoon of Venice to the eastward. In all probability it even slopes considerably outwards from the shore. The last general observations which we shall make in this place is, that the surface oſ a river is not flat, considered athwart the stream, but convex: this is owing to its motion. Suppose a canal of stagnant water; its surſace would be a perſect level. But suppose it possible by any means to give the middle waters a motion in the direction of its length, they must drag along with them the waters immediately contiguous. These will move less swiſtly, and will in like manner drag the waters without them; and thus the vater at the sides being abstracted, the depth must be less, and the general surface must be convex acrosss The fact in a running stream is similar to this; the side waters are vithheld by the sides, and every filament is moving more slowly than the one next it towards the middle of the river, but faster than the adjoining filament on the land sidee This alone must produce a convexity of surſacee But besides this, it is demonstrable that the pressure of a running stream is diminished by its motion, and the diminution is proportional to the height which would produce the velocity with which it is gliding past the adjoining filament. This convexity must in all cases be very small. Few rivers have the velocity nearly equal to eight ſeet per second, and this requires a height of one ſoot only. SECT. .Of the Windings of Rivers. RivERS are seldom straight in their cours. Formed by the hand of nature, they are accommodated to every change of circumstance They wind around what they cannot get over, and work their way to either side according as the resistance of the opposite bank makes a straight course more diffieult; and this seemingly fortuitous rambling distributes them more uniformly over the surface of a country, and makes them everywhere more at hand, to receive the numberless rills and rivulets which eolleet the waters oſ our springs and the superſluities of our showers, and to eomfort our habitations with the many advantages which cultivation and society can derive from their presence In their feeble beginnings the smallest inequality of slope or consisteney ĩs enough to turn them aside and make them ramble through every field, giving drink to our herds and fertility to our s0il. The more ve follow nature into the minutiæ of her operations, the more must we admire the inexhaustible ſertility of her resources, and the simplicity of the means by which she produces the most important and beneficial effectss. By thus twisting the course of our rivers into 10,000 shapes, she keeps them long amidst our fields, and thus compensates for the declivity of the surface, which otherwise would tumble them with great rapidity into the ocean, loaded with the best and richest of our soil. Without this, the showers of heaven would have little influence in supplying the waste of incessant evaporation But as things are, the rains are kept slowly trickling along the sloping sides of our hills and steeps, winding round every clod, nay, every plant, which lengthens their eourse, diminishes their slope, checks their speed, and thus pre- vents them from quiekly brushing off from every part oſ the surface the lightest and best of the soll. The ſlattest of our holm lands would be too steep, and the rivers would shoot along through our finest meadows, hurrying every thing away with them, and would be unſit for the purposes of inland conveyance, if the inequalities of soil did not make them change this headlong course for the more beautiful meanders which we observe in the course of the small rivers winding through our meadows. Those rivers are in general the straightest in their course which are the most rapid, and which roll along the greatest bodies oſ water; such are the Rhone, the Po, the Danube. The smaller rivers continue more devious in their progress, till they approach the sea, and have gathered strength from all their tributary streams. Every thing aims at an equilibrium, and this directs even the ramblings of riverss It is of importance to understand the relation between the force of a river and the resistance vhich the soil opposes to those deviations from a rectilineal course; for it may frequently happen that the general procedure of nature may be inconsistent with our local purposes. Man was set down on this globe, and the task of cultivating it was given him by nature, and his chieſf enjoyment seems to be to struggle with the elementss He must not find things to his mind, but he must mould them to his own fancy. Yet even this seeming anomaly is one of nature's most heneficent laws; and his exertions must still be made in conformity with the general tram of the operations of mechanical nature: and vhen ve have any work to undertake relative to the course of rivers, ve must be eareful not to thwart their general rules, otherwise we shall be sooner or later punished for their inſraction. Things vill be brought back to their former state, iſ our operations are inconsistent with that equilibrium which is constantly aimed at, or some nev state of things which is equivalent will be soon induced. Iſ a well-regulated river VOL. II. l has been improperly deepened in some place, to answer some particular purpose of our own, or if its breadth has been improperly augmented, we shall soon see a deposition of mud or sand choke up our fancied improvements; because, as we have enlarged the section without inercasing the slope or the supply, the velocity must diminish, and floating matters must be deposited. It is true, we frequently see permanent channels where the forms are extremely different ſfrom that which the vaters would dig for themselves in an uniform soil, and which approaches a good deal to the trapezium described formerIy. We see a greater breadth frequently compensate for a vant of depth; but all such deviations are a sort of constraint, or rather are indications of inequality of soil. Such irregular forms are the works of nature; and if they are permanent, the equilibrium is obtained. Commonly the bottom is harder than the sides, consisting of the coarsest of the sand and of gravel; and thereſore the necessary seetion can be obtained only by inereasing the width. We are accustomed to attend chieſly to the appearances which prognosticate mischief, and we interpret the appearances of a permanent bed in the same way, and frequently form very ſalse judgmentss When we see onq bank low and flat, and the other high and abrupt, we suppose that the waters are passing along the first in peace, and vith a gentle stream, but that they are rapid on the other side, and are tearing avay the bank; but it is just the contrary. The bed being permanent, things are in equilibrio, and each bank is of a ſorm just competent to that equilibrium. If the soil on both sides be uniform, the stream is most rapid on that side where the bank is low and flat, for in no other form would it withstand the action of the stream; and it has been worn aay till its ſlatness compensates for the greater foree oſ the stream. The stream on the other side must be more gentle, otherwise the bank could not remain abrupt. In short, in a state of permanency, the velocity oſ the stream and form oſ the bank are just suited to each other. It is quite otherwise before the river has acquired its proper regimen. A careful consideration therefore of the general features of rivers which have settled their regimen, is oſ use for informing us concerning their internal motions, and directing us to the most effectual methods of regulating their eourse. We have already said that perpendicular brims are inconsistent with stability. A semicireular section is the form which would produce the quickest train of a river vhose expense and slope are given; but the banks at B and D (Fig. 15.) would crumble in, and lie at the bottom, vhere their horizontal surface would secure them from farther changee The bed vill acquire the form G c F, of equal section, but greater width, and with brims less shelving. The proportion of the velocities at A and c may be the same with that oſ the velocities at A and C; but the velocity at G and F vill be less than it was formerly at B, C, or D; and the velocity in any intermediate point E, being somewhat between those at F and c, must be less than it vas in any intermediate point oſ the semicireular bed. The velocities will therefore decrease along the border from c towards G and F, and the steepness oſ the border vill augment at the same time, till, in every point of the new border G c F, these two circumstances vill be so adjusted that the necessary equilibrium is established. The same thing must happen in our trapezium. The slope of the brims may be exact, and vill be retained; it vill, however, be too great anywhere below, where the velocity is greater, and the sides will be worn away till the banks are undermined and crumble down, and the river vill maintain its section by increasing its width. In short, no horder made up oſ straight lines is consistent with that gradation of velocity which will take place whenever we depart from a semicircular ſformm And we accordingly see, that in all natural channels the section has a curvilineal border, with the slope inereasing gradually from the bottom to the brim. These observations will enable us to understand how nature operates when the inequality oſ surface or of tenacity obliges the current to change its direction, and the river forms an elbow. Supposing always that the discharge continues the same, and that the mean veloeity is either preserved or restored, the following conditions are necessary for a permanent regimen: 1. The depth of water must be greater in the elbow than any where else. 2. The main stream, aſter having struek the concave bank, must be reflected in an equal angle, and must then be in the direction of the next reach of the river. 8. The angle of incidence must be proportioned to the tenagity of the soil. 4. There mu;t be in the elbow an increase of slope, or oſ head of vwater, capable of overcoming the resistance oceasioned by the elbow. The reasonableness, at least, of these conditions will appear from the following considerations: I. It is certain that force is expended in producing this change of direetion in a ehannel which, by supposition, diminishes the eurrent. The diminution arising from any cause which can be eompared vith frietion must be greater vhen the stream is directed against one oſ the banks. It may be very difſicult to state the proportion, and it would occupy too much of our time to attempt it; but it is suſficient that we be convinced that the retardation is greater in this case. We see no cause to increase the mean velocity in the elbow, and we must therefore conelude that it is diminishedc But we are supposing that the discharge continues the same; the section must therefore augment, or the channel inerease its transverse dimensionss The only question is, in what manner it does this, and what change of form does it affect, and what ſorm is competent to the final equilibrium and the consequent permanency of the bed? Here there is much room for conjeeturee M. Buat reasons as follows: If we suppose that the points B and C (Fig. 16.) eontinue on a level, and that the points H and I at the beginning of the next reach are also on a level, it is an inevitable consequence that the slope along CMI must be greater than along BEH, because the depression of H below B is equal to that of I below C, and BEH is longer than CMI. Therefore the velocity along the convex bank CMI must be greater than along BEH. There may even be a stagnation and an eddy in the contrary direction along the concave bank. Therefore, if the form of the section were the same as up the stream, the sides could not stand on the convex bank. When therefore the section has attained a permanent form, and the banks are again in equilibrio with the action of the current, the convex bank must be much flatter than the concave. If the water is ready still on the concave bank, that bank vill be absolutely perpendicular; nay, may overhang Accordingly, this state of things is matter of daily observation, and justifies our reasoning, and entitles us to say, that this is the nature oſ the internal motion of the filaments which we cannot distinetly observe. The water moves most rapidly along the convex bank, and the thread of the stream is nearest to this sidee Reasoning in this way, the section, which we may suppose to have been originally of the form Mb a E, Fig. I7.) assumes the shape MBAE. 2. Without presuming to know the mechanism of the internal motions oſ fluids, ve know that superficial waves are reflected precisely as if they were elastic bodies, making the angles of incidence and reflection equal. In as ſar thereſore as the superficial wave is concerned in the operation, M. Buats second position is just. The permanency of the next reach requires that its axis shall be in the direction of the line EP, which makes the angle GEP —/ — FEN. IF the next reach has the direction EQ, MR, the wave reflected in the line ES will work on the bank at S, and will be reſlected in the line ST, and work again on the opposite bank at T. We knov that the effect of the superficial motion is great, and that it is the principal agent in destroying the banks of canals. So far therefore M. Buat is rightt. We cannot say with any precision or conſidence how the actions of the under filaments are modified; but we know no reason for not extending to the under filaments what appears so probable with respect to the surface vater. 8. The third position is no less evident. We do not know the mode of action of the water on the bank; but our general notions on this subject, confirmed by common experience, tell us that the more obliquely a stream of vater beats on any bank, the less it tends to undermine it or wash it avay. A stiſf and cohesive soil therefore vill suffer no more from being almost perpendicularly buffeted by a stream than a friable sand would suffer from water gliding along its face M. Buat thinks, from experience, that a clay bank is not sensibly affected till the angle FEB is about 36 degrees. 4. Since there are causes of retardation, and we still suppose that the discliarge is kept up, and that the mean velocity, which had been diminished by the enlargement of the seetion, is again restored, we must grant that there is provided, in the mechanism of these motions, an accelerating force adequate to this effectt. There ean be no accelerating force in an open stream but the superficial slope. In the present case it is undoubtedly so; because by the deepening of the bottom where there is an elbow in the stream, we have of necessity a counter slope. Nov, all this head of vater, which must produce the augmentation of velocity in that part of the stream which ranges round the convex bank, vill arise from the cheek which the water gets ſrom the coneave bank. This occasions a gorge or swell up the stream, enlarges a little the section at BVC; and this, by the principal of uniſorm motion, will augment all the velocities, deepen the channel, and put every thing again into its train as soon as the water gets into the next reach. The water at the bottom of this basin has very little motion, but it defends the bottom by this very circumstance. Such are the notions which M. de Buat entertains of this part of the mechanism of running vaters. We cannot say that they are very satisſactory, and they are very opposite to the opinions commonly entertained on the subject. Most persons think that the motion is most rapid and turbulent on the side of the concave bank, and that it is owing to this that ahe bank is worn away till it become perpendicular, and that the opposite bank is flat, because it has not been gnaved avay in this manner. With respeet to this general view of the matter, these persons may be in the right; and when a stream is turned into a crooked and yielding channel for the first time, this is its manner of actionn. But M. Buat's aim is to investigate the circumstances which obtain in the case of a regimen; and in this view he is undoubtedly right as to the facts, though his mode of aceounting for these facts may be erroneous. And as this is the only useful view to be taken of the subject, it ought chiefly to be attended to in all our attempts to procure stability to the bed of a river, Without the expensive helps of masonry, &e. II we attempt to secure permanency by deepening on the inside of the elbow, our bank vill undoubtedly erumble down, diminish the passage, and occasion a more violent action on the hollow bank The most effectual mean of security is to enlarge the section; and if we do this on the inside bank, ve must do iĩt by videning the stream very much, that we may give a very sloping bank. Our attention is commonly dravn to it when the hollow bank is giving way, and with a view to stop the ravages oſ the stream. Things are not nov in a state of permanency, but nature is working in her own vay to bring it aboutt. This may not suit our purpose, and ve must thwart her. The phenomena which we then observe are ſrequently very unlike to those deseribed in the preceding paragraphs. We see a violent tumbling motion in the stream towards the hollow bank. We see an evident accumulation of water on that side, and the point B is frequently higher than CC This regorging oſ the water extends to some distance, and is of itself a enuse of greater velocity, , and contributes, like a head of stagnant water, to force the stream through the bend, and to deepert the bottom. This is clearly the case when the velocity is excessive, and the hollow bank able to abide the shock. In this situation the water thus heaped up escapes where it best can; and as the water, obstructed by an obstacle put in its way, escapes hy the sides, and there has its velocity increased, so here the water gorged up against the hollov bank svells over towards the opposite side, and passes round the convex bank with an increased velocity. It depends much on the adjustment between the velocity and consequent accumulation, and the breadth oſ the stream and the angle oſ the elbow, whether this augmentation of velocity shall reach the convex bank; and we sometimes see the motion very languid in that place, and even depositions of mud and sand are made theree The whole phenomena are too complicated to be accurately tescribed in general terms, even in the case of perfect regimen: for this regimen is relative to the consistence of the channel; and when this is very great, the motions may be most violent in every quarter. But the preceding observations are of importance, because they relate to ordinary cases and to ordinary channels. It is evident, from M. Buat's second position, that the proper ſorm of an elbow depends on the breadth of the stream as well as on the radius of curvature, and that every nngle oſ elbow ill require a certain proportion between the vidth of the river and the radiu of the sweep. M. Buat gives rules and formulæ for all these purposes, and shows that in one sweep there may be more than one reflection or rebound. It is needless to enlarge on this matter of mere geometrical discussion. It is with the view of enabling the engineer o trace the windings of a river in such a manner that there shall be no rebounds which shall direct the stream against the sides, but preserve it always in the axis of every reach. This is of consequence, even when the bends of the river are to be secured by masonry or piling; for we have seen the necessity of increasing the section, and the tendency which the waters have to deepen the channel on that side where the rebound is made. This tends to undermine our defences, and obliges us to give them deeper and more solid foundations in such places. But any person accustomed to the use of the scale and compasses will form to himself rules of practice equally sure and more expeditious than M. de Buat's ſormulæ. . We proceed, thereſore, to what is more to our purpose, the consideration of the resistance caused by an elbow, and the methods of providing a force capable of overcoming it. We have already taken notice of the salutary consequences arising from the rambling course of rivers, inasmuch as it more effectually spreads them over the face of a country. It is no less beneficial by diminishing their velocity. This it does both by lengthening their course, which diminishes the declivity, and by the very resistance which they meet vith at every bend. We derive the chief advantages from our rivers, vhen they no longer shoot their way from precipice to precipice, loaded with mud and sand, but peaceably roll along their clear waters, puriſied during their gentler course, and offer themselves for all the purposes of pasturage, agriculture, and navigationn. The more a river vinds its way round the foot oſ the hills, the more is the resistance oſ its bed multiplied; the more obstacles it meets with in its way from its source to the sea, the more moderate is its velocity; and instead of tearing up the very bowels of the earth, and digging for itself a deep trough, along which it sweeps rocks and rooted-up trees, it ſlows vith majestic pace even with the surface of our cultivated grounds, which it embellishes and fertilizes. We may vith saſety proceed on the supposition, that the force necessary for overcoming the resistance arising ſrom a rebound is as the square of the velocity; and it is reasonable to suppose it proportional to the square oſ the sine of the angle of incidence, and this for the reasons given for adopting this measure oſ the general RESISTANCE OF FLuIDS. It cannot, however, claim a greater confidence here than in that application; and it has been shown in that article with what uncertainty and limitations it must he receivedlc. We leave it to our readers to adopt either this or the simple ratio of the sines, and shall abide by the duplicate ratio with M. Buat, because it appears by his experiments that this laW is very exactly observed in tubes in inclinations not exceeding 40°; whereas it is in these small angles that the application to the general resistance of fluids is most in ſault. But the coſtection is very simple, if this value shall be found erroneous. There can be little doubt that the force necessary for overcoming the resistance will inerease as the number oſ reboundsTherefore we may express the resistance, in general, by the formula r/ Vi5' n : : . : ; where 7 is the resistance, V the mean velocity oſ the stream, æ the sine of the angle of incidence, n the number of equal rebounds (that is, having equal angles oſ incidence), and m is a number to be determined by experiment. M. de Buat made many experiments on the resistance occasioned by the bendings of pipes, none of which differed ſrom the result of the above formula above one purt in twelve; and he coneludes, that the resistance to V: 5 bend i Sꝶ i y one bend may be estimated at 5000 The experiment vas in this ſorm: A pipe oſ I inch diameter, and 10 ſeet long, was formed with 10 rebounds of 36 each. A head of ater was applied to it, which gave the water a velocity of six feet per secondl. Another pipe of the same diameter and length, but vithout any bendings, was subjected to a pressure of a head of vater, hich was increased till the velocity of efſlux vas also six feet per secondc The additional head of vater was 5;5 inchess Another of the same diameter and length, having one bend oſ 24 84, and running 85 inches per second, was compared with a straight pipe having the same velocity, and the difference of the heads of vater was ; of an inch. A computation from these two experiments ill give the above result, or, in 2 . 5 . English measure, r/ 59005 ery nearly. It is probable that this measure oſ the resistance is too great; for the pipe was of uniform diameter even in the bends: whereas in a river properly formed, where the regimen is exact, the capacity of the section of the bend is inereased. The application of this theory to inclined tubes and to open streams is very obvious, and very legitimate and safe. Let AB (Fig. 18.) be the whole height of the reservoir ABIE, and BC the horizontal length of a pipe, containing any number of rebounds, equal or unequal, but all regular, that is, construeted according to the conditions ſormerly mentioned. The whole head of water should be conceived as perſorming, or as divided into portions which perform, a three difſerent officesOne portion AD - impels the water into the entry of the pipe with the velocity with which it really moves in it; another portion EB is in equilibrio ith the resistances arising from the mere length of the pipe expanded into a straight line; and the third portion DE serves to overcome the resistance of the hends. If, therefore, we draw the horizontal line BC, and, taking the pipe BC out of its place, put ĩt in the position DH, vith its mouth C in H, s0 that DH is equal to BC, the vater will have the same velocity in it that it had heſore. N. BFor greater simplicity oſ argument, we may suppose that when the pipe was inserted at B, its bends all lay in a horizontal plane, and that when it is inserted at D, the plane in which all its bends lie, slopes only in the direction DH, and is perpendicular to the plane oſ the figuree. We repeat it, the water will have the same velocity in the pipes BC and DH, and the resistances will be overcome. If we now prolong the pipe DH towards L to any distance, repeating continually the same bendings in a series of lengths, each equal to DH, the motion will be continued with the velocity corresponding to the pressure; of the columm AD; because the declivity of the pipe is augmented in each length equal to DH, by a quantity precisely suſficient for overcoming all the resistances in that length; and the true slope in these cases is BE  ED, divided by the expanded length oſ the pipe BC or DH. The analogy which we were enabled to establish between the uniform motion or the train of pipes and of open streams, entitles us now to say, that when a river has bendings, which are regularly repeated at equal intervals, its slope is compounded of the slope which is necessary for overcoming the resistance of a straight channel of its whole expanded length, agreeably to the formula for uniform motion, and oſ the slope which is necessary for overcoming the resistance arising from its bendings alone. Thus, let there be a river which, in the expanded course of 6000 fathoms, has 10 elbows, each of which has 0° of rebound; and let its mean velocity be 20 inches in a second. If we would learn its whole slope in this GO00 ſathoms, ve must first find (by the formula of uniform motion) the slope s which will produce the velocity of 20 inches in a straight river of this length, section, and mean depth. Suppose this to be ,;355, or 20 inches in this whole length. We must then find (by the formula Lut. ) the slope nev cessary ſor overcoming the resistance of 10 rebounds of 80 each. This we shall find to be 63 inches in the 6000 fathoms. Thereſore the river must have a slope oſ 26 inches in 6000 ſathoms, or æ5355;: and this slope vill produce the same velocity which 20 inches, or;1335, would do in a straight running river of the same length. ParT ILPRACTICAL INFERENCES. HAVING thus established a theory of a most important part of hydraulies, which may be confided in as a just representation of nature's procedure, we shall apply it to the examination oſ the chieſ results oſ every thing which art has contrived ſor limiting the operations of nature, or modifyimg them so as to suit our particular viess. Trusting to the detail which we have given of the connecting principles, and the chief circumstances which co-operate in producing the ostensible effeet; and supposing that such oſ our readers as are interested in this subject will not think it too much trouble to make the applications in the same detail; we shall content ourselves with merely pointing out the steps of the process, and showing their foundation in the theory itself: and ſrequently, in place of the direct analysis which the theory enables us to employ for the solution of the problems, we shall recommend a process of approximation by trial and correction, suſficiently accurate, and more vithin the reach of practical engineers. We are naturally led to consider in order the following articles I. The efſects of permanent additions of every kind to the waters of a river, and the most effectual methods of preventing or removing inundations. 2. The effects oſ weirs, bars, sluices, and keeps of every ind, for raising the surface oſ a river; and the similar eſſects oſ bridges, piers, and every thing which contracts the section of the stream. 3. The nature oſ canals; how they differ from rivers in respect oſ origin, discharge, and regimen, and vhat conditions are necessary for their most perfect construetion. 4. Canals for draining land, and drafts or canals of derivation from the main stream. The principles of their construetion, so that they may suit their intended purposes, and the change which they produce on the main stream, both above and below the point of derivation. Qf the Effects of permanent Additions to the Waters of a River. From what has been said already, it appears that to every kind of soil or bed there corresponds a certain velocity of current, too small to hurt it by digging it up, and too great to allow the deposition oſ the materials which it is carrying along. Supposing this known for any particular situation, and the quantity ofſ water which the channel must of necessity discharge, ve may vish to learn the smallest slope which must be given to this stream, that the vaters may run with the required velocity. This suggests Pros. I. Given the discharge D of a river, and V its velocity of regimen: required the smallest slope s, and the dimensions of its bed ? Since the slope must be the smallest possible, the bed must have the form which will give the greatest mean depth d, and should therefore be the trapezium formerly deseribed; and its aren and perimeter are the same vwith those of a rectangle vhose breadth is twice its height .These : : . D circumstances give us the equation vV 9I2. For the area of the section is twice the square oſ the height, and 4 the discharge is the produet of this area and the velocity. D 7D Therefore / h and ? = the breadth b. The formula of uniform motion gives V 3m LV5+I,6 2Q7 1va ,1 V4038T- 0o,1) N DO, 1, and every thing being known in the second Instead of Y , 1, put its equal nenb of this equation, ve easily get the value of s by a few trials aſter the following manner. Suppose that the second member is equal to any number, such as 9. First suppose that V5 is=9. Then the hyperbolie logarithm of 9+1,6 or of 10,6 is 2,36. Therefore ve have , s LVY5FT,592,36,o6,64; vhereas it should have been 9. Thereſore say 6,64: 9/9: I2,2 nearly. Now suppose that  æ is=12,2. Then L12,2+I,6L13,8, = 2,625 nearly, and 12,22,625 is 9,575, whereas it should be 92. Now we find that changing the value oſ F ſrom 9 to 12,2 has changed the answer ſrom 6, 64 to 9,575, or a change of 3,2 in our assumption has made a change of 2,935 in the answer, and has leſt an error of 0,575. Therefore say 2,935: 0,57 8,2: 0,628. Then, taking O,628 ſrom 12,2, ve have (for our next assumption or value of Y5) 11,57. Now 11,571 + 1,6 18, 172, and L 18,172 is 2,58 nearly. Now try this last value 11,5722,58 is 9,008, suſficiently exact. This may serve as a specimen of the trials by which ve may avoid an intricate analysis. Pros. II. Given the discharge D, the slope s, and the velocity V, of permanent regimen, to find the dimensions of the bed. Let æ be the width, and  the depth of the channel, and S the area oſ the sectionn. This must be = 2 which is discharge D, to find how mueh the section will rise, ĩſ the discharge be augmented by a given quantity. Let h be the height aſter the augmentation, and w the vidth for the rectangular bed. We have in any uniform current Vũ — Raising this to a square, and 2Wo3 / : . wh D putting for d and V their values 2 and Zſ and  207 wh making 78 0,3 K, the equation becomes-- 3'n D \: . 7 +0,1 JE Raising the' second member to a square, and reducing, ve obtain a cubic equation, to be solved in the usual manner. j But the solution would be extremely complicated. We may obtain a very expeditious and exact approximation from this consideration, that a small change in one of the dimensions oſ the section will produce a much greater change in the section and the discharge than in the mean depth d. Having therefore augmented the unknown dimension, vhich is here the height, make use of this to ſorm a new mean depth, and then the neW equation  E - + 0,1 will give us another value of h,  D0 vhich will rarely exceed the truth by 45,, This serves y the same process) for finding another, which will commonly be suſficiently exact. We shall illustrate this by an example. Let there be a river whose channel is a rectangle 150 feet wide and six ſeet deep, and which discharges 1500 cubic feet of water per second, having a velocity oſ 20 inches, and slope of ,;,b55, or about ; oſ an inch in 100 fathoms. How much vill it rise if it receives an advoL. II. 2x dition which triples its discharge ? and what vill be its velocity ? If the velocity remained the same, its depth would be tripled; but we know by the general formula that its velocity will be greatly increased, and therefore its depth will not be tripled. Suppose it to be doubled, and to become 129 feet. This will give d =10,34483, or 124, 138 inches; D then the equation V ĩ —0,1/VJ—or h —0,8 7) D . . —552X2 and in vhich ve have / B— v  i—o,1) 5708) 107,8, D4500; V d —0,111,0417, will give h/ 18,276; whereas it should have been I2. This shows that our calculated value of d was too small. Let us therefore increase the depth by 0,9, or make it 12,9, and repeat the caleulation. This will give us va—o,111,3997, and hæ 12,867, instead of 13,276. Therefore augmenting our data 0,9 changes our answer 0, 09. If we suppose these small changes to retain their proportions, ve may conclude that iſ 12 he augmented by the quantity æ x 0,, the quantity 18,276 will diminish by the quantity æ x 0,409. Therefore, that the estimated value of h may agree with the one which results ſrom the calculation, we must have I2+x x 0,9 æ 18,276 æ X 0,409. This vill = 0,9748, and æ } 0,97/ 0,8778; and h=/ IL2,8773. If we repeat the calculation with this value of hi, we shall find no change. This value of h gives d = 181, 8836 inches. If we now compute the new velocity by dividing the new discharge 4500 by the new area 150 x 12,8778, we shall find it to be 27,95 inches, in place of 20, the former velocity. give æ—/ We might have made a pretty exact first assumption, by recollecting what was formerly observed, that when the breadth is very great in proportion to the depth, the mean depth differs insensibly from the real depth, or rather follows nearly the same proportions, and that the velocities are proportional to the square roots oſ the depths. Call the the first discharge d, the height h, and velocity v, and let D, H, and V, express these things in their augmented qd state. We have v = ma V and 9: V æ a D > B ma: v,.& a =h: H. Therefore h: H =2: v an )B and ? D = H d, a: D æ : H (a useful theoand H ana H /sV rem) -7 F But by this remark v': V: = 12,48 Or ve might have made the same assumption by the remark also formerly made on this case, that the squares of the discharges are nearly as the cubes of the height, or 15000: 45000°  65: 22,485. And in making these first guesses we shall do it more exactly, by recollecting that a certain variation of the mean depth d requires a greater variation oſ the height, and the inerement will be to the height nearly as halſ the height to the width, as may easily be seenn. Thereſore, if ve add o 12,48 its 3 . th part, or its 24th part, viz. 0,52, ve have 18 ſor our first assumption, exceeding the truth only an inch and a hall. We mention these circumstances, that those who are disposed to apply these doctrines to the solution of practical cases may be at no loss when one occurs of which the regular solution requires an intricate analysis. It is evident that the inverse of the foregoing problems 5 vill show the eſfects oſ enlarging the section oſ a river, that is, will show how much its surſace will be sunk by any proposed enlargement of its bed. It is therefore needless to propose such problems in this placee Common sense directs us to make these enlargements in those parts oſ the river where their efſect ill be the greatest, that is, where it is shallowest when its breadth greatly exceeds its depth, or where it is narrovest, (iſ its depth exceed the breadth, vhich is a very rare case), or in general, where the slope is the smallest for a short run. The same general principles direct us in the method of embankments, for the prevention of floods, by enabling us to ascertain the heights necessary to be given to our banks. This will evidently depend, not only on the additional quantity of water which experience tells us a river brings down during its freshes, but also on the distance at which we place the banks from the natural banks of the river. This is a point where mistaken economy frequently defeats its ovn purpose. If we raise our embankment at some distance from the natural banks of the river, not only vill a smaller height suffice, and consequently a smaller base, which vill make a saving in the duplicate proportion of the height; but our works will be so much the more durable nearly, if not exactly, in the same proportion. For by thus enlarging the additional bed which we give to the swollen river, we diminish its velocity almost in the same proportion that we enlarge its channel, and thus diminish its pover oſ ruining our workss. Except, therefore, in the case of a river whose freshes are loaded with fine sand to destroy the turſ, it is always proper to place the embankment at a considerable distance from the natural banks. Placing them at half the breadth oſ the stream from its natural banks, will nearly double its channel; and, except in the case now mentioned, the space thus detached from our ſields will afford excellent pasture. The limits of such a vork as ours vill not permit us to m enter into any detail on the method of embankment. It would require a volume to give instructions as to the manner of founding, raising, and securing the dykes which must be raised, and a thousand circumstances which must be attended to. But a few generãl observations may be made, vhich naturally occur while we are considering the manner in which a river 5orks in settling or altering its channel. It must be remarked, in the first place, that the river will rise higher vhen embanked than it does while it was allowed to spread; and iĩt is by no means easy to conclude to what height it will rise from the greatest height to which it has been observed to rise in iĩts floodss. When at liberty to expand over a wide valley, then it could only rise till it overflowed vith a thickness or depth of vater sufficient to produce a motion backwards into the valley quick enough to take off the vater as fast as it was supplied; and ve imagine that a foot or two would suſfice in most cases. The best way for a prudent engineer vill be to observe the utmost rise remembered by the neighbours in some gorge, vwhere the river cannot spread out. Measure the increased section in this place, and at the same time recollect, that the water increases in a much greater proportion than the section; because an increase of the hydraulic mean depth produces an increase of velocity in the duplicate proportion of the depth nearly. But as this augmentation of velocity vill obtain also between the embankments, it will be suſficiently exact to suppose that the section must be increased here nearly in the same proportion as at the gorge already mentioned. Neglecting this method of information, and regulating the height of our embankment by the greatest swell thatthas been observed in the plain, vill assuredly make them too low, and render them totally useless. A line of embankment should always be carried on by a strict concert of the proprietors of both banks through its vhole extent. A greedy proprietor, by advancing his own embankment beyond that of his neighbours, not only exposes himself to risk by the working of the waters on the angles which this will produce, but exposes his neighbours also to danger, by narrowing the section, and thereby raising the surface and inereasing the velocity, and by turning the stream athwart, and causing it to shoot against the opposite bank. The whole shojld be as much as possible in a line; and the general effect should be to make the course of the strenm straighter than it was before All bends should be made more gentle, by keeping the embankment further from the river in all convex lines of the natural bank, and bringing it nearer here the bank is concave. This will greatly diminish the action of the waters on the bankment, and ensure their durationn. The same maxim must be ſollowed in fencing any brook which discharges itself into the river. The bends given at its mouth to the two lines of embankment should be made less acute than those of the natural brook, although, by this means, two points of land are left out. And the opportunity should be embraced of making the direction of this transverse brook more sloping than before, that is, less athart the direction of the river. It is of great consequence to cover the outside of the dyke vith very compact turf closely united. If it admit water, the interior part of the wall, which is always more porous, becomes drenched in water, and this water acts with its statical pressure, tending to burst the bank on the land-ide, and vill quickly shift it from its seat. The utmost care should thereſore be taken to make it and keep it perfeetly tight. It should be a continued fine turf, and every bare spot should be carefully covered with fresh sod; and ratholes must be careſully closed up. . Qf straighting or changing the Course of Rivers. WE have seen, that every bending of a river requires an additional slope in order to continue its train, or enable it to convey the same quantity of water without swelling in its bed. Thereſore the effect oſ taking away any of these bends must be to sink the waters of the river. It is proper, therefore, to have it in our power to estimate these effects. It may be desirable to gain property, by taking avay the sweeps of a very winding stream. But this may be prejudicial, by destroying the navigation on such a river. It may also hurt the proprietors below, by increasing the velocity of the stream, which will expose them to the risk of its overflowing, or oſ its destroying its bed, and taking a new course. Or this increase of velocity may be inconsistent with the regimen of the new channel, or at least require larger dimensions than we should have given it if ignorant of this effeet. Our principles of uniform motion enable us to answer every question of this kind which can occur; and M. de Buat proposes several problems to this effectt. The regular solutions of them are complicated and difficult; and we do not think them necessary in this place, because they may nll be solved in a manner not indeed so elegant, because in direet, but abundantly accurate, and easy to any person ſomiliar with those which we have already considered. We can take the exact level across all these sweeps, and thus obtain the whole slopee. We ean 'measure with accuracy the velocity in some part of the channel which is most remote ſrom any bend, and where the channel itself has the greatest regularity of form. This will give us the expense or discharge of the river, and the mean depth connected vith itt. We can then examine whether this velocity is precisely such as is compatible with stability in the straight course. Ifit is, it is evident that if we cut off the bends, the greater slope which this will produce will communicate to the waters a velocity incompatible with the regimen suited to this soil, unless ve enlarge the width of the stream, that is, unless ve make the new channel more capacious than. the old one. We must nov calculate the dimensions of the channel which, with this increased slope, vill conduet the waters with the velocity that is necessary. All this may be done by the foregoing problems; and we may easiest accomplish this by steps. First, suppose the bed the same vith the old one, and calculate the velocity for the increased slope by the general formula. Then change one of the dimensions of the channel, so as to produce the velocity we want, which is a very simple processs And in doing this, the object to be kept chieſly in view is not to make the new velocity such as vill be incompatible with the stability of the new bed. Having accomplished this first purpose, we learn ſin the very solution) how much shallower this channel with its greater slope will be than the ſormer, vhile it discharges all the waterss This diminution of depth must increase the slope and the velocity, and must diminish the depth of the river, above the place where the alteration is to be made. How far it produces these effects may be calculated by the general formula. We then see whether the navigation vill be hurt, either in the old river up the stream, or in the new channel. It is plain that all these points cannot be reconciledc We may make the new channel such, that it shall leave a velòcity compatible with stability, and that it shall not diminish the depth of the river up the stream. But, having a greater slope, it must have a smaller mean depth, and also a smaller real depth, unless ve make it oſ a very inconvenient form. : The same things, vieed in a different light, will show us what depression oſ waters may be produced by rectiſying the course of a river in order to prevent ĩts overſloing. And the process vhich ve would recommend is the same vith the foregoing. We apprehend it to be quite needless to measure the angles of rebound, in order to compute the slope vhich is employed ſor sending the river through the bend, vith a view 10 supersede this by straighting the river. It is infinitely easier and more exact to measure the levels themselves, and then we know the eſfect oſ removing them. Nor need we follow M. de Buat in solving problems for diminishing the slope and velocity, and deepening the channel of a river by bending its coursee The expense of this would be in every case enormous; and the practices which we are just going to enter upon afford infinitely easier methods of accomplishing all the purposes which are to be gained by these changes. Of Bars, Weirs, und Ietties, for ruising the Surface of Rivers. WE propose, under the article WaræR- WORES, to consider in sufficient practical detail all that relates to the construction and mechanism oſf these and other erections in water; and ve confine ourselves, in this place, to the mere effect which they will produce on the current of the river. We gave the name oſ weir or bar to a dam erected across a river for the purpose of raising its waters, whether in order to take off a draſt for a mill or to deepen the channel. Before we can tell the effect which they will produce, ve must have a general rule for ascertaining the relation between the height of the water above the lip oſ the weir or bar, and the quantity of water which ill flow over. First, then, with respect 1o a weir, represented in Fig. 19, 20. The latter figure more resembles their usual form, consisting of a dam of solid masonry, or built of timber, properly fortified with shoars and banks. On the top is set up a strong plank FR, called the wasteboard, or waster, over which the water flows. This is brought to an accurate level, of the proper height. Such voiders are ſrequently made in the. side of a mill-course, for letting the superfluous water run Po This is properly the waster, voider: it is also called an ofsett. The same observations will explain all these diſferent pieces oſf practice. The following questions ocur in course: Pnos. I. Given the length of an offset or wasteboard, made in the face of a reservoir of stagnant water, and the depth of its lip under the horizontal surface of the water, to determine the discharge, or the quantity of water which vill run over in a second? Let AB be the horizontal surſace of the still water, and F the lip of the wasteboard. Call the depth BF under the surface h, and the length of the wastehoard I. N. B. The water is supposed to flow over into another basin or channel, so0 much lower that the surface HL of the water is lower, or at least not higher, than F. If the water could be supported at the height BF, BF might be considered as an orifice in the side of a vessel. In which ease, the discharge would be the same as if the whole water were flowing with the velocity acquired from the height 3 BF, or 3 .And if we suppose that there is no contraction at the orifice, the mean velocity would be ẽ gih,N7ĩã́ h, in English inches per second The area of this oriſice is Ih. Thereſore the discharge would be I h V7 ẽ́ꝶ, all being measured in inchess. This is the usual theory; but it is not an exact representation of the manner in which the efflux really happens. The water cannot remain at the height BF; but in draving towards the wasteboard ſrom all sides, it forms a convex surſace AIH, s0 that the point I, where the vertical dravn from the edge oſ the wasteboard meets the curve, is considerably lower than B. But as all the mass above F is supposed perfectly ſluid, the pressure of the incumbent water is propagated, in the opinion of M. de Buat, to the filament passing over at F vithgut any diminutionn. The same may be said of any filament between F and I. Each tends, thereſore, to move in the same manner as iſ it were really impelled through an orifice in its placee Thereſore the motions through every part of the line or plane IF are the same as if the water were escaping through an oriſice TF, made by a sluice let down on the vater, and kęeping up the water of the reservoir to the level AB. It is beyond a doubt (says he) that the height IF must depend on the whole height BF, and that there must be a certain determined proportion between them. He does not attempt to determine this proportion theoretically, but says, that his experiments ascertain it with great precision to be the proportion of one to two, or that IF is always one- half of BF. He says, however, that this determination was not by an immediate and direet measurement; he concluded it from the comparison of the quantities o water discharged under different heights of the water in the reservoir. We cannot help thinking that this reasoning is very defective in several particularss. It cannot be inſerred, from the laws of hydrostatical pressure, that the filament at I is pressed forward with all the weight oſ the column BI. The particlè ITis really at the surface; and considering it as making part of the surſace of a rumning stream, it is subjected to hardly any pressure, any more than the particles on the surſace of a cup of water held in the hand, while it is carried round the axis of the earth and round the sun. Reasoning according to his own principles, and availing himselſ of his ovn diseovery, he should say, that the particle at Thas an accelerating force depending on its slope only; and then he should have endeavoured to ascertain this slope. The motion of the particle at I has no immediate connection with the pressure of the column BI; and if it had, the motion vould be extremely different from what it is: for this pressure alone would give it the velocity which M. Buat assigns it. Now it is already passing through the point I with the velocity which it has acquired in descending along the curve AT; and this is the real state of the case. The purticles are passing through vith a velocity already acquircd by a sloping cur- rent; and they are accelerated by the hydrostatical pressure of the vater above them. The internal mechanism of these motions is infinitely more complex than M. Buat here supposes; and on this supposition he very nearly abandons the theory which he has so ingeniously established, and adopts the theory of Guglielmini which he had exploded. At the same time, we think that he is not much mistaken when he asserts, that the motions are nearly the same as iſ a sluice had been let down from the surface to I. For the filament which passes at I has been gliding down a curved surface, and has not been exposed to any friction. It is perhaps the very case of hydraulies, vhere the obstructions are the smallest; and we should therefore expect that its motion will be the least retarded. We have therefore no hesitation in saying, that the filament at I is in the very state of motion which the theory would assign to it iſ it were passing under a sluice, as M. Buat supposes. And with respect to the inferior filaments, vithout attempting the very diſſicult task of investigating their motions, ve shall just say, that we do not see any reason ſor supposing that they will move slower than our author supposes. Therefore, though we reject his theory, we admit his experimental proposition in general; that is, we admit that the whole water which passes through the plane IF moves with the velocity (though not in the same direction) with which it would have run through a sluice of the same depth; and ve may proceed with his determination of the quantity of water discharged. If we make BC the axis of a parabola BEGEK, the velocities of the filaments passing at I and F will be represented by the ordinates IE and FG, and the discharge by the area IEGF. This allows a very neat solution of the problemm Let the quantity discharged per second be D, and let the whole height BF be h. Let 2 G be the quantity by which we must divide the square oſ the mean velocity, in order to have the producing heightt. This will be less than 2 5, the acceleration of gravity, on acęunt of cube of this is 64, of which the square root is eight Therefore a wasteboard of this depth under the surſace, and three ſeet long, will discharge every second 8 x S6 x II3 cubic inches of water, or I&; cubic feet, English measure. The ſollowing comparisons will show how much this theory may be depended on. Column I. shews the depth of the edge of the board under the surface; 2, shows the discharge by theory; and 8, the discharge actually observed. The length of the board was 16 inches. N. B. The number in M. Buat's experiments are here reduced to English measure: D. D. Theor. D. Exp. E. 1,78 506 54 28,98 3,199 29292 1218 69,83 4,665 2153 2155 123,03 6,753 3750 371 2l4,29 The last column iĩs the cubie inches discharged in a second by each inch of the wastehoard. The correspondence is undoubtedly very greatt. The greatest error is in the first, which may be attributed to a much smaller lateral contraction under so small a head of vater. But it must be remarked, that the calculation proceeds on two suppositionss. The height FI is supposed à of BF; and 2 G is supposed T725. It is evident, that by increasing the one and diminishing the other, nearly the same answers may be produced, unless much greater variations of h be examined. Both of these quantities are matters of considerable uncertainty, particularly the first; and it must be ſarther remarked, that this was not measured, but deduced from the uniformity of the experimentss We presume that M. Buat tried various values of G, till he found one which gave the ratios of discharge which he observed. We beg leave to observe, that in a set of numerous experiments which we had access to examine, BI was uniſormly much less than 4; it was nearly 3: and the quantity discharged was greater than what would result from M. Buats calculation. It was farther observed, that IF depended very much on the ſorm of the wasteboard. When it was a very thin board of considerable depth, IF was very considerably greater than if the board was thick, or narrow, and set on the top of a broad dam-head, as in Fig. 20. It may be proper to give the formula a form which ill correspond to any ratio which experience may discover between BF and TF. Thus, let BI be - BF. The ſor_ m 5 3 mula vil be D356 (1-;;)Hr* We presume, therefore, that the following table will be acceptable to practicable engineers, vho are not familiar with such computations. It contains, in the first column, the depth in English inches from the surface of the stagnant water of a reservoir to the edge of the wasteboard. The second column is the cubic feet of water discharged in a minute by every inch of the wasteboard: Depth. Discharge. Depth. Discharge. I 0,403 10 12,748 2 1,140 1 14,70 3 2,095 12 16,758 4 3,225 13 18,805 5 4,507 1.4 21,1I7 6 5,925 15 23,419 n T7,466 16 25,800 8 9,122 m 28,258 ſ 10,884 18 30,786 When the depth does not exceed four inches, it will not be exact enough to take proportional parts for the fractions of an inch. The ſollowing method is exact: If they be odd quarters of an inch, look in the table for as many inches as the depth contains quarters, and take the eighth part of the answer. Thus, for 33 inches, take the eighth part of 23,419, vhich corresponds to 15 inches. This is 2,997. If the vasteboard is not on the face oſ a dam, but in a running stream, ve must augment the discharge by multiplying the section by the velocity of the stream. But this correction can seldom oceur in practice; because, in this ease, the discharge is previously known; and it is h that we vant; which is the object of the next problem. We only beg leave to add, that the experiments which ve mention as having been already made in this country, give a result somewhat greater than this table, viz. about s. Thereſore, having obtained the answer by this table, add to it its 16th part, and we apprehend that ĩt will be extremely near the truth. When, on the other hand, ve know the discharge over a wasteboard, ve can tell the depth of its edge under the surface of the stagnant water oſ the reservoir, because we have hæ/ & very nearly. We are now in a condition to solve the problem respecting a weir across a river. ProB. II. The discharge and section oſ a river being given, it is required to determine how much the waters will be raised by a weir of the whole breadth of the river, discharging the water with a clear fall, that is, the surſace of the water in the lower channel being bẽlow the edge of the weir? In this case we have 2 G=T46 nearly, because there vill be no contraction at the sides when the weir is the vhole breadth of the riverr. But further, the water is not now stagnant, but moving with the velocity 5 S being the section of the river. Therefore let a be the height of the weir ſrom the bottom of the river, and h the height of the water above the edge oſ the weir. We have the velocity with which the D ſa+" , I being the length of the eir or breadth of the river. Therefore the height pro: a v water approaches the weir/ ducing the primary mean velocity is The v EFG i equation given a little ago will have h ( D ' 0,481 IV 2 G vhen the water above the eir is stagnant. Therefore, vhen it is already moving with the velocity; , we D h Cr0 h shãll have : aò1 p ) væg +h It would be very troublesome to solve this equation regularly, because the unknown quantity h is found in the second term of the answer. But we know that the height producing the velocity above the weir is very small in comparison of h and of a, and, if onlyestimated roughly, will make a very insensible change in the value oſ h; and, by repeating the operation, we can correct this value, and obtain h to any degree of exactness. To illustrate this by an examplee Suppose a river, the section of whose stream is 150 feet, and that it discharges 174 cubic feet of water in a second; how much vill the vaters of this river be raised by a weir of the same vidth, and 3 feet high? Suppose the width to be 50 feet. This ill give 3 feet for the depth; and we see that the water will have a elear fall, because the lower stream vill be the same as before. The section being 150 feet, and the discharge 174, the mean velocity is 373, = 1,16 feet,  I4 inches nearly, which requires the height of  of an inch very nearly. This may be taken for the second term of the value of h. D Ati : Therefore h æ a 1ſ. 1. Now V2 G is, vOL. II. 2I in the present case,2ũ,813; I is 600, and D is 174 x 1728,  300672. Therefore hæ12,192 D0,25, æ 11,942. Now oorrect this value of h, by correcting the second term, . : . D y which is; of an inch, instead of ( 73 ſ+h , or 0,141. This vill give us h/12,192O, I41, / 12,051, diſfering from the first value about ; of an inch. It is needless to carry the approximation farther. Thus ve see that a weir, which dams up the whole of the former current of three feet deep, vill only raise the waters of this river one foot. The same rule serves for showing how high we ought to raise this weir in order to produce any given rise of the waters, whether for the purposes of navigation, or for taking off a draſt to drive mills, or for any other service; for if the breadth of the river remain the same, the water will still flow over the weir with nearly the same depth. A very small and hardly perceptible difference will indeed arise from the diminution of slope occasioned by this rise, and a consequent diminution of the velocity with which the river approaches the weir. But this difference must always be a small fraction of the second term of our answer; which term is itselſ very small: and even this will be compensated, in some degree, by the ſreer fall which the water vill have over the veir. If the intended weir is not to have the whole breadth of the river (which is seldom necessary even for the purposes of navigation), the waters will be raised higher by the same height of the wasteboard. The calculation is precisely the same for this case. Only in the second term, which gives the head of water corresponding to the velocity of the river, I must still be taken for the whole breadth of the river, while in the first term l is the length of the wasteboard. Also V2 G must be a little less, on account of the contractions at the ends of the weir, unless these be avoided by giving the masonry at the ends oſ the wasteboard a curved shape on the upper side of the wasteboard. This should not be done when the sole object of the weir is to raise the surface of the waters. Its effect is but trifling at any rate, vhen the length of the wasteboard is considerable, in proportion to the thickness of the sheet of water flowing over it. The following comparisons of this rule with experiment vill give our readers some notion of its utility. above it. Inches. 0,625 0,350 0,116 0,0114 1,189 It was found extremely difficult to measure the exact height of the water in the upper stream above the wasteboard. The curvature AI extended several feet up the strenm. Indeed there must be something arbitrary in this measurement, because the surface of the stream is not horizontal. The deviation should he taken, not from a horizontal plane, but from the inclined surface of the river. It is plain that a river cannot be fitted for continued navigation by wEnS. These occasion interruptions; but a few inches may sometimes be added to the waters oſ a river by a nAR, Which may still allow a flat-bottomed lighter or a raſt to pass over it. This is a very frequent practice in Holland and Flanders; and a very cheap and certain conveyance of goods is there obtained by means of streams which we would think no better than boundary ditches, and unfit for every purpose of this kind. By means of a bar the vater is kept up a very few inches, and the stream has ſree course to the sea. The shoot over the bar is prevented by means oſ another bar placed a little way below it, lying flat in the bottom of the ditch, but which may be raised up on hinges. The lighterman makes his boat ſast to a stake immediately above the bar, raises the lower bar, brings over his boat, again makes it fast, and, having laid down the other bar again, proceeds on his journey. This contrivance answers the end of a lock at a very trifling expense; and though it does not admit of what we are accustomed to call navigation, it gives a very sure conveyance, which would otherwise be impossiblee When the waters can be raised by bars, so that they may be dravn off for machinery or other purposes, they are preſerable to veirs, because they do not obstruet floating with raſts, and are not destroyed by the ice. Pnos. III. Given the height of a bar, the depth of water both above and below it, and the width of the river, to determine the discharge? This is by no means so easily solved as the discharge over a weir, and ve cannot do it with the same degree of evidencee We imagine, however, that the following observations vill not be very far from a true account of the matter: We may first suppose a reservoir LFBM (Fig. 2l.) of stagnant water, and that it has a wastehoard of the height CB. We may then determine, by the foregoing problems, the discharge through the plane ECC With respect to the discharge through the part CA, it should be equal to this product of the part of the section by the velocity corresponding to the fall EC, which is the difference oſ the heights of water above and below the bar; ſor, because the difference of E a and Ca is equal to EC, every porticle a of water in the plane CA is pressed in the direction of this stream with the same fſorce, viæ. the weight of the eolumn EC. The sum of these discharges should be the whole discharge over the har; but since the o bar is set up across a running river, its discharge must be the same vith that of the river. The water oſ the river, vhen it comes to the place of the bar, has acquired some velocity by its slope or other causes, and this corresponds 10 some height FE. This velocity, multiplied by the section of the river, having the height EB, should give a discharge equal to the discharge over the bar. To avoid this complication of conditions, we may first compute the discharge of the bar in the manner now pointed out, without the consideration of the previous velocity of the stream. This discharge will be a little too small. If we divide it by the section EB, it will give a primary velocity too small, but not far from the truth. Therefore we shall get the height PE, by means of which we shall be able to determine a velocity intermediate between DG and CH, which would correspond to a weir, as also the velocity CH, which corresponds to the part of the section CA, which is wholly under vaterr. Then we correet all these quantities by repeating the operation with them instead of our first assumptions. M. Buat found this computation extremely near the truth, but in all cases a little greater than observation exhibited. We may now solve the problem in the most general terms. Pnos. IV. Given the breadth, depth, and the slope of a river, if e confine its passage by a bar or weir of a known height and width, to determine the rise of the waters above the bar. The slope and dimensions of the channel being given, our ſormula vill give us the velocity and the quantity of vater discharged. Then, by the preceding problem, ſind the height of vater above the wasteboard. From the sum of these two heights deduet the ordinary depth of the river. The remainder is the rise oſ the waters. For example: Let there be a river whose ordinary depth is 8 feet, and breadth 40, and whose slope is I3 in 100 fathoms, or m Suppose a weir on this river 6 feet high, and I8 feet vide. We must ſirst find the velocity and discharge of the river in its natural state, ve have I=/ 480 inches, h/ 36, H  75 Our formula of uniform motion gives V = 28,45, and D  405216 cubic inches. The contraction obtains here on the three sides of the orifico. We may thereſore take 2G 26,1. N. B. This example is M. Buat's, and all the measures are French. We have also a (the height of the weir) T2, and 2 / 724. Thereſore the equation h ſſ  1r57 1 boomes 0 182. Add this to the height of the weir, and the depth of the river above the sluice is 102, 162 inches, 8 feet and ũ, 162 inches. From this take 3 feet, and there remain 5 feet and 6, 182 inches for the rise of the waters. There is, however, an important circumstance in this rise of the waters, which must be distinctly understood before we can say what are the interesting effects of this weir. This swell extends, as we all know, to a considerable distance up the stream, but is less sensible as we go away from the weir. What is the distance to which the swell extends, and vwhat increase does it produce in the depth at different distances from the weir? If we suppose that the slope and the breadth of the channel remain as before, it is plain, that as we come down the stream ſrom that point where the swell is insensible, the depth of the channel increases all the way to the dam. Thereſore, as the same quantity of water passes through every section of the river, the velocity must diminish in the same proportion (very nearly) that the section increases. But this being an open stream, and therefore the velocity being inseparably connected with the slope of the surſace, it follos, that the slope of the surſace must diminish all the way from that point where the swell of the water is insensible to the dam. The surface, thereſore, cannot be a simple inclined plane, but must be concave upwards, as represented in Fig. 22, vhere FKLB represents the channel of a river, and FB the surface of the water running in it. If this be kept up to A by a weir AL, the surface vill be a curve FIA, touching the natural surface F at the beginning of the swell, and the line AD which touches it in A vill have the slope S8 corresponding to the velocity which the waters have immediately before going over the weir. We know this slope, because we are supposed to know the discharge of the river and its slope and other circumstances before barring it with a dam; and ve know the height of the dam H, and therefore the new velocity at A, or immediately above A, and consequently the slope S. Therefore, drawing the horizontal lines DC, AG, it is plain that CB and CA vill be the primary slope of the river, and the slope S corresponding to the velocity in the immediate neighbourhood of A, because these verticals have the same horizontal distance DC. We have thereſore CB: CA — S: à very nearly, and S2: 37/ CB— CA: CA, /AB (nearly) : CA. Therefore CA ABXS HS , . But 8:35 S:, DA =/ CA x S, by our definition of slope; therefore DA H. S. s 5 This is all that we can say vith precision of this curve. M. Buat examined what would result from supposing it an arch of a circle In this case we should have DA / DF, and AF very nearly equal to 2 AD: and as we can thus find AD, ve get the whole length FIA of the swell, and also the distances of any part of the ourve from the primitive surſace FB of the river; for these will be very nearly in the duplicate proportion of their distances from - F. Thus ID vill be; of AB, &e. Thereſore we should obtain the depth I d oſ the stream in that place Getting the depth of the stream, and knowing the discharge, we get the velocity, and can compare this with the slope of the surſace at I. This should be the slope of that part of the arch of the circle Making this comparison, he found these circumstances to be incompatible He found that the seetion and sell at I, corresponding to an arch of a circle, gave a discharge nearly ;th too great (they were as 205216 to 492142). Thereſore the curve is such, that AD is greater than DF, and that it is more incurvated at F than at A He found, that making DA to DF as I0 to ꝗ, and the curve FIA an arch oſ an ellipse whose longer axis was vertical, would give a very nice correspondence of the setions, velocities, and slopes. The wholo extent of the svell therefore can never be double of AD, and must always greatly surpass AD; and these limits ill do very well ſor every practical question. Therefore making DF; of AD, and draving the chord AD, and making DI of Di, we shall be very near the truth. Then we get the sell vith sufficient precision for any point H between F and D, by making FD?: FH? / ID: Hh; and iſf H is between D and A, ve get its distance from the tangent DA by a similar process. It only remains to determine the swell produced in the waters of a river by the erection of a bridge or cleaning sluice which contracts the passage. This requires the solution of ProB. V. Given the depth, breadth, and slope of a river, to determine the swell occasioned by the piers oſ a bridge or sides of a cleaning sluice, which contract the passage by a given quantity, for a given length of channel This swell depends on two circumstances: 1. The whole river must pass through a narrow space, vith a velocity proportionably increased; and this requires a certain head of water above the bridge. - 2. The vater, in passing the length of the piers with a velocity greater than that corresponding to the primary slope of the river, will require a greater slope in order to acquire this velocity. Let Vbe the velocity of the river before the erection of the bridge, and  the quotient of the width of the river divided by the sum of the widths between the piers. If the length of the piers, or their dimension in the direction of the , is not very great, XV will nearly express the velocity of the river under the arches; and if we suppose for a moment the contraction (n the sense hitherto used) to be nothing, the height producing this velocity will be xV: T a slope and velocity before getting under the arches, and 2 But the river will not rise 50 high, having already the height corresponding to this velocity is u;l ; thereſore the height for producing the augmentation of velocity is Kx v: V: EGHEE: we must employ a 2 G less than 2 5, and ve must multi But if we make allowance for contraction, ply the height now found by 25 It will then become ? V2 2 2 ba - )  õ ( 1I). This is that part of the swell which must produce the augmentation of velocity. With respect to what is necessary for producing the additional slope between the piers, let ꝓ be the natural slope of the river (or rather the difference of level in the length of the piers) before the erection of the bridge, and corresponding to the velocity V; X? ꝓ vill very nearly express the difference of superficial level for the length of the piers, vhich is necessary for maintaining the velocity KV through the same length. The increase of slope thereſore is E p—p=p & I). Thereſore the whole swell vill be V: 7G +2 )x I. TuEgsE are the chieſ questions or problems on this subject which occur in the practios of an engineer; and the solutions which we have given may in every ease be depended on as very near the truth, and we are eonfident that the errors vill never amount to one-fifth of the &hole quantity. We are equally certain, that oſ those who eall themselves engineers, and wvho, without hesitation, undertake jobs of enormous expense, not one in ten is able even to guess at the result of such operations, unless the circumstances of the case happen to coincide with those of some other projeet which he has executed, or has distinetly examined; and very few have the sagacity and penetration necessary for appreciating the effects of the distinguishing circumstances which yet remain. The society established for the encouragement of arts and manuſactures could scarcely do a more important service to the public in the line of their institution, than by publishing in their Transactions a description of every work of this kind executed in the kingdom, with an account of its performance. This would be a most valuable collection of experiments and facts. The unlearned practitioner would find among them something which resembles in its chief circumstances almost any project which could occur to him in his business, and would tell him vhat to expeet in the case under his management: and the intelligent engineer, assisted by mathematical knovledge, and the habit oſ classing things tgether, would frequently be able to frame general rules. To a gentleman qualified as was the Chevalier de Buat, such a collection would be inestimable, and might suggest a theory as far superior to his as he has gone beſore all other writers. WEe shall conclude this article ith some observations on the methods which may be taken for rendering small rivers and brooks fit ſor inland navigation, or at least for ſloutage. We get much instruction on this subject from vhat has been said concerning the swell produced in a river by weirs, bars, or any diminution of its former setion. Our knovledge of the form which the surface of this swell affects, will furnish rules for spacing these obstructions in such a manner, and at such distances from each other, that the swell produced by one shall extend o the one above it. If we know the slope, the breadth, and the depth oſ æ river, in the droughts of summer, and have determined on the height of the flood-gates, or keeps, which are to be set up in its bed, it is evident that their stations are not matters of arbitrary choice, if we would derive the greatest possible advantage from them. Some rivers in Flanders and Italy are made navigable in some sort by simple sluices, vhich, being shut, form magazines of water, which, being discharged by opening the gates, raises the inferior reach enough to permit the passage of the craſt which are kept on it. After this momentary rise the keeps are shut again, the water sinks in the lower reach, and the lighters which were floated through the shallows are now obliged to draw into those parts of the reach where they can lie afloat till the next supply of water from above enables them to proceed. This is a very rude and imperſect method, and unjustiſiable at this day, vhen we know the effect of locks, or at least of double gatess. We do not mean to enter on the consideration of these contrivances, and to give the methods of their construetion, in this place.* At present we confine ourselves  See the article WATERwORES in this volume, and also the EDiNnuou ENcycLorænia, orticle NAvicarion INranm, Vol XV. ſor farther information on these points. 5 to the single point of hushanding the diſferent falls in the bed of the river, in such a manner that there may be everywhere a suſficient depth of water; and, in what we have to deliver on the subject, we shall take the form of an example to illustrate the application of the foregoing rules. Suppose then a river 40 feet wide and 3 ſeet deep in the droughts of summer, vith a slope of I in 4800. This, by the formula of uniſorm motion, vill have a velocity V=æ 293 inches per second, and its discharge will be 405216 cubic inches, or 234 feet. It is proposed to give this river a depth not less than five feet in any place, by means of ſlood-gates of six feet high and I8 feet wide. We ſirst compute the height at which this body oſ 2343 cubic feet of water vill discharge itself over the flood-gates. This we shall find by Prob. II. to bè 304 inches, to which adding 72, the height of the gate, we have 102] for the whole height of the water above the floor of the gate; the primitive depth of the river being 3 feet, the rise or svell 5 feet 6; inches. In the next place, we find the range or sensible extent of this swell by Prob. I. and the observations which accompany it. This will be found to be nearly 9177 fathoms. Now since the primitive depth oſ the river is three feet,. there is only wanted two ſeet of addition; and the question is reduced to the finding what point of the curved surface of the swell is two ſeet above the tangent plane at the head of the swell? or how far this point is from the gate? The whole extent being 9177 fathoms, and the deviations from the, tangent plane being nearly in the duplicate ratio of the distances from the point of contact, ve may institute this proportion 66G&: 24 9177: 55626. The last term is the distance (from the head of the swell) of that part oſ the surface which is two feet above the primitive surface of the river. Therefore 9176526, or 8651 fathoms, is the distance of this part from the flood-gate; and this is the distance at which the gates should be placed ſrom each other. No inconvenience would arise from having them nearer, if the banks be high enough to contain the waters; but if they are farther distant, the required depth of water cannot be had without increasing the height of the gates; but if reasons of conveniency should induce us to place them nearer, the same depth may be secured by lower gates, and no additional height will be required for the banks. This is generally a matter of moment, hecause the raising the water brings along with it the chance of flooding the adjoining fields. Knowing the place where the svell ceases to be sensible, we can keep the top oſ the intermediate flood-gate at the precise height of the curved surface of the swell by means of the proportionality of the deviations ſrom the tangent to the distances from the point of contact. But this rule vill not do for a gate which is at a greater distance from the one above it than the 3651 fathoms already mentioned. We know that a higher gate is required, producing a more extensive svell; and the one swell does not coincide with the other, although they may both begin from the sarne point A Fig. 23.) Nor vill the curves even be simi lar, unless the thickness of the sheet of vater flowing over the gate be increased in the same ratio. But this is not the case; because the produce of the river, and therefore the thickness oſ the sheet of water, is constant. But we may suppose them similar without erring more than two or three decimals oſ an inch; and then we shall have AF: ALrfFF: DL; from which, if we take the thickness of the sheet of water already calculated for the other gates, there will remain the height of the gate BL. By ſollowing these methods, instead of proceeding by random guesses, ve shall procure the greatest depth oſ water at the smallest expense possible. ] But there is a circumstance which must be attended to, and which, if neglected, may in a short time render all our works useless. These gates must frequently be open in the time of freshes; and as this chammel then has its natural slope increased in every reach by the great contraction of the section in the gates, and also rolls along a greater body of water, the action of the stream on its bed must he increased by the augmentation of velocity which these circumstances vill produee; and although ve may say that the general slope is necessarily secured by the cills oſ the flood-gates, which are paved vith stone or covered with planks, yet this will not hinder this increased eurrent fſrom digging up the bottom in the intervals, undermining the banks, and lodging the mud and earth thus carried oſſf in places where the current meets with any check. All these consequences vill assuredly follow'if the increased velocity is greater than what corresponds to the regimen relative to the æoil in which the river holds on its course In order therefore to procure durability to works of this kind, which are generally of enormous expense, the local circumstanees must be most scrupulously studied. It is not the ordinary hurried survey of an engineer that vill free us from the risk of our navigation becoming very troublesome by the rise of the waters being diminished ſrom their former quantity, and banks formed at a small distance below every sluice. We must attentively study the nature of the soil, and disoover experimentally the velocity which is not inconsistent with the permanency of the channel. If this be not a great deal less than that of the river vhen accelerated by freshes, the regimen may be preserved aſter the establishment of the gato, and no great changes in the chamnel will be necessary: but if, on the other hand, the natural velocity of the rivers during its freshies greatly exceeds what is consistent ith stability, we must enlarge the vidth of the channel, that we may diminish the hydraulic mean depth, and along vith this the velocity. Thereſore, knowing the quantity discharged during the ſroshes, divide it by the velocity oſ regimen, or rather by a velocity some- vhat greater (for a reason which will appear by and by), the quotient vill be the area of a new section. Then taking the natural slope of the river for the slope which it will preserve in this enlarged channel, and after the cills of the flood- gates have been fixed, ve must calculate the hydraulic mean depth, and then the other dimensions of the channel. And, lastly, from the known dimensions of the channel and the ũischarge (Which we must now compute), we proceed to calculate the height and the distances of the floodgates, adjusted to their widths, which must be regulated by the room which may be thought proper for the free passage of the lighters which are to ply on the river. An example vill illustrate the whole of this process. Suppose then a small river having a slope of 2 inches in 1000 fathoms, or ;55, vhich is a very usual declivity of such small streams, and whose depth in summer is 2 feet, but subject to floods which raise it to  feet. Let iĩts breadth at the bottom be 18 feet, and the base of its slanting sides 3 of their height All of these dimensions are very conformable to the ordinary course of things. It is proposed to make this river navigable in all seasons by means of keeps and gates placed at proper distances; and ve want to know the dimensions of a channel which will be permanent, in a soil which begins to yield to a velocity of 80 inches per second, but vill be safe under a velocity of 21. The primitive channel, having the properties of a rectangular channel, its breadth during the freshes must be B 80 ſeet, or 860 inches, and its depth h ꝗ feqt, or 108 inches; therefore its hydraulic mean depth d / L  61,88 inches. Its real velocity therefore, during the ſreshes, vill be 38,9447 inches, and its discharge 1514169 cubie inches, or 8764 cubic feet per second. We see therefore that the natural channel will not be permanent, and vill be very quickly destroyed or changed by this great velocity. We have two methods for procuring stability, viz. diminishing the slope, or widening the bed. The first method will require the course to be lengthened in the proportion of 24 to 89880, or nearly of 36 to 100. The expense of this would be enormous. The second method vill require the hydraulic mean depth to be increased nearly in the same proportion (because the velocities are nearly as ⸗) This will evidently be much less costly, and, even 5 to procure convenient room for the navigation, must be preferred. We must now ohserve, that the great velocity, of vhich we are afraid, obtains only during the winter floodss If therefore we reduce this to 4 inches, it must happen that the autumnal freshes, loaded vith sand and mud, vill certainly deposite a part of it, and choke up our channel below the flood-gates We must thereſore select a mean velocity somewhat exceeding the regimen, that it may carry off these depositionss. We shall take 27 inches, which will produce this eſfect on the loose mud without endangering our channel in any remarkable degree. Therefore we have, by the theorem for uniform motion, vV—21, 21&T1) 08, 1). CaleovV: IAV stL,5 lating the divisor of this formula, we find it b55,884 Hence Và©0,1 h 5,3848, and there-  3E3E85803 fore d/80,5,. Having thus determined the hydraulie mean depth, we find the area S oſ the section by dividing the discharge 1514169 by the velocity 27. This gives us 56080,368. Then we get the breadth B by the forla æ SV&N S — mula formerly given, B / G ) : +5 1802,296 inches, or 150,19 feet, and the depth h 1,115 inches. With these dimensions of the section we are certain that the channel vill be permanent; and the cills of the floodgates being all fixed agreeable to the primitive slope, we need not fear that it will be changed in the intervals by the action of the current. The gates being all open during the freshes, the bottom vill be cleared of all deposited mud. We must now station the flood-gates along the new channel, at such distances that we may have the depth of water which is proper for the lighters that are to be employed in the navigation Suppose this to be four feett. We must first of all learn how high the water will be kept in this new channel during the summer droughts There remained in the primitive channel only 2 feet, and the section in this case had 20 feet 8 inches mean width; and the discharge corresponding to this section and slope of, ſ4, is, by the theorem of uniſorm motion, 130,849 cubic inches per second. To find the depth of water in the new channel corresponding to this discharge, and the same slope, we must take the method of approximation formerly exemplified, remembering that the discharge D is 130849, and the breadth B is 1760,8 at the bottom (the slant sides being 3)) These data will produce à depth of water 6; inches. To obtain four feet therefore behind any of the flood-gates, ve must have a svell of 413 inches produced by the gate below. We must now determine the width oſ passage which must be given at the gates. This vill regulate the thickness of the sheet of water which flows over them when shut; and this, with the height of the gate, fixes the swell at the gate. The extent of this swell, and the elevation of every point oſ its curved surface above the new surface of the river, requires a combination oſ the height of swell at the flood- gate, with the primitive slope and the new velocity. These being computed, the stations of the gates may be assigned, which will secure four feet of water behind each vVoI. II. n in summer. We need not give these computations, having already exemplified them all with relation to another river. This example not only illustrates the method of proceeding, 50 as to be ensured of success, but also gives us a precise instance of what must be done in a case which cannot but frequently occur. We see what a prodigious exeavation is necessary in order to obtain permanency. We have been obliged to enlarge the primitive bed to about thrice its former size, so that the excavation is at least two-thirds of what the other method requiredl. The expense, however, will still be vastly inferior to the other, both from the nature of the work and the quantity of ground occupied. At all events, the expense is enormous, and what could never be repaid by the navigation, except in a very rich and populous country. There is another circumstance to be attended to.The navigation of this river by sluices must be very desultory, unless they are extremely numerous, and oſ small heights. The natural surface of the swell being concave upwards, the additions made by its different parts to the primitive height of the river decrease rapidly as they approach to the place A (Fig. 28.), where the swell terminates; and three gates, each oſ which raises the water one foot when placed at the proper distance from each other, ill raise the water much more than two gates at twice this distance, each raising the vater two feet. Moreover, when the elevation produced by a flood-gate is considerable, exceeding a very few inches, the fall and current produced by the opening oſ the gate is such, that no boat can possibly pass up the river, and it runs imminent risk of being overset and sunk, in the attempt to go down the stream. This renders the navigation desultory. A number of lighters collec? themselves at the gates, and wait their opening They pass through as soon as the current becomes moderate. This would not, perhaps, be very hurtful in a regulated navigation, if they could then proceed on their voyage But the boats bound up the river must stay on the upper side oſ ———ii ——— s —m dlls a. u the gate which they have just now passed, hecause the channel is now too shallow for them to proceed. Those bound down the river can only go to the next gate, unless it has been opened at a time nicely adjusted to the opening of the one above itt. The passage downwards may, in many cases, be continued, by very intelligent and attentive lockmen, but the passage up must be exceedingly tedious. Nay, ve may say, that while the passage downwards is continuous, it is but in a very few cases that the passage upvard is practicablee. If we add to these inconveniences the great danger of passage during the freshes, while all the gates are open, and the immense and unavoidable accumulations of ice, on occasion even of slight ſrosts, we may see that this method of procuring an inland navigetion is amazingly expensive, desultory, tedious, and hazardous. It did not therefore merit, on ĩts own account, the attention we have bestowed on it. But the discussion was absolutely necessary, in order to show what must be done in order to obtain effect and permanency, and thus to prevent us from engaging in a project which, to a person not duly and confidently informed, is so feasible and promising. Many professional engineers are ready, and with honest intentions, to undertake such tasks; and by avoiding this immense expense, and contenting themselves with a much narrower channel, they succeed (vitness the old navigation of the river Mersey). But the work has no duration; and, not having been found very serviceable, its cessation is not matter of much regret. It was not a very refined thought to change this imperſect mode for another free from most of its inconveniencess. A boat was brought up the river, through one of these gates, only by raising the waters of the inferior reach, and depressing those of the upper: and it could not escape observation, that vhen the gates were far asunder, a vast body of water must be discharged before this could be done, and that it would be a great improvement to double each gate, with a very small distance between. Thus a very small quantity of water would fill the interval to the desired height, and allow the boat to come through; and this thought was the more obvious, from a similar practie having preceded it, viz. that of navigating a small river by means of double bars, the lowest of which lay flat in the bottom of the river, but could be raised up on hinges. We have mentioned this already; and it appears to have heen an old practice, being mentioned by Stevinus in his valuable work on sluices, published about the beginning of the last century; yet no trace of this method is to be found of much older dates. It occurred, however, accidentally, pretty often in the ſlat countries of Holland and Flanders, which being the seat of frequent wars, almost every town and village vas fortified with wet ditches, connected with the adjoining rivers. Stevinus mentions particularly the works of Condè, as having been long employed, with great ingenuity, ſor rendering navigable a very long stretch oſ the Scheldt. The boats were received into the lower part of the fosse, which was separated from the rest by a stone batardeau, serving to keep up the waters in the rest of the fosse, about eight feet. In this was a sluice and another dam, by which the hoats could be taken into the upper ſosse, which communicated with a remote part of the Scheldt by a long canal. This appears to be one of the earliest locks.* In the first attempt to introduce this improvement in the navigation of rivers already kept up by weirs, which gave a partial and interrupted navigation, it was usual to avoid the great expense oſ the second dam and gate, by making the lock altogether detached from the river, within land, and having its hasin parallel to the river, and communicating by one end with the river above the weir, and by the other end with the river below the weir, and having a flood-gate at each end.This vas a most ingenious * A very full History of Locks, &e. ill be found in the EnixBURGH ENcvcLoPænia, vol. XV. ꝑ. 208, Art. INLAND NavioaT10Nn.ED. Sium - —-9m—uau thought; and it was a prodigious improvement, free from all the inconveniences oſ currents, ice, &c. &e. It was called a Schlussel, or lock, with considerable propriety; and this was the origin of the word sluice, and of our application ò its translation lock. This practice being once introduced, it was not long before engineers found that a complete separation of the navigation from the bed of the river was not only the most perfeet method for obtaining a sure, easy, and uninterrupted navigation, but that it was in general the most economical in its first construetion, and subject to no risk of deterioration by the action of the current, vhich was here entirely removed. Locked canals, therefore, have almost entirely supplanted all attempts to improve the natural beds of rivers; and this is hardly ever attempted except in the ſlat countries, where they can hardly be said to differ from horizontal canalss We therefore close with these observations this article, and refer for the construction of canals and locks to the following article on WaræR-Worcs.*  Our readers will probably be pleased with the ſollowing list of authors who have treated professedly of the motions of rivers: Guglielmini De Fluviis et Castellis Aquarum Danubius Illustratus; Grandi De Castellis; Zendrini De Motu Aquarum; Frisius De Fluviis; Lecchi ITdrostatica i Idraulica; Michelotti Sperienze Idrauliche ; Belidor's Architecture Hydraulique; Bossut Hydrodynamique; Buat Hydraulique; Silberschlag Theorie des Fleuves] Lettres de M. L'Epinasse an P. Frisi Touchant sa Theorie des Fleuves; Tahleau des principales Rivieres du Monde, par Genettẽ; Stevins sur les Eeluses; Traitè des Ecluses, pur Boulard, qui a remporiè le Prix de l Acad. de Lyons; Bleiswyck Dissertatio de Aggeribus; Bossut et Viallet sur la Construction des Digues; Stevin Hydrostatica; Tielman van der Horst Theatrum Machinarum Universale; De La Lande sur les Canaux de Navigation; Rucolta di Autori chi Trattuno del Moto dell Acque, 3 tom. ato, Firenza, 1723.This most valuable eolleetion contains the writings of Archimedes, Albizi, Galileo, Castelli, Michelini, Borelli, Montanari, Viviani, Cassini, Guglielmini, Grandi, Manſredi, Picard, and Narduci; and an account of the numberless works which have been carried on in the embankment of the Po. UxDER this name may be comprehended almost every hydraulic structure or contrivance; such as, canals, conduits, locks, mills, water-engines, &e. But they may be conveniently arranged under two general heads, lst, Works which have for their objeet the conducting, raising, or otherwise managing, of water; and, 2dly, Works which derive their efficacy from the impulse or other action of vater. The first class comprehends the methods of simply conducting water in aqueducts or in pipes for the supply of domestic consumption, or the working of machinery: it comprehends also the methods of procuring the supplies necessary for these purposes, by means of pumps, water, or fire-engines. It also comprehends the subsequent management of the water thus condueted, whether in order to make the proper distribution of it according to the demand, or to employ it for the purpose of navigation, by lockage, or other contrivances.And in the prosecution of these things many subordinate problems vill oceur, in which practice vill derive great advantages from a scientific acquaintance vith the subject. CLASS I. 1. qſ the conducting of Water. Tuis is undoubtedly a business of great importance, and makes a principal part of the practice oſ the civil engineer: it is also a business so imperſectly understood, that we believe that very few engineers can venture to say, vith tolerable precision, what vill be the quantity of water which his work vill convey, or what plan and dimensions of con- duit vill convey the quantity which may be proposed. For proof of this we shall only refer our readers to the facts mentioned in the article RtvEES. In that article ve have given a sort oſ history oſ the progress of our knowledge in hydraulics, a branch of mechanical philosophy which seems to have been entirely unknown to the ancientss Even Archimedes, the author oſ almost all that we know in hydrostatics, seems to have been entirely ignorant oſ any principles by which he could determine the motion of water. The mechanical science of the ancients seems to have reached no farther than the doetrine of equilibrium among bodies at restt Guglielmini first ventured o consider the motion of water in open canals and in rivers. Its motion in pipes had been partially considered in detached scraps by others, but not so as to make a body of doctrine. Sir Isaac Newton first endeavoured to render hydraulics susceptible of mathematical demonstration: but his fundamental proposition has not yet been freed from very serious objections; nor have the attempts of his successors, such as the Bernouillis, Euler, DAlembert, and others, been much more successſul: so that hydraulics may still be considered as very imperſect, and the general conclusions, which we are accustomed to receive as fundamental propositions, are not much better than matters of observation, little supported by principle, and therefore requiring the most serupulous caution in the application of them to any hitherto untried case. When experiments are multiplied so as to include as great a variety oſ cases as possible, and when these areleared of extraneous circumstances, and properly arranged, we must receive the conclusions dravn from them as the general laws oſ hydraulicss The experiments oſ the Abbe Bossut, narrated in his Hydrodynamique, are of the greatest value, having been made in the cases of most general frequency, and being made vwith great caree The greatest service, however, has been done by the Chevalier Buat, vho saw the ſolly of at- tempting to deduce an accurate theory from any principles that we have as yet learned, and the necessity of adhering to such a theory as could be deduced from experiment alone, independent of any more general principles Such a theory must be a just one, if the experiments are really general, unaffected by the particular circumstances of the case, and if the classes of experiment are sufficiently comprehensive to include all the cases which occur in the most important practical questions. Some principle was necessary, however, for connecting these experiments. The sufficieney of, this principle was not easily ascertained. M. Buat's way of establishing this was judicious. If the principle is ill-founded, the results of its combination in cases of actual experiments must be irregular; but if experiments, seemingly very unlike, and in a vast variety of dissimilar cases, give a train of results which is extremely regular and consistent, e may presume that the principle, vhich in this manner harmonizes and reconciles things so unlike, is founded in the nature of things; and if this principle be such as is agreeable to our clearest notions of the internal mechanism of the motion of fluids, our presumption approaches to conviction. Proceeding in this way, the Chevalier Buat has colleeted a prodigious number of facts, comprehending almost every case of the motion oſ fluids. He first classed them according to their resemblance in some one particular, and observed the differences which accompanied their diſferences in other circumstances; and by considering what could produce these differences, he obtained general rules, deduced from fact, by which these differences could be made to fall into a regular series. He then arranged all the experiments under some other circumstance of resemblance, and pursued the same method; and by ſollowing this out, he has produced a general proposition, which applies to the whole of this numerous list of experiments with a precision far exceeding our utmost hopes. This propol sition is contained in the article RivER”S, and is there offered as onè of the most valuable results of modern science. We must, however, observe, that of this list of experiments there is a very large class, which is not direet, but requires a good deal of reflection to enable us to drav a confident conclusion; and this is in cases which are very frequent and important, viz. vhere the deelivity is exceedingly small, as in open canals and riverss. The experiments were of the following forms: two large cisterns were made to communicate with each other by means of a pipe. The surfaces of the water in these cisterns were made to differ only by a small fraction of an ineh: and it is supposed that the motion in the communicating pipe will be the same as in a very long pipe, or an open canal, having this very minute declivity We have no diſficulty in admitting the conclusion; but we have seen ĩt contested, and it is by no means intuitive. This, however, need not occasion any hesitation in the adoption of M. Buat's general proposition, because the experiments which we are now criticising fall in precisely with the general train of the rest, and show no general deviation which indieate a fallacy in principle. We apprehend it to be quite unnecessary to add much to what has been already delivered on the motion of waters in an open canal. , Their general progressive motion, and consequently the quantity delivered by an aqueduct of any slope and dimension, are sufficiently determined; and all that is wanted is the tables which we promised in the article RiveRs, by which any person who understands common arithmetic may compute the quantity of water vhich will be delivered by the aqueduet, canal, conduit, or pipe. We therefore take this opportunity of inserting these tables, which have been computed for this article with great labour. * * All the ſollowing Tables, recomputed and greatly extended by Mr Lourie, will be found in the EINEURGH ENCYCLO?æn14, voOl. XI. p. 5290, Art. HYDRODYNAMICEED. TaBLE I. consists of three columns. Column l, entitled d, contains the hydraulic mean depths of any conduit in inches. This is set down for every 10th of an inch in the first 10 inches, that the answers may be more accurately obtained for pipes, the mean depth of which seldom exceeds three or four inchess. The column is continued to I00 inches, which is fully equal to the hydraulic mean depth of any canal. Column 2. contains the logarithms of the values of Vũ—2, 1, multiplied by 307; that is, the logarithm of . 3071 & àa0,1 the numerator of the fraction voLT00 given in the article RivERS. Column 2. contains the produets of the values oſ Yũo, 1 multiplied by 0,3. TaBLE II. consists of two eolumnsColumn 1, entitled s, contains the denominator of the fraction expressing the slope or declivity of any pipe or canal; that is, the quotient of its length divided by the elevation of one extremity above the other. Thus, if a canal of one mile in length be three feet higher at one end than the other, then s is 5280 1760. Column 2. contains the logarithms oſ the denominators of the above-mentioned fraction, or of the diſferent values of the quantity V ,TV5 +1,6. These quantities were computed true to the third decimal placee. Notwithstanding this, the last figure in about a dozen of the first logarithms of each table is not absolutely certain to the nearest unit. But this cannot produce an error of I in 100,000. Examples of the Use of these Tables. Example . Water is brought into the city of Edinburgh in several mains. One of these is a pipe oſ five l inches diameter. The length of the pipe is 14,637 feet: and the reservoir at Comiston is 44 feet higher than the reservoir into which it delivers the water on the Castle Hill. Query, The number of Scotch pints which this pipe should deliver in a minute ? I. We have a32, = 1,25 inches. The logarithm corresponding to this d, being nearly the mean between the logarithms corresponding to 1,2 and 1,8, is 2.49472. 2. We have s Ia or 382,7. The logarithm corresponding to this in Table II. is had by taking proportional parts for the difference between the logarithms for 27 880 and s  840, and is l. 18583. 3. From 2.49472 Take I.18538 Remains I. 30989, the logarithm of 20,385 inches. 4. In column 3. of Table I. opposite to d=1,2 and d —/ 1,8 are 0,3 and 0,31, oſf which the mean is 0,305 inches, the correction for viscidity. 5. Therefore the velocity in inches per second is 20,385  0,305, or 20,08. 6. To obtain the Scotch pints per minute (each containing 103, 4 cubic inches), multiply the velocity by 60, and this produet by 5, and this by 0,7854 (the area of a cirele whose diameter is I), and divide by 108,4. Or by logarithms, Add the log. of 20,08 - - 1.80276 log. of 66/ - - 1.71815 log. of 5 or 25 - - 1.89794 log. of 0,7854 - - .59509 4.37394 Subtract the log. of 108,4 - - 2.01451 Remains the log. of 25,8 pints - 2.35948 Example 2. The canal mentioned in the article RivERS was 18 feet broad at the surſace, and 7 feet at the bottom. It was 4 ſeet deep, and had a declivity of 4 inches in a mile Quæery;, The mean velocity ? I. The slant side of the canal, corresponding to 4 feet deep and 53 projection, is 6,8 ſeet; therefore the border touched by the water is 6,8 7 + 6,8,  20,6. The 1I8 +7 2 area is 4 x , =/50 square feet. Therefore d = 2,427 feet, or 29, 124 inches. The logarithm corresponding to this in Table I. is 8.21118, and the correction for viscidity from the third column of the same Table is 1,58. 2. The slope is one- third of a foot in a mile, or one ſoot in three miles. Therefore ? is 15,840. The logarithm corresponding to this is 2.08280. 8. From 3.21llò Subtract 2.08280 Remains I.12883  log. 13,438 of inches. Subtract for viscidity 1.58 Velocity per second 11,856 This velocity is considerably smaller than what was observed by Mr Watt. And indeed we observe, that in the very small declivities of rivers and canals, the formula is little differentt. We have made several comparisons with a formula which is essentially the same with Buat's, and comes nearer in these cases. Instead of taking the hyperbolic logarithm of /77T, 6, multiply its common logarithm by 23, or multiply it by 8, and divide the producet by 43 and this process is vastly easier than taking the hyperbolie logarithm. We have not, however, presumed to calculate tables on the authority of our own observations, thinking too respeetvOL. 1I. LU fully oſ this gentlemans labours and observations. But this subject will, ere long, be fully established on a series of observations on canals of various dimensions and declivities, made by several eminent engineers during the execution of them. Fortunately M. Buat's formula is chiefly founded on observations on small canals; and is therefore most accurate in such works where it is most necessary, viz. in mill courses, and other derivations for working machinery. We now proceed to take notice of a few circumstances which deserve attention, in the construetion of canals, in addition to those delivered in the article RivEES. When a canal or aqueduct is brought off from a basin or larger stream, it ought always to be widened at the entry, if it is intended for drawing off a continued stream of water: for such a canal has a slope, without which it can have no current. Suppose it filled to a dead level to the farther end. Take away the bar, and the water immediately begins to flow off at that end. But it is some time beſore any motion is perceived at the head of the canal, during all which time the motion of the water is augmenting in every part of the canal; consequently the slope is increasing in every part, this being the sole cause of its stream. When the ater at the entry begins to move, the slope is scarcely sensible there; but it sensibly stẽepens every moment with the increase of velocity, which at last attains its maximum relative to the slope and dimensions of the whole canal; and this regulates the depth of water in every point down the streaem. When all has attained a state of permanency, the slope at the entry remains much greater than in any other part of the canal: for this slope must be such as vill produce a velocity sufficient for supplying its TRAIN. And it must be remembered, that the velocity which must be produced greatly exceeds the mean velocity corresponding to the train of the canal. Suppose that this is 25 inches. There must be a velocity oſ 80 inches at the surface, as appears by the Table in the article RivE=S. This must be produced by a real fall at the entry. In every other part the slope is sufficient, if it merely serves to give the water (already in motion) force enough for overcoming the friction and other resistances. But at the entry the water is stagnant, if in a basin, or it is moving past laterally, if the aqueduct is derived from a river; and, having no velocity whatever in the direction oſ the canal, it must derive it from its slope. The water therefore which has acquired a permanent form in such an aqueduct, must necessarily take that form which exactly performs the offices requisite in its different portions. The surface remains horizontal in the basin, as at KC Fig. 1.), till it comes near the entry of the canal AB, and there it acquires the form of an undulated curve CDE; and then the surface acquires an uniform slope EF, in the lower part of the canal, where the water is in train. If this is a drain, the discharge is much less than might be produced by the same bed if this sudden slope could be avoided. If it is to be navigated, having only a very gentle slope in its whole length, this sudden slope is a very great imperſection, both by diminishing the depth of water, which might otherwise be obtained along the canal, and by rendering the passage of boats into the hasin very difficult, and the coming out very hazardous. All this may be avoided, and the velocity at the entry may be kept equal to that which forms the train of the canal, by the simple process of enlarging the entry. Suppose that the water could accelerate along the slopes of the canal, as a heavy hody would do on a finely polished plane. If we now make the width of the entry in its different parts inversely proportional to the fietitious velocities in those parts, it is plain that the slope of the surface vill be made parallel to that of the canal which is in train. This will require a form somevhat like a bell or speaking trumpet, as may easily be shown by a mathematical discussion. It would, however, be s0 much evasated at the basin as to occupy much room, and it would be very expensive to make such an excavation. But e may, at a very moderate expense of money and room, make the increase oſ velocity at the entry almost insensible. This should always be done, and it is not all expense: for if it he not done, the water will undermine the banks on each side, because it is moving very sviſtly, and vill make an excavation for itself, lenving all the mud in the canal belom. We may observe this enlargement at the entry of ull natural derivations from a basin or lake. It is a very instruetive experiment, to fill up this enlargement, continuing the parallel sides of the drain quite to the side of the lakee We shall immediately observe the water grow hallower in the drain, and its performance will diminish. Supposing the ditch carried on vith parallel sides quite to the side of the basin, if ve build two walls or dykes from the extremities of thosæ sides, bending outwards with a proper curvature (and this vill oſten be less costly than widening the drain), the dischurge vill be greatly increased. We have seen instances vhere it was nearly doubled. The enlargement at the mouths of rivers ĩs generally owing to the same enusee The tide of flood up the river produces a superficial slope. opposite to that of the river, and this widens the mouth. This is most remarkable when the tides are high, and the river has little slopeAfſter this great fall at the entry of a canal, in which all the filaments are much aceelerated, and the inferior ones most of all, things take a contrary turnn. The water, by rubbing on the bottom and the sides, is retarded; and therefore the seetion must, from being shallow, become a little deeper, and the surſace will be convex ſor some distance till all comes into train. When this is established, the filaments nearest the bottom and side are moving slowest, and the surſuce ſin the middle especially) retains the 7 greatest velocity, gliding over the rest. The velocity in the canal, and the depth of the section, adjust themselves in such a manner that the difference between th&; urſace of the basin and the surſace oſ the uniform section of the canal corresponds exactly to the velocity. Thus, if this be ohserved to be two feet in a second, the difference oſ height vill be threesixteenths oſ an ineh. All the practical questions that are of considerable importance respecting the motion of water in aqueducts, may be easily, though not elegantly, solved by means of the tables. But it is to be remembered, that these tables relate only to uniform motion, that is, to water that is in train, and where the velocity suffers no change by lengthening the conduit, provided the slope remain the same. It is much more diſſicult to determine what ill be the velocity, &e. in a canal of which nothing is given but the form, and slope, and depth of the entry, without saying how deep the water runs in it. And it is here that the common doctrines oſ hydraulios are most in fault, and umble to teach us how deep the vater vill run in a canal, though the depth of the basin at the entry be perfectly known. Between the part of the canal which is in train and the basin, there is an interval where the water is in a state of acceleration, and is aſterwards retarded. The determination of the motions in this interval is exceedingly diffioult, even in a rectangular canal. It was one great aim of Mr Buat's experiments to ascertain this by measuring accurately the depth of the water. But he found that, vhen the slope was but a very few inches in the whole length of his eanal, it was not in train for want of greater length; and when the slope was still less, the small fraetions of an ineh, by which he was to judge of the variations of depth, could not be measured with sufficient aceuracy. It would be a most desirable point to determine the length of a canal, vhose slope and other dimen- sions are given, which will bring it into train; and what is the ratj; which will then obtain between the depth at the entry and the depth which ill be maintained. Till this be done, the engineer cannot ascertain by a direct process what quantity of water will be drawn off from a reservoir by a given canal. But as yet this is out of our reach. Experiments, however, are in view which will promote the investigation. But this and similar questions are of such importance, that we cannot be said to have improved hydraulies, unless we can give a tolerably precise answer. This we can do by a sort of retrograde process, proceeding on the principles oſ uniform motion established by the Chevalier Buat. We may suppose a train maintained in the canal, and then examine whether this train can be produced by any fall that is possible at the entry. If it can, we may be certain that it is so produced, and our problem is solved. We shall now point out the methods of answering some chief questions of this kind. Quest. I. Given the slope 5 and the breadth w of a canal, and the height H of the surface of the water in the basin above the bottom of the entry, io find the depth : and velocity V of the stream, and the quantity of water Q which is discharged ? The chieſ difficult is to find the depth of the stream vhere it is in train. For this end, we may simpliſy the hydraulic theorem of uniform motion of the article RivER; making V ng-. vhere g is the velocity (in inches) acquired in a second by falling, d is the hydraulic mean depth, and /S stands for8  L VS I,6. N is a number to be fixed by experiment (see RivER,) depending on the contraction or obstruction sustained at the entry of the canal, and it may in most common cases be taken = 244; so that VN may be somevhat less than 807. To ſind it ve may begin by taking for our depth of stream a quantity h, somewhat smaller than H the height of the surface of the basin above the bottom of the canal. With this depth, and the known width w of the canal, we can find the hydraulic depth d (RivER,) Then vith Vd and the slope find V by the Table: make this V ę⸗ This gives N This value of N⸗~ is suſficiently exact; for a small error of depth hardly affects the hydraulic mean depth. Aſter this preparation, the expression of the mean velowh city in the canal will be V . +2 h. The height l : . . . N” wh which will produce this velocity is 55 4h) Now this is the slope at the entry of the canal which produces the velocity that is aſterwards maintained against the obstructions by the slope of the canal. It is therefore/H N” ) —h. Hence ve deduce C60ũ +] 20) 4 . 8H u - ſo æ+1)- ? H) If there be no 4 contraction at the entry, G and Ju Having thus obtained the depth h of the —- we obtain the quantity of water by combining this with the vidth  and the velocity V. But as this was but an approximation, it is necessary to examine vhether the velocity V be possible This is very easy. It must be produced by the fallHh. We shall have no occasion for any correction of our first assumption, if h has not been extravagantly erroneous, because a small l mistake in  produces almost the same variation in d. The test of accuracy, however, is, that h, together with the height which vill produce the velocity V, must make up the whole height HAssuming h too small leaves H to0 great, and vill give a small velocity V, which requires a small value of Hnm. The error of H & thereſore is always greater than the error ve have committed in our first assumption. Therefore when this error of H—h is but a trifle, such as one-fourth of an inch, we may rest satisfied with our ansver. Perhaps the easiest process may be the ſollowing: Suppose the whole stream in train to have the depth HThe velocity V obtained for this depth and slope by the Table requires a certain productive height :. Make /H + u: H æH: h, and h vill be exceedingly near the truth. The reason is obvious. Quest. 2. Given the discharge (or quantity to be furnished in a second) Q. The height H of the basin above the bottom of the canal, and the slope, to find the dimensions of the canal? Let æ and 5 be the depth and mean width. It is plain that the eqquation u = VIG6 VH /Z vill give a value of 5 in terms oſ æ. c; this with the value oſ 5 obtained ſrom the equationò = uat æy E vill give an equation containing only æ and known quantities But it will be very complicated, and ve must have recourse to an approximation. This will be best understood in the form of an example. Suppose the depth at the entry to be 18 inches, and the slope :45. Let 1200 cubic feet oſ water per minute be the quantity of water to be drawn off, for orking machinery or any other purpose; and let the canal be supposed of the best form, recommended in the article RivEE, where the base of the sloping side is ſour-thirds oſ the height. The slightest consideration will show us that if v: 44 be taken for the height producing the velocity, it cannot exceed 2 inches, nor be less than I. Suppose it —2, and therefore the depth of the stream in the canal to be 16 inches; find the mean width of the canal by the equation Q w= n& a—o,3 Ed oꝶ in which Q is 20 cubic feet (the 60th part of I200), /8 is  26, 153, =VT000  L VT000 F I6, and hI6. This gives w=D8,52 feet. The section n=17,36 ſeet, and V=/2ę,6 inches. This requires a fall of 1,52 inches instead of 2 inches. Take this from 18, and there remains 16,48, which we shall find not to differ one-tenth of an inch from the exact depth which the water will acquire and maintain. We may thereſore be satisfied with assuming 5,36 feet as the mean wigth, and 8,58 feet ſor the width at the bottom. This approximation proceeds on this consideration, that vwhen the width diminishes by a small quantity, and in the same proportion that the depth increases, the hydraulic mean depth remains the same, and thereſore the velocity also remains, and the quantity discharged changes in the exact proportion of the section. Any minute error which may result from this supposition, may be corrected by increasing the fall producing the velocity in the proportion of the first hydraulic mean depth to the mean depth corresponding to the new dimensions found for the canal. It vill now become 1,53, and V vill be 32,72, and the depth vill be 16,47. The quantity discharged being divided by V, vill give the section =7,335 ſeet, from which, and the new depth, we obtain 5, 344 for the width. This and the foregoing are the most common questions proposed to an engineer. We asserted with some confidence that few oſ the proſession are able to answer them vith tolerable precisionn. We cannot offend the professional gentlemen by this, vhen we inform them, that the Academy of Sciences at Paris were occupied during several months vith an examination of a plan proposed by M. De Parcieux, ſor bringing the waters of the Yvette into Paris; and aſter the most mature consideration, gave in a report of the quantity of water vhich M. De Parcieux's aqueduet would yield, and that their report has been found erroneous in the proportion of at least 2 to 5: for the waters have been brought in, and exceed the report in this proportion. Indeed long after the giving in the report, M. Perronet, the most celebrated engineer in France, afſfirmed that the dimensions proposed were much greater than were necessary, and said, that an aqueduct of 54 feet wide, and 35 deep, with a slope of 15 inches in a thousand fathoms, would have a velocity oſ I2 or 13 inches per second, which would bring in all the water ſurnished by the proposed sources. The great diminution of expense occasioned by the alteration encouraged the community to undertake the work. It was accordingly begun, and a part executẽl. The water was found to run vith a velocity of near 19 inches when it was 8 feet deep. M. Perronet founded his computation on his ovn experience alone, acknow ledging that he had no theory to instruet himm. The work was carried no farther, it being found that the city could be supplied at a much smaller expense by steam-engines erected by Boulton and Watt. But the ſacts which occurred in the partial execution of the aqueduet are very valuablee IF M. Perronet's aqueduct be examined by our general formula, æ vill be found æ L455, and d æ 18,72, from which we deduce the velocity = 18]5, agreeing with the observation vith astonishing precision. . The experiments at Turin by Michelotti on canals ere very numerous, but complicated with many circumstances which would render the discussion too long for this place. When cleared of these circumstances, which we have done vith serupulous care, they are also abundantly conformable to our theory of the uniform motion of running vaters. But to return to our subject: Should it be required to bring off at once from the basin a mill course, having a determined velocity for driving an under-shot wheel, the problem becomes easier, because the velocity and slope combined determine the hydraulie mean depth at once; and the depth of the stream vill be had by means of the height which must be taken for the vhole depth at the entry, in order to produce the required velocity. In like manner, having given the quantity to be discharged, and the velocity and the depth at the entry, we can find the other dimensions of the channel; and the mean depth being fonnd, we can determine the slope. When the slope of a canal is very small, so that the depth of the uniform stream differs but a little from that at the entry, the quantity discharged is but small. But a great velocity, requiring a great fall at the entry, produces a great diminution of depth, and thereſore it may not compensate for this diminution, and the quantity discharged may be smalle. Improbable as this may appear, it is not demonstrably false; and hence we may see the propriety of the following Question 3. Given the depth H at the entry of a rectangular canal, and also its width , required the slope, depth, and velocity, which will produce the greatest possible discharge? Let æ be the unknown depth of the strenaemm H æ is the productive fall, and the velocity is V0G VH 4. This multiplied by w æ vill give the quantity discharged. Thereſore w æ V3G VH 2 must be made a maximum. The common process for this will give the equation 2 H =2S8æ, or?=3  II. The mean velocity will be VIG VſH; the section vill be 3 w H, and the discharge 3 VTG w H VTH, and d = M With these data the slope is easily had by the formula ſor uniſorm motion If the canal is of the trapezoidal form, the investigation is more troublesome, and requires the resolution of a cubic equation. It may appear strange that incrensing the slope of a canal beyond the quantity determined by this problem can diminish the quantity of water conveyed. But one of these two things must happen; either the motion will not acquire uniformity in such a canal for want oſ length, or the discharge must diminish. Supposing, however, that it could augment, we can judge how ſar this can g0. Let us take the extreme case, by making the canal vertica. In this case it becomes a simple weir or wasteboard. Now the discharge of a wasteboard is 3 Vẽ2 G ſ YQ B)?. The maximum determined by the preeeding problem is to that of the pastcboni of the same dimensions as H Vſ H: u un , or as H VſH: H /H —à H VſH, =5T8: 6465, nearly 9: 10. Having given the dimensions and slope of a canal, we can discover the relation between its expenditure and the time; or we can tell how mueh it will sink the surface oſf a pond in 24 hours, and the gradual progress of this effect; and this might be made the subject of a purticular problem. But it is complicated and diſfieult. In cases where this is an interesting object, ve may solve the question with suſficient accuracy, by calculating the expenditure at the beginning, supposing the basin kept full. Then, from the known area oſ the pond, we can tell in what time this expenditure will sink an inch; do the same on the supposition that the water is one-third lower, and that it is two-thirds lower (noticing the contraction of the surſace of the pond occasioned by this abstraction of its waters). Thus we shall obtain three rates oſ diminution, from which we can easily de- duce the desired relation between the expenditure and the time. Aqueducts derived from a basin or river are commonly furnished with a sluice at the entry This changes exceedingly the state of thingss The slope oſ the canal may be precisely such as vill maintain the mean velocity oſ the water which passes under the sluice; in which case the depth of the stream is equal to that of the sluice, and the velocity is produced at once by the head of water above it. But if the slope is less than this, the velocity of the issuing water is diminished, and the water must rise in the eanal. This must check the efflux at the sluice, and the water will be as it were stagnant above what comes through below it. It is extremely difficult to determine at vhat precise ope the ater vill begin to check the efflux. The contraction at the lower edge of the board hinders the water from attaining at once the whole depth which ĩt acquires afterwards, vhen its velocity diminishes by the obstruetions While the regorging which these obstructions occasion does not reach back to the sluice, the efflux is not affected by it Even when it does reach to the sluice, there will be a less depth immediately behind it than farther down the canal, where it is in train; because the swift-moving water which is next the bottom drags with it the regorged water which lies on it: but the canal must be rapid to make this difference of depth sensible. In ordinary canals, with moderate slopes and velocities, ſhe velocity at the sluice may be saſely taken as if it were that which corresponds to the difference of depths above and below the sluice, where both are in train. Let therefore H be the depth above the sluice, and h the depth in the canal. Let æ be the elevation of the sluice above the sole, and let b be its brendth. The discharge vill be e  VH —& VT5 ſor the sluice, and w h 5 Vi »h for the canal. These must be the same. + 2 . This gives the equation e  VH5 VG = v h Ne PL , containing the solution of all the questions which can be proposedl. The only uncertainty is in the quantity G, which expresses the velocity competent to the passage of the water through the orifice, circumstanced as it is, namely, subjected to contraction. This may be regulated by a proper form given to the entry into this orifice. The contraction may be almost annihilated by making the masonry of a eyclodial form on both sides, and also at the lower edge of the sluice-board, so as to give the orifice a form resembling Fig. 5, D, in the article RivERs. If the sluice is thin in the face of a basin, the contraction will reduce 2 G to 296. If the sluice be as wide as the canal, 2 G will be nearly 500. Question 4. Given the head of vater in the basin H, the breadth b, and elevation æ of the sluice, and the breadth æ and slope s of the canal, to find the depth h of the stream, the velocity, and the discharge ? We must (as in Question 2.) make a ſirst supposition for h, in order to find the proper value of . Then the equation e  VH5 VI G æ vh Nẽ gives h + GJ H G s : Ngq + 7Nga) If this value shall differ considerably from the one whi*h we assumed in order to begin the computation, make use of it for obtaining a nev value of d, and repeat the operationn. We shall rarely be obliged to perform a third operation. The following is of frequent use: Question 5. Given the dimensions and the slope, with the velocity and discharge of a river in ĩts ordinary state, required the area or section oſ the sluice which ill raise the vaters to a certain height, still allowing the same quantity of water to pass through? Such an operation may render the river navigable ſor small craſt or raſts above the sluice. The problem is reduced to the determination of the size oſ orifice which will discharge this water with a velocity competent to the height to which the river ĩs to be raised; only we must take into consideration the velocity of the water ahove the sluice, considering it as produced by a fall which makes a part of the height produetive of the whole velocity at the sluice: Therefore H, in our investigation, must consist of the height to which we mean to raise the vaters, and the height which will produce the velocity with which the waters approach the sluice: h, or the depth of the stream, is the ordinary depth of the river. Then (using wh JNædi v2ũ’ũ s (Hp) the former symbols) we have e b vy2G HH h) IF the aurea of the sluice is known, and we would leasm the height to which it will raise the river, ve have Hſ 4 for the expression of the rise of the water above its ordinary level. But from this ve must take the height which would produce the velocity of the river; so that if the sluice were as wide as the river, and vere raised 2 Q 26 presses the height that produces the velocity under the sluice, must be equal to the depth of the river, and Hn< will be æ O. The performance of aqueduet drains is a very important thing, and merits our attention in this place While the art oſf managing vaters, and of conducting them so as to answer our demands, renders us very important service by embellishing our habitations, or promoting our commercial intercourse, the art of draining creates as it were new riches, ſertilizing tracts of bog or marsh, which was not to the ordinary surface of the vater, which exe only useless, but hurtſul by its unwholesome exhalations, and converting them into rich pastures and gay meadows. A vild country, occupied by marshes which are inaccessible to herds or ſlocks, and serve only for the haunts of waterfowls, or the retreat of a few poor fishermen, when once it is freed from the waters in which it is drowned, opens its lap to receive the most precious seeds, is soon clothed in the richest garb, gives life and abundance to numerous herds, and never ſails to become the delight of the industrious cultivator vho has enfranchised it, and is attached to it by the labour which it cost him. In return, it procures him abundance, and supplies him with the means oſ daily augmenting its fertility. No species of agriculture exhibits such long-continued and progressive improvement. New families flock to the spot, and there multiply; and there nature seems the more eager to repay their labours, in proportion as she has been obliged, against her will, to keep her treasures locked up for a longer time, chilled by the waterss. The countries newly inhabited by the human race, as is a great part of America, especially to the southward, are still covered to a great extent with marshes and lakes; and they would long remain in this condition, if population, daily making new advances, did not increase industry, by multiplying the cultivating hands, at the same time that it increases their vantss The Author of this beautiſful world has at the beginning formed the great masses of mountains, has scooped out the dales and sloping hills, has traced out the courses, and even formed the beds oſ the rivers: but he has leſt to man the care of making his place of abode, and the field which must feed him, dry and comſortablee For this task is not beyond his povers, as the others are Nay, by having this given to him in charge, he is richly repaid ſor his labour by the very state in which he finds those countries into which he penetrates for the first time. Being covered with lakes and forests, the juices of the soil are kept for him as it were in reserve. . The air, the burning heat of the sun, and the continual washing of rains, would have combined to expend and dissipate their vegetable powers, had the fields been exposed in the same degree to their action as in the inhabited and cultivated countries, the most fertile moulds of vhich are long since lodged in the bottom of the ocean. All this would have been completely lost through the whole extent of South America, had it not been protected by the forests which man must cut down, by the rank herbage which he must burn, and by the marsh and bog which he must destroy by draining. Let not ungrateſful man complain of this. It is his duty to take on himself the task of opening up treasures, preserved on purpose ſor him vith so much judgment and care. If he has discernment and sensibility, he vill even thank the Author of all good, who has thus husbanded them for his usee. He vill co-operate with his beneficent views, and vill be careful not to proceed by wantonly snatching at present and partial good, and by picking out what is most easily got at, regardless of him vho is to come afterwards to uncover and extract the remaining riches of the ground. A wise administration of such a country will think it their duty to leave a just share oſ this inheritance to their descendants, who are entitled to expect it as the last legatees. National plans of cultivation should be formed on this principle, that the steps taken by the present cultivators for realiZing part of the riches of the infant country shall not obstruet the works which vill afterwards be necessary for also obtaining the remainder. This is carefully attended to in Holland and in China. No man is allowed to conduct the drains, by which he recovers a piece of marsh, in such a vay as to render it much more difficult for a neighbour, or even for his oWn successor, to drain another piece, although it may at present be quite inaccessiblee. There remains in the middle of the most cultivated countries many marshes, which industry has not yet attempted to drain, and where the legislature has not been VOL. II. 20 at pains to prevent many little abuses which have produced elevations in the beds of rivers, and rendered the complete draining of some spots impossible Administration should attend to such things, because their consequences are great. The sciences and arts, by which alone these diſſicult and costly jobs can he performed, should be protected, encouraged, and cherished. It ĩs only from science that we ean obtain principles to direet these artss The problem oſ draining canals is one of the most important, and yet has hardly ever occupied the attention of the hydraulic speculatist. We apprehend that Mr Buat's theory vill throw great light on ĩt; and regret that the very limited condition of our present work vill hardly afford room for a slight sketch oſ what may be done on the subject. We shall, however, attempt it by a general problem, which vill involve most of the chieſ circumstances which occur in vorks of that kind. Quest. 6. Let the hollow ground A (Fig- 2.) be inundated by rains or springs, and have no outlet but the canal AB, by which it discharges its water into the neighbouring river BCDE, and that its surface is nearly on a level vith that of the river at B. It can only drain when the river sinks in the droughts of summer; and even if ĩt could then drain completely, the putrid marsh would only be an infeeting neighbour. It may be proposed to drain it by one or more canals; and it is required to determine their lengths and other dimensions, s0 as to produce the best effects ? It is evident that there are many circumstances to determine the choice, and many conditions to be attended to. If the canals AC, AD, AE, are respectively equal to the portions BC, BD, BE, of the river, and have the same slopes, they will have the same discharge: but they are not for this reason equivalent. The long canal AE may drain the marsh completely, while the short one AC will only do it in part; because the difſerence of level between A and C is but inconsiderablee Also the freshes of the river may totally obstruet the operation of AC, while the canal AE cannot be hurt by them, E being so much lower than C. Therefore the canal must be carried so far down the river, that no freshes there shall ever raise the waters in the canal 50 high as to reduce the slope in the upper part oſ it to such a level that the current shall not be sufficient to carry off the ordinary produce of water in the marsh. Still the problem is indeterminate, admitting many solutions. This requisite discharge may be accomplished by a short but wide canal, or by a longer and narrover. Let us first see what solution can be made, so as to accomplish our purpose in the most economical manner, that is, by means of the smallest equationWe shall give the solution in the form of an example. Suppose that the daily produce of rains and springs raises the water 14 inch on an area of a square league, which gives about 120,000 cubic fathoms of water. Let the bottom of the basin be three feet below the surſace of the freshes in the river at B in winter. Also, that the slope of the river is 2 inches in 100 ſathoms, or ”dth, and that the canal is to be 6 feet deep. The canal being supposed nearly parallel to the river, ĩt must be at least 1800 fathoms long before it can be admitted into the river, otherwise the bottom of the bog vill be lower than the mouth of the canal; and even then a hundred or two more fathoms added to this will give it so little slope, that an immense breadth vill be necessary to make the discharge with so small a velocity. On the other hand, if the slope oſ the canal be made nearly equal to that of the river, an extravagant length will be necessary beſore its admission into the river, and many obstacles may then intervene. And even then it must have a breadth of 13 feet, as may easily be ealculated by the general hydraulic theorem. BY receding from each of these extremes, we shall diminish the expense oſ exeavationn. Thereſore, — Let æ and 5 be the breadth and length, and h the depth (6 ſeet) oſ the cana. Let q be the depth oſ the bog below the surface of the river, opposite to the basin, D the discharge in a second, and ] the slope of the river We must make æ 5 a minimum, or æ +v x =o. The general formula gives the velocity vVYng —0;5 ào,1. This vould give æ andy; but the logarithmic term renders it very complicated. We may make use of the simple form V/ u i making VNg nearly 2 5 b. This will be suſficiently exact for all cases which do not deviate far from this, because the velocities are very nearly in the subduplieate ratio of the slopes. To introduce these data into the equation, recollect that the canal being supposed of nearly equal length with the river & vill express the whole difference oſ height, and H q is the difference of height for the cana. This quantity being divided by v, gives the value of 55 & . Therefore the equation for the canal becomes V N” hæ b9 Hence ve deduce: Vsi Bgr⸗ DD +2n A8Ng l æ 5 3 —S Neiu/;(stæ -p) Iſ we substitute these (ææ D +2 ) values in the equation  æ +æ 5 O, and reduce it, we obtain finally, Ng®n æ æ5 8:8h If we resolve this æuatio, by making N/(Q96)?,, or 87616 inches; h æ , 2 = and D æ 518400, we obtain æ/ 892 inches, or 82 feet 8 inches, ma 2 orV xr = 18,86 inches. Now, putting these values in the exact formula for the velocity, we obtain the slope oſ the canal, which is ã7,, nearly ,62 inches in 100 fathoms. Let I be the length of the canal in fathoms. As the river has 2 inches fall in 100 fathoms, the whole fall iso° and that oſf the canal is The difference of these two must be  feet, which is erenee between the river and the emtry of the cana. We have therefore &i : = 86 inchess. Hence /2604 fathoms; and this multiplied by the section of the canal gives 14177 cubic ſathoms of earth to be removed. This may surely be done, in most cases, for eight shillings each cubic fathom, which does not amount to L. 6000, a very moderate sum for completely draining of nine square miles of country. In order to judge of the importance of this problem, ve have added two other canals, one longer and the other shorter, having their widths and slopes so adjusted as to ensure the same perſormance. width. Velocity. Blope. Length. Excavation. Feet. Inches. 41 14,28 S 21]l 15541 923 18,86 2604 1417 2l 28,57 m3851 25838 We have considered this important problem in its most simple state. If the basin is far from the river, so that the drains are not nearly parallel to it, and therefore have less slope attainable in their course, it is more diſficult. Perhaps the best method is to try two very extreme cases and a middle one, and then a fourth, nearer to that extreme vhich differs least from the middle one in the quantity of excavation. This will point out on which side the minimum of excavation lies, and also the law by which it diminishes and aſterwards increasess Then drav a line, on which set off from one end the lengths of the canals At each length erect an ordinate representing the excavation; and drav a regular curve through the extremities of the ordinatess From that point of the curve which is nearest to the base line, draw another ordinate to the base. This vill point out the best length of the canal with suſficient accuracy. The length ill determine the slope, and this vill give the width, by means of the general tHeorem. N. BThese draining canals must always come off from the basin with evasated entries. This will prevent the loss of much fſall at the entry. Two canals may sometimes be necessary. In this case expense may frequently be saved, by making one canal ſlow into the other. This, however, must be at such a distance from the basin, that the swell produced in the other by this addition may not reach back to the immediate neighbourhood of the basin, othervise it would impede the performance of both. For this purpose, recourse must be had to the problem III. in the article RivERR. We must here observe, that in this respeet canals differ exceedingly from rivers: rivers enlarge their beds, so as always Let L be the length, and h the fall which would produce the velocity with which the water enters the pipe, and actually flows in it, aſter overcoming all obstructions. This may be expressed in terms of the velocity by a G denoting the acceleration of gravity, corresponding to the manner of entry. When no methods are adopted for ſacilitating the entry of the water, by a bell-shaped funnel or otherwise, 2G may be assumed as  500 inches, or 42 feet, according as we measure the velocity in inches or feet. 1n/ The slope is3, 2 G, which must be put inio the L general formula. This would make it very complicated. We may simplify it by the consideration that the velocity is very small in comparison of that arising ſrom the height H: consequently h is very small. Also, in the same pipe, the resistances are nearly in the duplicate ratio of the velocities vhen these are small, and when they differ little among themselves. Therefore make b taking  by guess, a very little less than H. Then compute the mean velocity v corresponding to these data, or take it from the tablee. If R - be H, we have ſound the mean velocity V=/uv. If not, make the following proportion: v : : . h55H2õ 25 ?hich is the same with this . v ? H h+6:  H v, mi v i 3 , 7 2QGH 9ru If the pipe has any bendings, they must be calculated for in the manner mentioned in the article RivER; and the head of water neos, for overcoming this additional resistance being calles the last proportion must be changed for Quest. 2. Given the height of the reservoir, the lengih of the pipe, and the quantity of water which is to be drawn off in a second, to find the diameter of the pipe which ill drav it off? Let d be considered as  of the diameter, and let I: c represent the ratio of the diameter of a circle to its circumferencee. The section of the pipe is 4 c d Let the quantity of water per second be Q then is the mean velocity. Divide the length of the pipe by the height of the reservoir above the place of delivery, diminished by a very small quantity, and call the quotient S. Consider this as the slope of the conduit; the general formula now becomes We may neglect the last term in every case oſ civil praetice, and also the small quantity O,. This gives the very simple formula E from which we readily deduce This process gives the diameter somewhat too small. But we easily rectify this error by computing the quantity delivered by the pipe, which vill difſer a little from the quantity proposed. Then observing, by this equation, that tvo pipes having the same length and the same slope give quantities of water, oſf which the squares are nearly as the 5th povers oſ the diameter, we form a new diameter in this proportion, which will be almost perfectly exact. It may be observed that the height assumed for determining the slope in these tvo questions vill seldom diſfer more than an inch or two from the whole height of the reservoir above the place of delivery; for in conduits of a few hundred feet long the velocity seldom exceeds four feet per second, which requires only a head of 8 inches. As no inconvenience worth minding results from making the pipes a tenth of an inch or 50 wider than is barely suſficient, and as this generally is more than the error arising from even a very erroneous assumption of h, the answer first obtained may be 'augmented by one or two tenths oſ an inch, and then we may be confident that our conduit will drav off the intended quantity of water. We presume that every person who assumes the name of engineer knows how to reduce the quantity of water measured in gallons, pints, or other denominations, to cubic inches, and can calculate the gallons, &e. furnished by a pipe of known diameter, moving with a velocity that is measured in inches per second. We further suppose that all care is taken in the construetion of the conduit, to avoid obstructions occasioned by lumps of solder hanging in the inside of the pipes; and, particularly, that all the cocks and plugs by the way have waterways equal to the section of the pipe. Undertakers are most tempted to fail here, by making the cocks too small, because large cocks are very costly. But the employer should be serupulously attentive to this; because a simple contraction of this kind may be the throwing avay, oſ many hundred pounds in a wide pipe, vhich yields no more water than can pass through the small cock. The chief obstructions arise from the deposition of sand or mud in the lower parts of pipes, or the collection of air in the upper parts of their bendingss The velocity being always very moderate, such depositions of heavy matters are unavoidable. The utmost care should therefore be taken to have the vater freed from all such things at ĩts entry by proper filtration; and there ought tò be cleansing plugs at the lower parts of the bendings, or rather a very little way beyond them. When these are opened, the water issues vith greater velocity, and carries the depositions with it. It is much more diſficult to get rid of the air which chokes the pipes by lodging in their upper parts. This is sometimes taken in along with the water at the reservoir, vhen the entry of the pipe is too near the surfacee This should be carefully avoided, and it costs no trouble to do so. IF the entry of the pipe is to feet under the surface, no air can ever get in. Floats should be placed above the entries, having lids hanging from them, which will shut the pipe before the water runs too low. But air is also disengaged ſrom spring-water by merely passing along the pipe. When pipes are supplied by an engine, air is very oſten drawn in by the pumps in a disengaged state. It is also disengaged from its state of chemical union, vhen the pumps have a suction- pipe of 10 or 12 feet, which is very common. In whatever vay it is introduced, it collects in all the upper part of bendings, and chokes the passage, s0 that sometimes not a drop of vater is delivered. Our cocks should be placed there, which should be opened frequently by persons vho have this in charge. Desaguiliers describes a contrivance to be placed on all such eminences, which does this of itself. It is a pipe vith a cock, terminating in a small cisternn The key of the cock has a hollow ball of copper at the end oſ a lever. When there is no air in the main pipe, water comes out by this discharger, ſills the cistern, raises the ball, and thus shuts the cock. But when the bend of the main contains air, it rises into the cistern, and occũpies the upper part of it. Thus the ſloating ball falls down, the cock opens and lets out the air, and the cistern again filling with water, the ball rises, and the cock is again shut. A very neat contrivance for this purpose as invented by the late Professor Russell of Edinburgh. The cylindrical pipe BCDE (Fig. 8.), at the upper part of a hending of the main, is screwed on, the upper end of which is a ſlat plate perforated with a small hole F. This pipe contains a hollow copper eylinder G, to the upper part oſ which is fastened a piece of soft leather H. When there is air in the pipe, it comes out by the hole A, and occupies the discharger, and then escapes through the hole F. The water follows, and, rising in the discharger, lifts up the hollow cylinder G, causing the leather H to apply itself to the plate CD, and shut the hole Thus the air is discharged vithout the smallest loss oſ vater. It is of the most material consequence that there be no contraction in any part of a conduit. This is evident; but it is also prudent to avoid all unnecessary enlargements. For when the conduit is ſull of water moving along it, the velocity in every section is inversely proportional to the area of the section: it is therefore diminished wherever the pipe is enlarged; but it must again be increased where the pipe contracts. This cannot be without expending force in the acceleration. This consumes part of the impelling pover, whether this be a head of water, or the force of an engine. See what is said on this subject in the following dis sertation on Purs. Nothing is gained by any enlargement; and every contraction, by requiring an augmentation of veloeity, employs a part of the impelling force precisely equal to the weight of a column of water hose base is the contracted passage, and whose height is the fall which would produce a velocity equal to this augmentation. This point seems to have been quite overlooked by engineers of the first eminence, and has in many instances greatly diminished the performancè of their best works. It is no less detrimental in open canals; because at every contraction a m small fall is required for restoring the velocity lost in the enlargement of the canal, by which the general slope and velocity are diminished. Another point which must be attended to in the condueting of water is, that the motion should not be subsultory, but continuouss When vater is to be driven along a mam by the strokes of a reciprocating engine, it should be forced into an air-box, the spring of vhich may preserve it in motion along the whole subsequent main. If the water is brought to rest at every suecessive stroke of the piston, the whole mass must again be put in motion throngh the whole length of the main. This requires the same useless expenditure of power as to communicate this motion to as much dead matter; and this is over and above the force which may be necessary for raising the water to a certain height; which is the only circumstance that enters into the calculation of the power of the pump-engine. An air-hox removes this imperſfection, because it keeps up the motion during the returning stroke of the piston. The compression oſ the air by the active stroke of the piston must be such as to continue the impulse in opposition to the contrary pressure oſ the water (iſ it is to be raised to some height), and in opposition to the friotion or other resistances which arise from the motion that the water really acquires. Indeed a very considerable force is employed here also in changing the motion of the vater, which is forced out of the capacious air-box into the narrow pipe; and vhen this change of motion is not judiciously managed, the expenditure of power may be as great as if all were brought to rest and again put into motion. It may even be greater, by causing the water to move in the opposite direction to its former motionn. OF such consequence is it to have all these circumstances scientifically considered. It is in such particulars, unheeded by the ordinary herd of engineers or pump-makers, that the superiority of an intelligent practitioner is to be seen. Another material point in the conduit of water in pipes is the distribution of it to the different persons vho have occasion for it. This is rarely done from the rising main. It is usual to send the whole into a cistern, from which ĩt is aſterwards conducted to different places in separate pipes. Till the discovery of the general theorem by the Chevalier Buat, this has been done vith great inaccuracy Engineers think that the different purchasers from water-works receive in proportion to their respective bargains when they give them pipes whose areas are proportional to these payments. But we now see, that when these pipes are of any considerable length, the waters of a larger pipe run vith a greater velocity than those of a smaller pipe having the same slope. A pipe of two inches diameter vill give much more water than four pipes of one inch diameter; it will give as much as five and a half such pipes, or more; hecause the squares of the discharges are very nearly as the fifth powers of the diameters. This point ought therefore to be carefully considered in the bargains made with the proprietors of water-wonks, and the payments made in this proportion. Perhaps the most unexceptionable method would be to make a double distributionn Let the water be first let off in its proper proportions into a second series of small cisterns, and let each have a pipe which will eonvey the whole water that is discharged into it. The first distribution may be made entirely by pipes of one inch in diameter; this would leave nothing to the calculation of the distributor, for every man would pay in proportion to the number of such pipes which run into his own cistern. In many cases, however, water is distributed by pipes derived from a main. And here another circumstance comes into actionn. When water is passing along a pipe, its pressure on the sides oſ the pipe is diminished by ĩts velocity; and if a pipe is now derived from it, the quantity drawn off is also diminished in the subduplicate ratio of the pressures. IF the pressure is reduced to th, ĩth, s&th, &e. the discharge ſfrom the lateral pipe is reduced to b 19, 3ih, e. It is therefore of great importance to determine, what this diminution of pressure is which arises from the motion along the main. It is plain, that if the water suffered no resistance in the main, its velocity would be that with which it entered, and it would pass along vithout exerting any pressure. If the pipes were shut at the end, the pressure on the sides would be the full pressure of the head of water. If the head of water remain the same, and the end oſ the tube be contract%d, but not stopped entirely, the velocity in the pipe is diminished. If ve would have the velocity in the pipe with this contracted mouth augmented to what it was before the contraction was made, ve must employ the pressure of a piston, or of a head of water. This is propagated throngh the fluid, and thus a pressure is immediately excited on the sides oſ the pipe. New obstructions of any kind, arising from ſriction or any other cause, produce a diminution of velocity in the pipe. But when the natural velocity is checked, the particles react on what obstructs their motion; and this action is uniſormly propagated through a perſect fluid in every direction. The resistance therefore which we thus ascribe to friction, produces the same lateral pressure which a contraction of the orifice, which equally diminishes the velocity in the pipe, would do. Indeed this is demonstrable from any distinet notions that we can form of these obstructions. They proceed from the want of perfect smoothness, wvhich obliges the particle next the sides to move in undulated lines. This excites transverse forces in the same manner as any constrained curvilineal motion. A particle in its undulated path tends to escape from it, and acts on the lateral particles in the same manner that it ould do if moving simply in a capillary tube having the same undulations; it would press on the concave side of every such undulationn. Thus a pressure is exerted among the particles, which is propagated to the sides of the pipe; or the diminution of velocity may arise from a viscidity or want of perfect fluidity. This obliges the particle immediately pressed to drag along with it another particle which is withheld by adhesion to the sides. This requires additional pressure from a piston, or an additional head of water; and this pressure also is propagated to the sides oſ the pipe. Hence it should follow, that the pressure which water in motion exerts on the sides of its conduit is equal to that which is competent to the head of water which impels it into the pipe, diminished by the head of water competen? to the actual velocity with which it moves along the pipe. Let H represent the head of water which impels it into the entry of the pipe, and h the head which would produce the actual velocity; then Hp, is the column which would produce the pressure exerted on its sides. This is abundantly verified by very simple experiments. Let an upright pipe be inserted into the side of the main pip. When the water runs out by the mouth of the main, it will rise in this branch till the weight of the column balances the pressure that supports it; and if ve then ascertain the velocity of the issuing water by means of the quantity discharged, and compute the head or height necessary for producing this velocity, and subtract this from the height of water above the entry of the main, ve shall find the height in the branch precisely equal to their differencee Our readers may see this by examining the experiments related by Gravesande, and still better by consulting the experiments narrated by Bossut, § 558, vhich are detailed with great minuteness; the results corresponded accurately with this proposition. The experiments indeed were not heights of water supported by this pressure, but water expelled by it through the same orifice. Indeed the truth of the proposition appears in every way we can consider the motion of waterr And as it is of the first importance in the practice of conducting vater (for reasons which vill presently appear), it merits a particular attention. When an inclined tube is in train, the accelerating power of the water (or its weight diminished in the proportion of the length of the oblique column to its verticl height, or its veight multiplied by the ſraetion vhich expresses the slope), is in equilibrio with the obstructions; and therefore it exerts no pressure on the pipe but what arises from its weight alone. Any part of it would continue to slide down the inclined plane vith a constant velocity, though detached from what follows it. It thereſore derives no pressure from the head oſ water which impelled it into the pipe. The same must be said of a horizontal pipe infinitely smooth, or opposing no resistance. The water would move in this pipe with the full velocity due to the head of water which impels it into the entry. But when the pipe opposes an obstruction, the head of water is greater than that which would impel it into the pipe with the velocity that it actually has in it; and this additional pressure is propagated along the pipe, where it is balanced by the actual resistance, and thereſore excites a quaqua versum pressure on tè pipe. In short, whatever part of the head of water in the reservoir, or of the pressure which impels it along the tube, is not employed in producing velocity, is employed in acting against some obstruction, and excites (by the reaction of this obstruction) an equal pressure on the tube. The rule thereſore is general, but is subject to some modifications hich deserve our attention. In the simply inelined pipe BC (Fig. 4.), the pressure on any point S is equal to that of the head AB oſ water vwhich impels the water into the pipe wanting, or minus that of the head of water which would communicate to it the velocity with which it actually moves. This we shall call æ, and consider it as the weight of a column of vater voL. II. 2r . whose length alm is æ Ih like manner H may be the eolumn AB, which impels the water into the pipe, and would communicate u certam velocity ; and h may represent the oolumn which would communicate the actual velocity. We have thereſore ? /H h. In the pipe HIKL, the pressure at the point I is AH h—IO, / H hIO; and the pressure at  is H —h  PE And in the pipe DEFG, the pressure on E is  AR R—EM, æ/ H hEM; and the pressure at F is H h 4 FN. We must carefully distinguish this pressure on any square inch of the pipe from the obstruetion or resistance which that inch actually exerts, and which is part oſ the cause of this pressure. The pressure is (by the laws of hydrostatios) the same vith that exerted on the water by a square inch oſ the piston or ſorcing head of waterr This must balance the united obstruetions of the whole pipe, in as far ns they are not balanced by the relative weight of the water in an enclosed pipe. Whatever be the inclination oſ a pipo, and the velocity of the water in it, there is a certain part oſ this resistance which may not be halanced by the tendency which the vater ias to slide along it, provided the pipe be long enough; or if the pipe is too short, the tendeney down the pipe may more than halance all the resistances that obtain below. In the first case, this overplus must be balanced by an additional head of water; and in the latter case the pipe is not in train, and the water vill accelerate There is something in the mechanism of these motions which makes a certain length of pipe neeesnary for bringing it into train; a certain portion of the surface which acts in concert in obstructing the motion. We do not completely understand this circumstance, but we can form a pretty distinet notion of its mode of acting. The film of water contiguous to the pipe is withheld by the obstruction, but glides along; the ſilm immedi. ately within this is withheld by the outer film, but glides through it: and thus all the cncentrie films glide within those around them, somewhat like the sliding tubes oſ a spy-glass, when we drav it out by taking hold of the end of the innermost. Thus the second film passes beyond the ſirst or outermost, and becomes the outermost and rubs along the tube. The third does the same in its turn; and thus the central filaments come at last to the outside, and all sustain their greatest possible obstructionn. When this is accomplished, the pipe is in train. This requires a certain length, which we eannot determine by theory. We see, however, that pipes oſ greater diameter must require a greater length, and this in a proportion which is probably that of the number of filaments, or the square of the diametor. Buat found this supposition agreo well enough vith his experimentss. A pipe of one ineh in diameter sustained no change of velocity by gradually shortening it till he reduced it to six feet, and' then it discharged a little more water. A pipe of two inches diameter gave a sensible augmentation of velocity when shortened to 25 feet. He therefore says, that the square of the diameter in inches, multiplied by 72, will express (in inches) the length necessary for putting any pipe in train. ſThe resistance exerted by a square inch of the pipe makes but a small part of the pressure which the whole resistances ocoasion 1o be exerted there before they can be overcome. The resistance may be represented by : vhen d is the hydraulie depth ſſth of the diameter), and ⸗ the length of a column whose vertical height is one ineh, and it is the rlative weight oſ a column of water whose base is a square inch, and height is d. For the resistance of any length s of pipe which is in train, is equal to the tendency of the vater to slide down (being balanced by it); ſhi is, equal to the eight of this column multiplied ⸗ . The mag- nitude of this column is had by multiplying its length by its section. The section is the product of the border b or circumference, multiplied by the mean depth d, or it is bd This, multiplied by the length, is bd æ; and this multiplied by the slope H is b d, the relative weight of the column whose length is . The relative weight of one inch is therefore b and this is in equilibrio with the resistance oſ a ring of the pipe one inch broad. This, vhen unſolded, is a parallelogram b inches in length. One inoh of this therefore is s the relative eight of a column of water having d for its height and a square inch for its hasee Suppose the pipe four inches in diameter, and the slope  53, the resistance is one grain; for an inch of water weighs 258 grains. This knowledge of the pressure of water in motion is of great importance. In the management of rivers and eanals it instructs us concerning the damages which they produce in their beds by tearing up the soil; it informs us of the strength which we must give to the banks: hut it is of more consequence in the management of close conduits. By this we must regulate the strength of our pipes; by this also ve must ascertain the quantities of water which may be drawn off by lateral branches from any main conduit. With respect to the first of these objects, where security is our sole concern, it is proper to consider the pressure in the most unfavourable cireumstances, viz. hen the end of the main is shut. This case is not unſrequent. Nay, vhen the water is in motion, its velocity in a conduit seldom exceeds a very few ſeet in a second. Eight feet per second requires only one foot of water to produce it. We should thereſore estimate the strain in all conduits by the whole height of the reservoir. In order to adjust the strength of a pipe to the strain, we may conceive it as consisting oſ tvo half eylinders of insuperable strength, joined along the two seams, where the strength is the same vith the ordinary strength of the materials of which it is made. The inside pressure tends to burst the pipe by tearing open these seams, and each of them sustains half of the strain. The strain on an inch of these two seams is equal to the weight of a column of water whose height is the depth of the seam below the surface of the reservoir, and whose base is an inch broad and a diameter of the pipe in length. This ſollows from the common principles of hydrostatics. Suppose the pipe to be of lead, one foot in diameter and 100 feet under the surface of the reservoir. Water weighs 624 pounds per foot. The base of our column is therefore 4th of a foot, and the tendency to burst the pipe is 100 x 62 4 X v /11,  52l pounds nearly. Therefore an inch of one seam is strained by 2604 poundss A rod of lead one inch square is pulled asunder by 860 pounds (87 ENGTE OF MATERIALS, vol. I.). Therefore, if the thickness of the seam is  ĩ18 inches, or 3d of an inch, it will just withstand this strain. But we must make it much stronger than this, especially if the pipe leads from an engine which sends the vater along it by startss: Belidor and Desaguiliers have gſten tables of the thickness and weights of pipes which experience has ſound sufficient for the diſſerent materials and depths. Desaguiliers says, that a leaden pipe of -ths of an inch in thickness is strong enough for a height of 140 feet and diameter oſ 7 inches. From this we may calculate otherss Belidor says, that a leaden pipe 12 inches diameter and 60 feet deop should be half an inch thick: but these things will be more properly conputed by means of the list given in the article STRENGTH oF MATERIALS, vol. I. The application which we are most anxious to make of the knowledge of the pressure of moving waters is the derivation from a main conduit by lateral branches. This ocurs very frequently in the distribution of waters among the inhabitants of towns; and it is ;0 imperſectly understood by the greatest part of those vho take the name of engineers, that individuals have no security that they shall get even one half of the water they burgain and pay ſor; yet this may be as accurately ascertained as any other problem in hydraulios by means of our general theorem. The case therefore merits our parſiculat attention. It appears to be determined already, vhen we have ascertained the pressures by which the vater is impelled into these lateral pipes, especially after we have said that the experiments of Bossut on the hctual diacharges from a lateral pipe fully confirni the theoretieal doetrine. But much remains to be considered. We have seèn that there is a vast difference between the discharge made through a hole, or even through a short pipe, and the discharge from the ſur end of a pipe derived ſrom a main conduitt. And oven when this has has been ascertained by our new theory, the discharge thus modified will be found considerably different from the real state of things: for when water is flowing along a main with a known velocity, and therefore exerting a known pressure on the circle which we propose for the entry of a branch, if we insert a branch there water vill go along it: but this will generally make a considerable change in the motion along the nſiin, and therefore in the pressure which is to expel the water. It also makes a considerable ohange in the whole quantity which pnsses along the anterior part of the main, and a still greater change on what moves along that part oſ it which lies beyond the branch: it thereſore affſects the quantity necessary for the whole supply, the force that is required for propelling it, and the quantity delivered by other branches. This part therefore of the management of vater in conduits is of considerable importance and intricacy. We can propose in this place nothing more than a solution of such leading questions as involve the chief cireumstances, recommending to our readers the perusal of original works on this subject. M. Bossuſ's experiments are ſully competent to the establishment oſ the fundamental principlee The hole through which the lateral discharges were made was but a few feet from the reservoir. The pipe was succesively lengthened, by which the resistances werè increased, and the velocity diminished. But this did not aſfect the lateral discharges, except by aſfecting the pressures; and the discharges from the end of the main were supposed to be the same as when the lateral pipe was not inserted. Although this was not strictly true, the difference was insensible, because the lateral pipe had but about the 18th part of the area of the main. Suppose that the discharge ſrom the reservoir remains the same aſter the derivation of this branch, then the motion of the water all the way to the insertion of the branch is the same as before; but, beyond this, the discharge is diminished by all that is discharged by the branch, with the head æ equivalent to the pressure on the sidee The discharge by the lower end of the main being diminished, the velocity and resistance in it are also diminished. There: fore the difference between æ and the head employed io overcome the friòtion in this second dase, vould he a needless or inefſicient part of the whole load at the entry, which is impossible; for every force produces an efſęet, or it is destroyed by some reaction. The effect of the ſorting hęad of water is to produce the greatest discharge corresponding to the obstructions; and thus the discharge ſrom the reservoir, or the supply to the main, must be augmented by the insertion of the branch, if the forcing head of water rmaios the same. A greater portion thereſorè of the foreing head was employed in producing a greater discharge at the entry of the main, and the remainder, less than æ, produced the pressure on the sides. This head was the one competent to the obstructions resulting from the velocity beyond the insertion of the branch; and this velocity, diminished by the discharge already made, was less thun that at the entry, and even than that of the mam without a branch. This will appear more distinetly by putting the case into the form of an equation. Therefore let Hæ be the height due to the velocity at the entry, of which the eſfect obtains only horizontallg The head æ is the only one which acts on the sides of the tube, tending to produce the discharge by the branch, at the same time that it must overcome the obstructions beyond the branch. If the orifice did not exist, and if the force producing the velocity on a short tube be represented by 2G, and the seetion of the main by A, the supply at the entry of the main would be A YTG YH —42; and if the orifice had no influence on the value of æ, the discharge by the orifice would be D / a D being its discharge by means of the head H, when the end of the main is shut; for the discharges are in the subduplicate ratio of the heads of water by which the xz ſi are expelled; and therefore  H: / 2æ/D: D (3). But we have seen that æ must diminish; and ve know that the obstructions are nearly as the square roots oſ the velocities, hen these do not differ much among themselves. Thereſore calling  the pressure or head which balances the resistances oſ the main without a branch, while æ is the head necessary for the main with a branch, we may institute this proportion : H 5,2 and this fourth term will express the head producing the velocity in the main beyond the branch (as H—& would have done in a main without a branch). This velocity beyond the branch vill be vG /e and the dicharge at the end vill be A G U611 10 v this we add the discharge of the branch, the sum vill be the whole discharge, and thereſore the whole supply. Thereſore ve have the ſollowing equation, A VaG VH 5 / ræ ſſ= ſ4q From this ve deduce 2GHA? T  Je 5 vL the value of ſavæ" 3  ſ5 r2æ This value of 7 being substituted in the equation of the discharge  of the branch, which was D s will give the discharges required, and they vill differ so much the more ſfrom the discharges calculated according to the simple theory, as the velocity in the main is greater. By the simple theory, we mean the supposition that the lateral discharges are such as would be produced by the head H —n, where H is the height of the reservoir, and h the head due to the actual velocity in the main. And thus it appears that the proportion of the discharge by a lateral pipe from a main that is shut at the far end, and the discharge from a main that is open, depends not only on the pressures, but also on the size of the lateral pipe, and its distance from the reservoir. When it is large, it greatly alters the train of the main, under the same head, by altering the discharge at its extremity, and the velocity in it beyond the branch; and if it be near the reservoir, it greatly alters the train, because the diminished velocity takes place through a greater extent, and there is a greater diminution of the resistances. When the branch is taken off at a considerable distance from the reservoir, the problem becomes more complicated, and the head æ is resolved into two parts; one of which balances the resistance in the first part of the muin, and the other balances the resistances beyond the lateral pipe, vith a velocity diminished by the discharge from the branchA branch at the end of the main produces very little change in the train of the pipe. When the lateral discharge is great, the train may he s0 altered, that the remaining part of the main will not run ſull, and then the branch will not yield the same quantity. The velocity in a very long horizontal tube may be small (by a small head of water and great obstructions in a very long tube) that it will just run ful An orific] made in its upper side vill yield nothing; and yet a small tube inserted into it ill carry a column almost as high as the reservoir. So that we cannot judge in all cases of the pressures by the discharges, and vice verss. If there be an inclined tube, having a head greater than vhat is competent 0 the velocity, ve may bring it into train, by an opening on its upper side near the reservoir. This will yield some vater, and the velocity ill diminish in the tube till it is in train. If ve should now enlarge the hole, it vill yield no more water than beſore. And thus we have pointed out the chieſ ciroumstances vhich affect these lateral dischargess The discharges are ſtervards modified by the conduits in which they are conveyed to their places of destination. These being generally of small dimensions, ſor the sake of economy, the velocity is much diminished. But, at the same time, it approaches nearer to that which the same conduit would bring directly from the reservoir, because its small velocity will produce a less change in the train of the main conduit. We shall now treat of jets oſ water, which still make an ornament in the magnificent pleasure grounds of the wealthy. Some oſ these are indeed grand objects, such as the two at Peterhoſf in Russia, which spout about 60 feet high a column of nine inches diameter, which falls again, and shakes the ground with its blov. Even a spout of an inch or two inches diameter, lancing to the height oſ 150 ſeet, is a gay object, and greatly enlivens a pleasure- ground, especially when the changes of a gentle breeze bend the jet to one sidee But ve have no room leſt ſor treating this subjoet, which is of some nicety; and must conclude ſhis article with a very short aceount of the management oſ water as an active power ſor impelling niachinery. II. QF Machinery driven by Water. Tuis is a very comprehensive article, including almost every possiblo species of mill. It is no less important, and it is therefore matter of regret that we cannot enter into the detail which it deserves. The mere deseription of the immense variety of mills which are in general use would fill volumes, and a scientific deseription of their principles and maxims of construction vould almost form a complete body of mechanical science. But this is far beyond the limits of a work like ours Many of these machines have been already described under their proper names, or under the articles which give an account of their manufactures; and for others we must refer our readers to the original works, where they are described in minute detail. The great academical collection Des Arts et Metiers, published at Paris in many folio volumes, contains a description of the peculiar machinery of many mills; and the volumes of the Encycloptdio Methodique, which particularly relate to the mechanie arts, already contain many more. All that we can do in this place is, to consider the chief circumstances that are common io all water-mills, and from vhich all must derive their efficacy These circumstances are io be found in the manner of employing water as an neting pover, and most of them are comprehended in the construction oſ water-wheelss. When we have explained the principles and the maxims oſ construction of a watervheel, every reader conversant in mechanies knows, that the axis of this vheel may be employed to tranmmit the force impressed on it to any species of machinery. Thereſore nothing subsequent to this can with propriety be considered as water-uorks. . - Water-wheels are oſ two kinds, distinguished by the manner in which water is made an impelling poer, viz. by its weight, or by its impulsee This requires a very diſferent form and manner of adaptation; and this forms an ostensible distinction, sufficiently obvious to give a name to each class. When water is made to act by its weight, it is delivered from the spout as high on the wheel as possible, "that it may continue long to press it down: but when it is made to strike the wheel, it is delivered as low as possible, that it may have previously acquired a great velocity. And thus the wheels are said to be ovERSHOT O UNDERSHOTQf Overshot Wheels. Thnis is nothing but a ſrame of open buckets, so disposed round the rim of a wheel as to receive the water delivered from a spout; so that one side of the wheel is loaded with water, hile the other is empty. The consequence must be, that the loaded side must descend. By this motion the water runs out of the lower buckets, while the empty buckets of the rising side of the wheel come under the spout in their turn, and are filled with water. LIf it were possible to construet the buekets in such a manner as to remain completely filled with water till they come to the very bottom of the wheel, the pressure with which the water urges the wheel round its axis would be the same as if the extremity of the horizontal radius were continually loaded vith à quantity of water suſficient to fill a square pipe, whose section is equal to that of the bucket, and whose length is the diameter of the wheel. For let the buckets BD and EF (Fig. 5.) be compared together, the arches DB and EF are equal. The mechanical energy of the water contained in the bucket EF, or the pressure vith which its weight urges the wheel, is the same as if all this water were hung on that point T of the horizontal arm CF, where it is cut by the vertical or plumb-line BT. This is plaim ſrom the most elementary principles of mechanics. . 7 Therefore the effect of the bucket BD is to that oſ the bucket EF at CT to CF or CB. Drav the horizontal lines PB b b, QD d d. It is plain, that if BD is taken very small, so that it may be considered as a straight line, BD: BO æCB: BP, and EF: b d CF: CT, and EF x CT = ©b d x CF. Therefore if the prism of water, whose vertical section is b b d d, were hung on at F, its force to urge the wheel round would be the same as that oſ the vater lying in the bucket BD. The same may be said of every bucket; and the effective pressure of the whole ring of water A HKFI, in its natural situation, is the same with the pillar of water a h ha hung on at F. And the effect of any portion B F of this ring is the same with that of the corresponding portion b F 7b of the vertical pillar. We do not take into account the small difference which arises from the depth B Or Ff, because we may suppose the circle deseribed through the centres of gravity oſ the buckets. And in the farther prosecution oſ this subject, we shall take similar liberties, with the view of simpliſying the subject, and saving time to the reader. But such a state of the wheel is impossiblee. The bueket at the very top of the wheel may be completely filled with water; but when it comes into the oblique position BD, a part of the water must run over the outer edge), and the bucket will only retain the quantity ZBD; and if the buckets are formed by partitions directed to the axis of the wheel, the whole water must be run out by the time that they descend to the level oſ the axis. To prevent this many contrivances have been adoptedl. The wheel has been surrounded with a hoop or sweep, consisting of a circular board, which comes almost. into contact with the rim of the wheel, and terminates at H, where the water is allowed to run off But unless the work is executed with uncommon accuracy, the vheel made exactly round, and the sweep exactly fitting it, a great quantity of water escapes between them; and there is a very sensible ob- struction to the motion oſ suech a wheel, from something like friction between the water and the sweet. Frost alo effectually stops the motion of sueh a wheal. Sweeps have thereſore been generally laid aside, although there are situations where they might be used with good effect. Mill-wrights have turmed their whole attention to the giving a form to the bukets which shall enable them io retain the water along a great portion of the ciroumference of the wheel. It would be endless to describe all these contrivances; and we shall therefore content ourselves with one or two of the most approved. The intelligent reader vill readily see that many of the cireumstances hich coneur in producing the ultimate effeet (such as the ſacility vith which the water is received into the buekets, the place which it is to occupy during the progress of the bucket from the top to the bottom of the wheel, the readiness with vhich they are evacuated, or the chance that the water has oſ being dragged beyond the bottom of the wheel by its adhesion, &e. &e.) are such as do not admit of precise calculation or reasoning about their merits; and that this or that form can seldom be evidently demonstrated to be the very best possible But, at the same time, he vill see the general reasons of preference, and his attention will be directed to circumstances which must be attended to, in order to have a good bucketed wheel. Fig. 6. is the outline of a wheel having 40 buckets. The ring of hoard contained between the concentric ciroles QDS and PAR, making the ends of the buekets, is called the ROUDING, in the language of the art, and QP is called the depth of shrouding. The inner cirele PAR is called the soLE Of the wheel, and usually consists of hoards nailed to strong wooden rings of compass timber of considerible seantling, ſfirmly united with the arms or radii. The partitions which determine the form of the buekets consist of three different planes or boards AB, BC, CD, which are variously named by different artists We have heard them T named the 8TART or SHOULDERS, the Anu, and the WaEsT (probably for wrist, on acoount of a resemblance oſ the whole line to the human arm); B is àlso called the Einov. Fig.l. represents a small portion of the same bucketing on a larger scale, that the proportions of the parts may be more distinetly seenn. AG, the sole of one bucket, is made about ; more than the depth GH of the shrouding. The start AB is 4 of AI. The plane BC is 30 inclined to AB that it would pass through H; but it is made to terminate in C, in such a mamer that FO is ꝗths of GH or A. Then CD is 5 placed that HD is about jth of IH. By this construcetion, it follows that the area FABC is very nearly equal to DABC; so that the water which will ſill the space FABC will all be contained in the bucket vhen it shall come into such a position that AD is a horizontal line; and the line AB vill then make an angle of nearly 85° with the vertical, or the bucket will be 35° from the perpendicular. If the buchet descend so much lower that one half of the water runs out, the line AB vill make an angle of 2500, or 24 nearly, with the vertical. Therefore the wheel, ſilled to the degreæ now mentioned, will begin to lose water at about 3th of the diameter from the bottom, and half of the water ill be discharged from the lowest bucket, about æth of the diameter farther down. These situations oſ the discharging bucket are marked at T and V in Fig.  Had a greater proportion of the bueEets been filled with water when they were under the spout, the discharge would have begun at a greater height from the bottom, and we should lose a greater portion of the whole fall of water. The los by the present construction is less than 5th (supposing the water to be delivered into the vheel at the very top), and may be estimated at about ith; for the loss is the versed sine of the angle which the radius of the bucket makes with the vertielee. The versed sine of 85° is nearly 3th of the radius (being 0, 18085), or ſoth of the diameter. It is evident, that if only à of this water were supplied to each bucket as it pases the spout, it would have been retained for 10 more of a revolution, and the loss of fall would have been only about 7th. These observations serve to show, in general, that an advantage is gained by having the buckets so capacious that the quantity of water which each can receive as it passes the spout may not nearly fill itt. This may be accomplished by making them of a sufficient length, that is, by making the wheel sufficiently broad between the two shroudings. Economy is the only objection to this practice, and it is generally very ill placedc When the work to be performed by the wheel is great, the addition of power gained by a greater breadth will soon compensate for the additional expense. The third plane CD is not very frequent; and millvrights generally content themselves with continuing the board all the way from the elbowv B to the outer edge of the wheel at H; and AB is generally no more than 3d oſ the depth AI. But CD is a very evident improvement, causing the wheel to retain a very sensible addition to the water. Some indeed make this addition more considerable, by bringing BC more outward, s0 as to meet the rim of the wheel at H, for instance, and making HD coincide vith the rim. But this makes the entry of the water somevhat more diſficult during the very short time that the opening of the bucket passes the spout. To facilitate this as much as possible, the water should get a direction ſrom the spout, such as vill send iĩt into the buckets in the most perſect manner. This may be obtained by delivering the water through an aperture that is divided by thin plates of board or metal, placed in the proper position, as we have represented in Fig. 6. The form oſ bucket last mentioned, having the wrest concentric with the rim, is unfavourable to the ready admission of the water; whereas an oblique wrest conduets thie water which has missed one bucket into the next below. The mechanical consideration oſ this subjeet also shows us, that a deep shrouding, in order to make a eapacious bucket, is not a good method: it does not make the bueEets retain their water any longer; and it diminishes the efſective ſull of water: for the water received at the top of the wheel iminediately ſalls to the bottom of the bucket, and thus shortens the ſictitious pillar of water, which we sliowed to be the measure of the eſfective or useſul pressure on the wheel: and this concurs with our former reasons ſor recommending as great a breadth of the wheel, and length of buckets, as economical considerations vill permit. A bucket-wheel has been executed lately by Mr Robert Burns, at the cotton-mills of Houston, Burns, and Co. at Cartside in Renſrewshire, of a construction entirely new, but founded on a good principle, which is susceptible of great extension. It is represented in Fig. 8. The bucket consists of a start AB, an arm BC, and a wrest CD, concentric with the rim. But the bucket is also divided by a partition LM, concentric with the sole and rim, and s0 placed as to make the inner and outer portions of nearly equal capacity. It is evident, without any farther reasoning about it, that this partition will enable the bucket to retain its vater much longer. When they are ſilled àd, they retain the whole water at 18 from the bottom; and they retain 4 at 1II They do not admit the water quite s0 freely as buckets of the common construction; but by means of the contrivance mentioned a little ago for the spout (also the invention of Mr Burns, and furnished with a rack- work, which raised or depressed it as the supply of vater varied, so as at all times to employ the whole fall of the water), it is found that a slow-moving wheel allows one- half of the water to get into the inner buckets, espe-cially if the purtition do not altogether reach the radius drawn through the lip D of the outer bucket. voL. II 20 This is a very great improvement of the bucket-wheel; and vhen the wheel is made of a liberal breadth, so that the water may be very shallow in the buckets, it seems to carry the performance as far as it can go. Mr Burns made the first trial on a wheel of 2ã feet diameter; and iĩts performance is manifestly superior to that of the wheel which it replaced, and which was a very good one. It has also another valuable property: when the supply of water is very scanty, a proper adjustment of the apparatus in the spout vill direct almost the whole of the water into the outer buckets; which, by placing it at a greater distance from the axis, makes a very sensible addition to its mechanical energy. We said that this principle is susceptible of considerable extension; and it is evident that two partitions vill increase the effect, and that it will increase with the number of partitions; s0 that when the practicæ now begun, of making water- wheels of iron, shall become general, and thereſore very thin partitions are used, their number may be greatly increased without any inconvenience: and it is obvious, that this series of partitions must greatly contribute to the stiffness and general firmness of the whole wheel. There frequently occurs a diſficulty in the making of bucket- wheels, vhen the half- taught mill-wright attempts to retain the water a long time in the buckets. The water gets into them vith a diſficulty which he eanmot account for, and spills all about, even when the buckets are not moving avay from the spout. This arises ſfrom the air, vhich must find its vay out to admit the water, but is obstructed by the entering water, and oceasions a great sputtering at the entry. This may be entirely prevented by making the spout considerably narrower than the wheel. This will leave room at the two ends of the buckets for the escape of the air. This obstruction is vastly greater than one would imagine; ſor the water drags along vith it a l great quantity of air, as is evident in the Water-blast described by many authors. There is another and very serious obstruction to the motion of an overshot or bucketed wheel. When it moves in back-water, it is not only resisted by the water when it moves more slowly than the wheel, which is very frequently the case, hut it lifts a great deal in the rising buckets. In some particular states of back-water, the deseending bucEet fills itself completely with vater; and, in other cases, it contains a very considerable quantity, and air of common density; while in some rarer cases it contains less water, ith air in a condensed state. In the first case, the rising bucket must come up filled with water, which ĩt cannot drop till its mouth get out of the water. In the second case, part of the water goes out before this; but the uir rareſies, and therefore there is still some vater dragged or lifted up by the wheel, by suction, as it is usually called. In the last case there is no such back load on the rising side of the wheel, but (which ĩs as detrimental to its performance) the descending side is employed in congęnsing air; and although this air aids the ascent of the rising side, it does not aid it so much as it impedes the descending side, being (by the form of the bucket) nearer to the vertical line dravn through the axis. All this may be completely prevented by a few holes made in the start of each bucket. Air being at least 800 times rarer than water, will escape through a hole almost 30 times faster with the same pressure. Very moderate holes ill therefore suffice for this purpose: and the small quantity of vater hich these holes discharge during the descent of the buckets, produces a loss which is altogether insignificantt. The water which runs out of one runs into another, so that there is only the loss of one bucket. We have seen a wheel of only 14 feet diameter working in nearly three feet of back-water. It laboured prodigiously, and brought up a great load of water, vhich fell ſrom it in abrupt dashes, which rendered the motion very hobbling. When three holes of an inch diameter were made in each bucket (12 feet long), the wheel laboured no more, there as no more plunging oſ water from its rising side, and its power on the machinery vas inoreased more than jth. These practical observations may contain information that is new even to several experienced mill wrights. To persons less informed they cannot fail of being useful. We now proceed to consider the action of water thus lying in the buckets of a wheel; and to ascertain its energy as it may be modified by different ciroumstances of ſall, velocity, &e. l With respect to variations in the fall, there can be little room for discussion. Since the active pressure is measured by the pillar of water reaching from the horizontal plane where it is delivered on the wheel, to the horizontal plane vhere it is spilled by the wheel, it is evident that it must be proportional to this pillar, and thereſore we must deliver it as high and retain it as long as possible. Thi' maxim obliges us, in the first place, to use a wheel whose diameter is equal to the whole ſal. We shall not gain any thing by employing a larger wheel; for although ve should gain by using only that part of the circumſfeorence where the weight vill act more perpendicularly to the radius, we shall lose more by the necessity of discharging the water at a greater height ſfrom the bottom: for we must suppose the buckets of both the wheels equally well constructed; in which case, the heights above the hottom, vhere they vill discharge the water, vill increase in the proportion oſ the diameter of the wheel. Nov, that we shall lose more by this than we gain by a more direct application of ihe weight, is plain, without any further reasoning, by taking the extreme case, and supposing our vheel enlarged to such a size, that the useless part below is equal  our whole ſal. In this case the water will be uu. spilled ſrom the buckets as soon as it is delivered into them. All intermediate cases, thereſore, partake of the imperfection of this. When our ſall is exceedingly great, a wheel of an equal diameter becomes enormously big and expensive, and is of itself an unmanageable loadc We have seen wheels of 58 feet diameter, however, which worked extremely well; but they are of very diſſicult construction, and extremely apt to warp and go ont of shape by their weight. In case: like this, vhere we are unvilling to lose any part of the foree of a small stream, the best form oſ a bucket-wheel is an inverted chain-pump. Instead of employing a chainpump oſ the best construction, ABCDEA (Fig. 9.) to raise water through the upright pipe CB, by means of u force applied to the upper wheel A, let the water be delivered from a spout F, into the upper part of the pipe BC, and it will press down the plugs in the lower and narrower bored part of it with the full weight of the eolumn, and escape at the dead level of C. This weight vill urge round the vheel A vithout any defaloation: and this is the most powerſful manner that any fall of water whatever can be applied, and exceeds the most perfect overshot wheel. But though it excels all chains oſ buckets in economy and n effect, it has all the other imperſections of this kind of machinery. Though the chain of plugs be of great strength, it has 5o much motion in its joints that it needs frequent repairs; and when it breaks, it is generally in the neighhourhond of A, on the loaded side, and all comes down with a great crash. There is also a loss of power by the immersion of 50 many plugs and ehains in the water; for there can be no doubt but that if the plugs were big enough and light enough, they would buoy and even drav up the plugs in the narrow part of C. They must thereſfore diminish, in all other cases, the force with which this plug is pressed down. The velocity oſ an overshot wheel is a matter of very great nicety; and authors, both speculative and practical, have entertained diſferent, nay opposite, opinions on the subject. Mr Belidor, vhom the engineers of Europe have long been accustomed to regard as sacred authority, maintains, that there is a certain velocity related to that obtainable by the whole fall, which will procure to an overshot wheel the greatest performance. Desaguiliers, Smeaton, Lambert, Des Parcieux, and others, maintain, that there is no such relation, and that the performance of an overshot wheel will he the greater, as it moves more slowly by an increase of its load of work. Belidor maintains, that the active power of water lying in a bucket-wheel of any diameter is equal to that oſ the impulse of the same vater on the floats of an undershot wheel, vhen the water issues from a sluice in the bottom of the dam. The other writers hom we have named assert, that the energy oſ an undershot wheel is but one-half of that of an overshot, actuated by the same quantity of ater falling ſfrom the same height To a manufacturing country dike ours, which derives nstonishing superiority, by which it more than compensates for the impediments of heavy taxes and luxurious living chieſly from its machinery, in which it leaves all Europe far behind, the decision of this question, in such a manner as shall leave no doubt or misconception in the mind even of an unlettered artist, must be considered as a material service; and we think that this is easily attainable. When any machine moves uniſormly, the accelerating force or pressure actually exerted on the impelled point oſ the machine is in equilibrio with all the resistances which are exerted at the working point with those arising from friction, and those that are excited in diſferent parts oſ the machine by their mutual actions. This is an incontestable truth; and, though little attended to by the mechanicians, is the foundation oſ all practical knowledge of machines. Thereſore, when an overshot wheel moves uniformly, with any velocity whatever, the water is acting with its whole weight: for gravity would accelerate its descent, if not completely balanced by some reaction; and in this balanc] gravity and the reacting part oſ the machine exert equal and opposite pressures, and thus produce the uniform motion of the machine. We are thus particular on this point, because we observe mechanicians of the first name employing a mode of reasoning on the question now before us vhich is specigus, and appears to prove the conclusion which they draw; but is nevertheless contrary to true mechanical principles They assert, that the slower a heavy body is descending (suppose in a scale suspended from an axis in peritrochea), the more does it press on the scale, and the more does it urge the machine round: and thereſore the slower an overshot wheel turns, the greater is the force with which the water urges it round, and the more work will be done. It is very true that the machine is more ſorcibly impelled, and that more work is done: but this is not because a pound of water presses more strongly, but because there is more water pressing on the wheel; for the spout supplies at the same rate, and each bucket receives more vater as it passes by it. Let us therefore examine this question b the indubitable principles oſ mechanies. Let the overshot wheel AſH Fig. 5.) receive the vater from a spout at the very top of the wheel; and, in order that the wheel may not he retarded by dragging into motion the water simply laid into the uppermost bucket at A, let it be received at B, vith the velocity (directed in a tangent to the wheel) acquired by the head oſ water AP. This velocity, thereſore, must be equal to that of the rim oſ the wheel. Let this be v, or let the wheel and the water move over v inches in a second. Let the buckets be oſ such dimensions, that all the water which each receives as it passes the spout is retained till it comes to the position R, where it is discharged at once. It is plain that, in place of the separate quantities oſ water lying in each bucket, we may substitute a continued ring of vater, equal to their sum, and uniſormly distributed in the space BER: f5. This constitutes a ring of uniform thickness. Let the area of its cross section ? B or Ff be called a We have already demonstrated, that the mechanieal energy vith which this water on the circumſerence of the wheel urges it round, is the same vith what would be exerted by the pillar b r r b pressing on Ff, or actjpꝶg by the lever CF. The weight oſ this pillar may be expressed hy ax br, ora xPS; and if we call the radius CF of the wheel R, the momentum or mechanical energy oſ this weight ill be represented by a x PS x R. Nov, let us suppose that this wheel is employed to raise a veight W, which is suspended by a rope wound round the axis of the wheel. Let 7 be the radius oſ this axle. Then Wæ r is the momentum of the work. Let the weight rise with the velocity u when the rim of the wheel turns with the velocity u, that is, let it rise u inches in a second. Since a perſect equilibrium obtains between the power and the work when the motion is uniform, we must have Wxr = a x PSxR. But it is evident that R: r =v: uThereſore W x u æ a x v x PS. Now the performance of the machine is undoubtedly measured by the weight and the height to which it is raised in a second, or by Wx u. Thereſore the machine is in ita best possible state when a x v x PS is a maximum. But it is plain that a x v is an invariable quantity; for it is the cubic inches of water which the spout supplies in a second. If the wheel moves ſast, little water lies in each bucket, and a is smal. When v is smali, a is great, for the opposite reason; but a x v remains the same. Therefore ve must make PS a maximum, that is, ve must deliver the water as high up as possiblee But this diminishes AP, and this diminishes the velocity of the wheel: and as this has no limit, the proposition is demonstrated; and an pvershot wheel does the more work as it moves slowest. Convincing as this discussion must be to any mechanician, we are anxious to impress the same maxim on the minds oſ practical men, unãceustomed to mathematical reasoning of any kind: We thereſore beg indulgence for adding a popular view of the question, which requires no such investigation. We may reason in this vay: Suppose a wheel having 80 buckets, and that six cubic feet of water are delivered in a second on the top of the wheel, and discharged without any loss by the way at a certain height from the bottom of the wheel. Let this be the case, whatever is the rate of the wheel's motion; the buckets being of a sufficient capacity to hold all the water which falls into them. Let this wheel be employed to raise a weight of any kind, suppose water in a chain of 80 buckets, to the same height, and vith the same velocity. Suppose, ſarther, that when the load on the rising side of the machine is one-half of that on the wheel, the wheel makes four times in a minute, or one tum in 15 seconds. During this time 90 cubie feet of water have ſlowed into the 80 buckets, and each has recœived three cubic feet. Then each of the rising buckets contains 13 feet; and 45 cubic feet are delivered into the upper cistern during one turn of the wheel, and 180 cubic feet in one minute. Nov, suppose the machine so loaded, hy making the rising buckets more capacious, that it makes only two turns in a minute, or one turn in 80 secondss Then each descending bueket must contain six cubic feet of water. If each bucket of the rising side contained three cubic ſeet, the motion of the machine would be the same as before. This is a point which no mechanician will controvert. When two pounds are suspended to one end of a string which passes over a pulley, and one pound to the other end, the descent oſ the two pound will be the same with that of a four pounds weight, which is employed in the same manner to drav up two pounds. Our machine would thereſore continue to make four turns in the minute, and would deliver 90 cubic feet during each turn, and 360 in a minute. But, by supposition, it is making but two turns in a minute: this must proceed from a greater load than three cubic feet of water in each rising bucket. The machine must thereſore be raising more than 0 feet of water during one turn of the wheel, and more than I80 in the minute. Thus it appears, that if the machine is turning twice as slow as before, there is more than tuice the former quantity in the rising buckets, and more vill be raised in a minute by the same expenditure of power. In like manner, if the machine go three times as slow, there must be more than three times the former quantity of water in the rising buckets, and more work vill be done. But ve may go farther, and assert, that the more we retard the machine, by loading it with more work of a similar kind, the greater will be its performance This does not immediately appear from the present discussion: but let us call the first quantity of water in the rising bucket A; the water raised by four turns in a minute vill be 4 x 30 x A, = 120 A. The quantity in this bucket, when the machine goes twice as slow, has been shown to be greater than 2 A (call it 2A + æ); the water raised by two turns in a minute vill be 2 x 80x Tã +æ = I20 A + 60 2. Now, let the machine go four times as slow, making but one turn in a minute, the rising bucket must now contain more than twice 2 A + æ, or more than 4 A + 2æ; call it 4 A -2æ+y. The work done by one turn in a minute vill now be 80 x A F 27  5=I20A + 60 + 30 v By such an induction of the work, done with any rates of motion we choose, it is evident that the performance of the machine increases with every diminution oſ ils velocity 1ln. ællblæ that is produced by the mere addition oſ a similar load of work, or that it does the more work the slower it goes. We have supposed the machine to be in its state of permanent uniform motion. If we consider it only in the beginning oſ its motion, the result ĩs still more in favour of slow motion: ſor, at the first action oſ the moving poer, the inertia of the machine itselſ consumes part of it, and it acquires its permanent speed by degrees; during which, the resistances arising from the work, frietion, &e. increase, till they exactly balance the pressure oſ the water; and aſter this the machine accelerates no more. Now the greater the power and the resistance arising from the work are, in proportion to the inertia of the machine, the sooner will all arrive at ĩts state oſ permanent velocity. There is another circumstance which impairs the performance of an overshot wheel moving vwith a great velocity, viæ. the effects of the centrifugal force on the water in the buckets. Our mill- wrights know well enough, that too great velocity will throw the water out of the buckets; but few, if any, know exactly the diminution oſ power produced by this cause. The following very simple construetion will determine this: Let AOB (Fig. I0.) be an overshot wheel, oſ which AB is the upright diameter, and C is the centree Make CF the length of a pendulum, which vill make two vibrations during one turn of the wheel Dravw FE to the elbow of any of the buckets. The water in this bucket, instead of having its surſace horizontal, as NO, vill have it in the direction n O perpendicular to FE very nearly. For the time of falling along half of FC is to that of two vibrations of this pendulum, or to the time of a revolution of the wheel as the radius of a circle is to its circumference: and it is well known, that the time of moving along half oſf AC, by the uniform action of the centrifugal ſorce, is to that oſ a revolution as the radius of a cirele to its circumſerencee Thereſore the time oſ describing ; of AC hy the centriſugal ſorce, is equal to the time oſ deseribing à of FC by gravity. These spaces, being similarly described in equal times, are proportional to the acoœlerating forces. Thereſore ; FC: 3 AG, or FC: AC æ gravity: centriſugal force. Complete the parallelogram FCEE. A purticle at E is urged by its weight in the direetion KE, vith a force which may be expressed by FC or KE; and it is urged by the centrifugal force in the direction CE, vith a force  AC or CE. By their combined action it is urged in the direction FE. Thereſore, as the surface of standing water is always at right angles to the action of gravity, that is, to the plumb-line, so the surſace oſ the water in the revolving bucket is perpendicular to the action of the combined force FE. Let NEO be the position of the bucket, which just holds all the water which it received as it passed the spout when not aſfected by the centrifugal force; and let NDO be its position when it would be empty. Let the vertical lines through D and E cut the cirele described round C vith the radius CF in the points H and I. Drav HC, IC, cutting the cirele AOB in L and M. Make the arch ?à equal to AL, and the arch  equal to AM: Then C) and C: vill be the positions of the bucket on the revolving vheel, corresponding to CDO and CEO on the wheel at rest. Water will begin to run out at, and it will be all gone at .The demonstration is evident. The force which now urges the wheel is still the weight really in the buckets: for though the water is urged in the direction and with the force FE, one of its constituents, CE, has no tendency to impel the wheel; and KE is the only impelling force. It is but of late years that mills have heen constructed or attended o with that accuracy and scientifie skill which are necessary for deducing confidential conclusions from any experiments that can be made with them; and iĩt is therefore no matter oſ wonder that the opinions of mill-wrights have been so diſſerent on this subject. There is a natural vish to see a machine moving briskly; it has the appear ance of activity: but a very slow motion always looks as if the machine were overloaded. For this reason mill-wrights have always yielded slowly, and with some reluctance, to the repeated advices of the mathematicians: but they have yielded; and we see them adopting maxims of construction more agreeable to sound theory; making their wheels of great breadth, and loading them with a great deal of wor. Mr Euler says, that the performance of the best mill cannot exceed that of the worst above th: but we have seen a strenm of water completely expended in driving a small flax-mill, which now drives a cotton-mill of 4000 spindles, vith all its earding, roving, and drawing machinery, besides the lathes and other engines of the smiths and earpenters workshops, exerting a force ſnot less than ten times vhat suſfficed for the flax- mill. The above discussion only demonstrates in general the advantages of slow motion; but does not point out in any degree the relation between the rate of motion and the work performed, nor even the principles on which it depends. Yet this is a subject fit ſor a mathematical investigation; and we would prosecute it in this place, if it were necessary for the improvement of practical mechaniess But we have seen that there is not, in the nature oſ things, a maximum of performance attached to any particular rate of motion which should thereſore be preſerredl. For this reason we omit this diseussion oſ mere speculative curiosity. It is very intricate: for we must not now express the pressure on the wheel by a constant pillar of water incumbent on the extremity of the horizontal arm, as ve did before when we supposed the buckets completely filled; nor by a smaller constant pillar, corresponding to a smaller but equal quantity lying in every bucket. Each different velocity puts a different quantity of water into the bucket as it passes the spout; and this occasions a difference in the place where . the discharge is begun and completedl. This circumstance is some obstacle to the advantages of very slow motions, because it brings on the discharge sooner. All this may indeed be expressed by a simple equation of easy management; but the whole process of the mechanical discussion is both intricate and tedious, and the results are so much diversified by the forms oſ the buckets, that they do not aſford any rule of sufficien? generality to revard our trouble. The curious reader may see a very full investigation of this subject in two dissertations by Elvius in the Swedish Transactions, and in the Hydrodynamique of Professor Karstner of Gottingen; who has abridged these Dissertations of Elvius, and considerably improved the whole investigation, and has added some comparisons of his deductions vith the actual performance of some great works. These comparisons, however, are not very satisfactory. There is also a valuable paper on this subject by Mr Lambert, in the Memoirs of the Academy of Berlin for the year I775. From these dissertations, and from the Hydrodynamique of the Abbè Bossut, the reader will get all that theory can teach of the relation between the pressures of the power and work on the machine and the rates of its motion. The practical reader may rest with confidence on the simple demonstration ve have given, that the performance is improved by diminishing the velocity. All we have to do, thereſore, is to load the machine, and thus to diminish its speed, unless other physical circumstances throw obstacles in the way: but there are such obstacles. In all machines there are little inequalities of action that are unavoidable In the action of a wheel and pinion, though made vith the utmost judgment and care, there are such inequalities. These increase by the changes of form occasioned by the wearing of the machinemuch greater irregularities arise from the subsultory motions of eranks, stampers, and other parts which move unequally or reciprocallyy. A machine may be so loaded as just to be ;r]um—°7? 7] in equilibrio with its work, in the favourable position of its parts. When this changes into one less favourable, the machine may stop; if not, it at least staggers, hobbles, or works unequally. The rubbing parts bear long on each other, with enormous pressures, and cut deep, and increase friction. Such slow motions must therefore be avoided. A little more velocity enables the machine to get over those increased resistances by its inertia, or the great quantity of motion inherent in it. Great machines possess this advantage in a superior degree, and will therefore work steadily vith a smaller velocity. These circumstances are hardly susceptible of mathematical discussion, and our best reliance is on vell- directed experience. . For this purpose, the reader vill do well to peruse with care the excellent paper by Mr Smeaton in the Philosophical Transactions for 1759. This dissertation contains a numerous list of experiments, most judiciously contrived by him, and executed with the accuracy and attention, to the most important circumstances, which is to be observed in all that gentleman's performances. It is true, these experiments were made vith small models; and we must not, without great caution, transfer the results of such experiments to large works. But ve may safely transfer the, laws of variation which result from a variation of circumstances, although we must not adopt the absolute quantities of the variations themselves. Mr Smeaton vas fully avare of the limitations to which conclusions dravn from experiments on models are subject, and has made the applications with his usual sagacity. His general inference is, that, in smaller works, the rim of the overshot wheel should not have a greater velocity than three feet in a second; but that larger mills may be allowed a greater velocity than this When every thing is executed in the hest manner, he says that the work performed vill amount to fully two-thirds oſ the power ex- pended; that is, that three cubic feet of water descending from any height, will raise two to the same height. It is not very easy to comparẽ these deductions with observations on large works; because there are few cases vhere we have good measures oſ the resistances opposed by the work performed by the machine. Mills employed for pumping water afford the best opportunities. But the inertin of their working gear diminishes their useful performance very sensibly; because their great beams, pumprods, &c. have a reciprocating motion, which must be destroyed, and produced anew in every stroke. We have examined some machines oſ this kind which are esteemed good ones; and ve find ſew of them whose perlormaneexceeds one-halſ of the power expended. By comparing other mills with these, e get the best information of their resistancess The comparison with mills worked by Watt and Boulton's steam-engines is perhaps a better mensure of the resistances opposed by different kinds oſ work, because their power is very distinetly known. We have been informed by one of the most eminent engineers, that a ton and half of vater per minute falling one ſoot vill grind and dress one bushel of wheat per hour. This is equivalent to 9 tons falling IO feet. If an overshot wheel opposed no resistance, and only one bucket were ſilled, the wheel would acquire the velocity due to a fall through the whole heightt. But when it is in this state of accelerated motion, if another bucket of water is delivered into it, its motion must be checked at the first, by the necessity of dragging forward this water. If the buekets fill in succession as they pass the spout, the velocity acquired by an unresisting wheel is but halſ of that which one bucket would give. In all cases, thereſore, the velocity is diminished by the inertia of the entering water when ũt is simply laid into the upper buckets. The perſormance vill therefore be improved by delivering the water on the wheel with that velocity with which the wheel is really moving. And as e cannot give the direction of a tangent to the vheel, the velocity with which it is delivered on the wheel must be so much greater than the intended velocity of the rim, that it shall be precisely equal to it when it is estimated in the direction of the tangent. Three or four inches of ſall are sufficient for this purpose; and iĩt should never be neglected, for it has a very sensible influence on the performance. But it is highly improper to give it more than this, with the view oſ impelling the wheel by its stroke. For even although it were proper to employ part of the fall in this way (which we shall presently see to be very improper), we cannot procure this impulse; because the water falls among other water, or it strikes the boards of the wheel with such obliquity that it cannot produce any sensible effect. It is a much-debated question among mill-wrights, Whether the diameter of the wheel should be such as that the water vill be delivered at the top of the wheel; or larger, s0 that the water is received at some distance from the top, where it will act more perpendieularly to the arm ? We apprehend that the observations formerly made vill decide in favour of the first practico. The space below, where the water is discharged from the wheel, being proportional to the diameter of the wheel, there is an undoubted loss of fall attending a large wheel; and this is not compensated by delivering the water at a greater distance from the perpendieula We should therefore recommend the use of the whole descending side, and make the diameter of the wheel no greater than the ſall, till it is so much reduced that the centrifugal force begins to produce a sensible effect. Since the rim can hardly have a smaller velocity than three feet per second, it is evident that a small wheel must revolve more rapidly. This made it ꝓroper to insert the determination that ve have given, of the loss oſ power produced by the centriſugal ſorce. But even with this in view, we should VOL. II. E employ much smaller wheels than are generally done on small falls Indeed the loss of water at the bottom may be diminished, by nicely fitting the arch which surrounds the wheel, 50 as not to allow the water to escape by the sides or bottom. While this improvement remains in good order, and the wheel entire, it produces a very sensible effect; but the passage widens continually by the wearing of the wheel. A bit of stick or stone falling in about the vheel tears off part of the shrouding or bucket, and ſrosty weather frequently binds all fast. It thereſore seldom answers expectations We have nothing to add on this case to what we have already extracted from Mr Smeatons Dissertation on the Subject of Breast or half Overshot Wheels. There is atother form of wheel by which water is made to act on a machine by its weight, which merits consideration. This is known in this country by the nume oſ Borkers mill, and has been deseribed by Desaguiliers, vol. II. p. 468. It consists of an upright pipe or trunk AB (Fig: 11.), communicating with two horizontal branches BC, Be, which have a hole C c near their ends, opening in opposite directions, at right angles to their lengths. Suppose water to be poured in at the top from the spout F, it will run out by the holes C and  vith the velocity corresponding to the depth of these holes under the surface The consequence of this must be, that the arms will be pressed backwards; ſor there is no solid surface at the hole C, on vwhich the lateral pressure of the water can be exerted, vhile it acts with its full force on the opposite side of the arm. This unbalanced pressure is equal to the weight of a column having the orifice for its base, and twice the depth under the surface of the water in the trunk for its height. This measure of the height may seem odd, because if the orifice were shut, the pressure on it is the weight of a column reaching from the surfacee But when it is open, the water issues ith nearly the velocity ac- quired by ſalling from the surface, and the quantity of motion produced is that of a column of twice this length, moving vith this velocity. This is actually produced by the pressure of the fluid, and must therefore be accompanied by an equal reaction. Now suppose this apparatus set on the pivot E, and to have a spindle AD above the trunk, furnished with a cylindrical bobbin D, having a rope wound round it, and passing ovẽ&r a pulley G. A weight W may be suspended there, which may balance this backward pressure. If the weight be too small for this purpose, the retrograde motion of the arms vill wind up the cord, and raise the weight; and thus we obtain an acting machine, employing the pressure oſ the water, and applicable to any purpose. A runner millstone may be put on the top of the spindle; and we should then produce a flour-mill of the utmost simplicity, having neither wheel nor pinion, and subject to hardly any wear. It is somewhat surprising, that although this was invented at the beginning of this century, and appears to have such advantage in point of simplicity, it has not come into use. So little has Dr Desaguiliers account been attended to (although it is mentioned by him as an excellent machine, and as highly instructive to the hydraulist), that the same invention was again brought forward by a German professor (Segner) as his own, and has been honoured by a series of elaborate disquisitions concerning its theory and performance by Euler and by John Bernoulli. Eulers dissertations are to be found in the Memoirs of the Academy of Berlin, 1751, &e. and in the Nov. Comment. Petropol. tom. VI. Bernoulli's are at the end of his Hydraulics. Both these authors agree in saying, that this machine excels all other methods oſf employing the force of water. Simple as it appears, its true theory, and the best form of construction, are most abstruse and delicate subjects; and it is not easy to give such an account of its principles as will be understood by an ordinary reader. We see, in genral, that the machine must press backwords; and little investigation suſfices for understanding the intensity of this pressure when the machine ĩs Iat rest. But when it is allowed to run backwards, withdrawing itselſ from the pressure, the intensity of it is diminished: and if no other circumstances intervened, it might not be diſſicult to say what particular pressure corresponded to any rate of motion. Accordingly, Desaguiliers, presuming on the simplicity of the machine, affirms the pressure to be the eight of a column, which would produce a velocity of eſflux equal to the diſference of the velocity of the fluid and of the machine; and hence he deduces, that ĩts performance will be the greatest possible, when its retrograde velocity is one-third of the velocity acquired by falling from 'the surſace, in which case, it will raise ſths of the water expended to the same height, which is double of the performance of a mill acted on by the impulse of water. But this is a very imperſect account of the operation. When the machine (construeted exactly as we have deseribed) moves round, the water which issues descends in the vertical trunk, and then, moving along the horizontal arms, partakes of this circular motionn. This excites a centrifugal force, which is exerted against the ends of the urms by the intervention of the fluid. The whole fluid is subjected to this pressure (increasing for every section ncross the arm in the proportion of its distance from the axis), and every particle is pressed with the accumulated centrifugal forces oſ all the sections that are nearer to the axis. Every section therefore sustains an actual pressure proporrional to the square of its distance from the axis This increases the velocity of eſſlux, and this increases the velocity oſ revolution; and this mutual eo-operation would seem to terminate in an infinite velocity of both motions. But, on the other hand, this circular motion must be given anew to every particle of water as it enters the horizontal arm. This can be done only by the motion already in the arm, and at its expens. Thus there must be a velocity which cannot be overpassed even by an unloaded machine. But it is also plain, that by making the horizontal arm very capacious, the motion of the water from the axis to the jet may be made very slow, and much of this diminution of circular motion preventedl. Aecordingly, Euler has recommended a form by which this is done in the most eminent degree His machine consists of a hollow conoidal ring, of which Fig. 12. is a section. The part AH ha is a sort of funnel basin, which receives the water from the spout F; not in the direction pointing towards the axis, but in the direction, and with the precise velocity, of its motion. This prevents any retardation by dragging forvard the vater. The water then passes down between the outer conoid AC ca and the inner conoid HG h along spiral channels formed by partitions soldered to both conoids. The curves of these channels are determined by a theory which aims at the annihilation of all unnecessary and improper motions of the water, but which is too abstruse to find a place heree The water thus conducted arrives at the bottom Cũ, c. On the outer cireumſerence of this bottom are arranged a number of spouts (one for each channel), which are all directed one way in tangents to the circumference. Adopting the common theory of the reaction of fluids, this should be a very powerful machine, and should raise iyths of the water expended. But if we admit the reaction to be equal to the force of the issuing fluid (and we do not see how this can be refused), the machine must be nearly twice as powerful. We thereſore repeat our wonder, that it has not beeh brought into use. But it appears that no trial has been made even of a model; so that we have no experiments o encourage an engineer to repeat the trial Even the late author, Professor Segner, has not related any thing of this kind in his Exercitationes Hydroulicœ, where he particularly describes the machinee. This remissness probably has proceeded from fixing the attention on Euler's improved construction. It is plain that this must be a most cumbrous mass, even in a small size, requiring a prodigious vessel, and carrying an unvieldy load. IF we examine the theory which recommends this construction, ve find that the advantages, though real and sensible, bear but a small proportion to the whole performance of the simple machine as invented by Dr Barker. It is therefore to be regretted, that engineers have not attempted to realize the first project. We beg leave to recommend it, with an additional argument taken from an addition made to it by Mr Mathon de la Cour, in Rozier's Journal de Physique, January and August 1775. This gentleman brings down a large pipe FEH (Fig. 18.) ſrom a reservoir, bends it upward at H, and introduces it into two horizontal arms DA, DB, which have an upright spindle DE, carrying a millstone in the style of Dr Barker's mil. The ingenious mechanician will have no diſſiculty of contriving a method of joining these pipes, so as to permit a free circular motion vithout losing much water. The operation of the machine in this form is evident. The water, pressed by the column FG, flows out at the holes A and B, and the unbalanced pressure on the opposite sides of the arms forces them round. The compendiousness and other advantages of this construetion are most striking, allowing us to make use oſ the greatest ſall without any increase oſ the size oſ the machine It undoubtedly enables us to employ a stream oſ water too scanty to be employed in any other form. The author gives the dimensions o? an engine which he had seen at Bourg Argenta. AB is 92 inches, and its diameter 8 inches; the diameter of*each orifice is 13; FG is 2l feet; the pipe D was fitted into C by grinding; and the internal diameter oſ D is 2 inches. n When the machine was perſorming no work, or was unloaded, and emitted water by one hole only, it made 115 turns in a minute. This gives a velocity of 46 feet per second for the holee This is a curious fact: for the water would issue from this hole at rest with the velocity of 371. This great velocity (which was much less than the velocity with which the water actually quitted the pipe) was undoubtedly produced by the prodigious centrifugal force, which was nearly I7 times the weight of the water in the orifice. The empty machine weighed 80 pounds, and its weight was half supported by the upper pressure of the water, so that the friction of the pivots was much diminished. It is a pity that the author has given no account of any work done by the machine. Indeed it was only working ventilators for a large hal. His theory by no means embraces all its principles, nor is it well-founded. We think that the free motion round the neck of the feeding pipe, without any loss of water or any considerable frietion, may be obtained in the following manner: AB (Fig. 14.) represents a portion of the revolving horizontal pipe, and CE ec part of the ſeeding pipe. The neck of the first is turned truly eylindrical, so as to turn easily, but vithout shake, in the collar Cc of the feeding pipe, and each has a shoulder which may support the other. That the ſriction of this joint may not be great, and the pipes destroy each other by wearing, the horizontal pipe has an iron spindle EF, fixed exactly in the axis of the joint, and resting with its pivot F in a step of hard steel, fixed to the iron bar GH, which goes across the feeding pipe, and is firmly supported in it. This pipe is made bell-shaped, videning below. A collar or hose of thin leather is fitted to the inside of this pipe, and is represented (in section) by LEM m k I. This is kept in its place by means of a metal or wooden ring Nn, thin at the upper edge, and taper- slaped. This is dravn in above the leather, and stretches it, and causes it to apply to the side of the pipe all around. There can be no leakage at this joint, because the water vill press the leather to the smooth metal pipe; nor can there be any sensible frietion, because the water gets at the edge of the leather, and the whole unbalanced pressure ĩs at the small erevice, between the two metal shoulders. These shoulders need not touch; so that the friction must be insensible. We imagine that this method of tightening a turning joint may be used with great advantage in many cases. We have only further to observe on this engine, that any imperſection by which the passage of the water is diminished or obstructed produces a saving of water which is in exact proportion to the diminution of effeet. The only inaccuracy that is not thus compensated is hen the jets are not at right angles to the arms. We repeat our vishes, that engineers wvould endeavour to bring this machine into use, seeing many situations where it may be employed to great advantage Suppose, for instance, a small supply of water from a great height applied in this manner to a centrifugal pump, or to a hair belt passing over a pulley, and dipping in the vater of a deep well. This would be a hydraulic machine exceeding all others in simplicity and durability, though inferior in eſfeet to some other constructions. 2. Qf Undershot Wheels. ALL wheels go by this name where the motion of the water is quicker than that of the partitions or boards of the vheel, and it therefore impels them These are called the sloat-boards, or floats, of an undershot wheel. The vater, running in a mill-row, with a velocity derived from a head of water, or from a declivity of channel, strikes on these 4 ſloats, and occasions, by its deflections sidewise and upwards, a pressure on the floats suſficient for impelling the vheel. There are few points of practical mechanios that have been more considered than the action of vater on the floats of a wheel, hardly a book of mechanics being silent on the subject. But the generality of them, at least such as are intelligible to persons who are not very much conversant in dynamical and mathematical discussion, have hardly done any thing more than copied the earliest deductions from the simple theory oſ the resistance of fluidss The consequence has been, that our practical knowledge is very imperfect; and it is still chieſly from experience that we must learn the performance of undershot wheels. Unfortunately this stops their improvement; because those who have the only opportunities of making the experiments are not suſficiently acquainted vith the principles of hydraulies, and are apt to ascribe differences in their perſormance to trifling nostrums in their construction, or in the manner of applying the impulse of the ater. We have said so much on the imperſection of our theories oſ the impulse of fluids in the article RESISTANCE of FLuips, that we need not repeat here the defects oſ the common explanations of the motions oſ undershot wheels. The part of this theory of the impulse of fluids which agrees best with observation is, that the impulse is in the duplicate proportion of the velocity with which the water strikes the flout. That is, if v be the velocity of the stream, and u the velocity of the float, we shall have F, the impulse on the float when held fſast to its impulse  on the float moving vith the velocity u, as 9 to v, and f F x This is the pressure acting on the float, and urging the vheel round its axis The wheel must yield to this mo- tion, if the resistance of the work does not exert a superior pressure on the ſloat in the opposite direction. By yielding, the float withdraws from the impulse, and this is therefore diminished. The wheel accelerates, the resistances increase, and the impulses diminish, till they become an exact balance for the resistances. The motion now remains uniform, and the momentum of impulse is equal to that of resistancee. The performance of the mill thereſore is determined by this; and, whatever be the construction of the mill, its performance is best when the momentum of impulse is greatest. This is had by multiplying the pressure on the ſloat by its velocity. Therefore the momenu 7 are constant quantities, the momentum vill be proportional to u X u. Let æ represent the relative velocity. Then ⸗ vill be u, and the momentum will be protum will be expressed by F x x u. But since F and portional to / x æ, and vill be a maximum when 7 x æ is a maximum, or vhen v ?æ is a maximum. This will be discovered by making its fluxion o. That is, 2 vxx2 à x—o. and 2vx2na'/o or 2vo23 æ0 andc 2 v=/3a2, and æ7/2J v; and therefore v=z, or u, æ4 7. That is, the velocity of the float must be onethird of the velocity of the stream. It only remains to say vwhat is the absolute pressure on the float thus cireumstanced. Let the velocity  be supposed to arise ſrom the pressure of a head of water h. The common theory teaches that the impulse on a given surface S at rest is equal to the weight of a column hS; put this in place of F, and j v in place of Tæ and } v for u. This gives us S h X à v for the momentum. Now the power expended is S h v, or the column S h moving vith the velocity 7 Therefore the greatest perſormance of an undershot wheel is equiva- lent to raising i of the water that drives it to the same height. But this is too small an estimation; for the pressure exerted on a plane surſace, situated as the float in a mill heel, is considerably greater than the weight of the column S h. This is nearly the pressure on a surface wholly immersed in the fluidl. But vhen a small vein strikes a larger plane, 50 as to be deflected on all sides in a thin sheet, the impulse is almost double of this This is in some measure the case in a mill-whee. When the stream strikes it, ĩt is heaped up along its face, and falls back againand during this motion it is acting with a hydrostatic pressure on it. When the wheel dips into an open river, this accumulation is less remarkable, because much escapes laterally; but in a mill-course it may be considerable. We have considered only the action on one float, but several generally act at oncee The impulse on most of them must be oblique, and is therefore less than when the same stream impinges perpendicularly; and this diminution of impulse is, by the common theory, in the proportion of the sine of the obliquity. For this reason it is maintained, the impulse of the whole stream on the lowest float-board, vhich is perpendicular to the stream, is equal to the sum of the impulses made on all the floats which then dip into the water; or that the impulse on any oblique float is precisely equal to the impulse which that part of the stream would have made on the lowest float-board had it not been interrupted. Therefſore it has been recommended to make such a number of float-boards, that when one of them is at the bottom of the wheel, and perpendicular to the stream, the next in succession should be just entering into the water. But since the impulse on a float by no means annihilates all the motion of the water, and it bends round it and hits the one behind with its remaining force, there must be some advantage gained by employing a greater number of floats than this rule will permit. This is abundantly con- firmed by the experiments of Smeaton and Bossut. M. Bossut formed three or four suppositions of the number of floats, and calculated the impulse on each; according to the observations made in a course of experiments made by the Academy of Sciences, and inserted by us in the article REsisTaNCE oF FLuIDS; and vhen he summed them up and compared the results with his experiments, he ſound the agreement very satisſactory He deduces a general rule, that if the velocity of the wheel is 3d of that of the stream, and if T2 degrees of the circumference are immersed in the stream, the wheel should have 86 floats Each vill dip ;th of the radius. The velocity being still supposed the same, there should be more or fewer ſloats according as the arch is less or greater than 72 degrees. Such is the theory, and such are the circumstances which it leaves undeterminedl. The accumulation of the water on a float-board, and the force with which it may still strike another, are too intricate to be assigned vith any tolerable precision: for such reasons we must acknovledge that the theory of undershot wheels is still very imperſect, and that recourse must be had to experience for their improvement. We therefſore strongly recommend the perusal of Mr Smeaton's experiments on undershot wheels, contained in the same dissertation with those we have quoted on overshot vheelss. We have only to observe, that to an ordinary reader the experiments will appear too much in favour of undershot wheels. His aim is partly to establish a theory, vhich will state the relation between their performance and the velocity of the stream, and partly to state the relation between the pover expended and the work done. The velocity in his experiments is always considerably below that which a body would acquire by falling ſrom the surface of the head of water; or it is the velocity acquired by a shorter fal. Thereſore, if ve estimate the power expended by the quantity of vater multiplied by this diminished fall, ve shall make it too small; and the difference in some cases is very great: yet, even with these concessions, it appears that the utmost performance of an undershot wheel does not surpass the raising ,d of the expended water to the place from which it came. It is therefore far inferior to an overshot wheel expending the same power; and Mr Belidor has led engineers into very mistaken maxims of construetion, by saying that overshot wheels should be given up, even in the case of great ſalls, and that we should always bring on the water from a sluice in the very bottom of the dam, and bring it to the wheel with as great velocity as possible. Mr Smeaton also says, that the maximum takes place when the velocity of the wheel is Iths of that of the stream, instead of Iths according to the theory; and this agrees with the experiments of Bossut. But he measured the velocity by means oſ the quantity of water vhich run pastt. This must give a velocity somevhat too small, as vill appear by attending to Buaſs observations on the superficial, the mean, and the bottom velocities. The rest of his observations, are most judicious, and vell adapted to the instruction of practitioners We have only to add to them the observations of Deparcieux and Bossut, vho have evinced, by very good experiments, that there is a very sensible advantage gained by inclining the float-boards to the radius of the wheel about 20 degrees, s0 that the lowest float-hoard shall not be perpendicular, but have its point turned up the stream ahout 20 degrees. This inclination causes the water to heap up along the floatboard, and act by its weightt. The floats should thereſore be made much broader than the vein of water interrupted by them is deep. Some engineers, observing the great superiority of overshot wheels above undershot wheels driven by the same expense of power, have proposed to bring the water home to the bottom oſ the wheel on an even bottom, and to make the float- board no deeper than the aperture of the sluice, which would permit the water to run out. The wheel is to be ſitted with a close sole and sides, exactly fitted to the end of this trough, so that if the wheel is at rest, the water may be dammed up by the sole and float-board. It will thereſore press forvard the ſloat-board with the whole fore of the head of waterr But this cannot answer: for if we suppose no float-boards, the water vill flow out at the bottom, propelled in the manner those persons suppose; and it will be supplied from behind, the water coming slowly from all parts of the trough to the hole below the wheel. But nov add the floats, and suppose the wheel in motion vith the velocity that is expectedl. The other ſloats must drag into motion all the water which lies between them, giving to the greatest part of it a motion vastly greater than it would have taken in consequence of the pressure of the water behind it; and the water out oſ the reach oſ the floats will remain still, which it would not have done independent of the float-boards above it, because it would have contributed to the expense of the holee The motion, thereſore, which the wheel ill acquire by this construction must be so different from what is expected, that we can hardly say what it will be. We are therefore persuaded, that the best way of delivering the water on an undershot wheel in a close mill-course is, to let it slide down a very smooth channel, without touching the wheel till near the bottom, where the wheel should be exactly fitted to the course; or, to make the ſloats exceedingly broader than the depth of the vein of water which glides down the course, and allow it to be partly intercepted by the first floats, and heap up along them, acting by its weight, aſter its impulse has been expended. If the bottom oſ the course be an arch of a circle described with a radius much greater than that of the wheel, the water which slides down vill be thus gradually intercepted by the floats. Attempts have been made to construct water-wheels which receive the impulse obliquely, like the sails oſ a com- mon vind-mil. This would, in many situations, be a very great acquisitionn. A very slow but deep river could in this manner be made to drive our mills; and although much pover is lost by the obliquity of the impulse, the remainder may be very great. It is to be regretted, that these attempts have not been more zealously prosecuted; for we have no doubt of their success in a very serviceable degree. Engineers have been deterred, because when such wheels are plunged in an open stream, their lateral motion is too much impeded by the motion of the stream. We have seen one, however, which was very powerful: it was a long cylindrical frame, having a plate standing out from it about a foot broad, and surrounding it with a very oblique spiral like a cork-screw. This was plunged about one-fourth of its diameter (hich was about 12 feet), having its axis in the direction of the stream. By the work vhich it wãs performing, it seemed more powerſul than a common wheel which occupied the same breadih of the river. Its length was not less than 20 feet: it might have been twice as much, which would have doubled its poer, vithout occupying more of the water-way. Perhaps such a spiral, continued to the very axis, and moving in a hollow canal wholly filled by the stream, might be a very advantageous way of employing a deep and slow stream. But mills with oblique floats are most useful for employing small streams, which can be delivered from a spout vith a great velocity. Mr Bossut has considered these vith due attention, and ascertained the best modes of constructionn. There are tvo which have nearly equal performances: I. The vanes being placed like those of a windmill, round the rim of a horizontal or vertical wheel, and being made much broader than the vein of water which is to strike them, let the spout be so directed that the vein may strike them perpendicularly By this measure it will be spread about on the vane in a thin sheet, and exert a pressure nearly equal to twice the weight of a column whose base is the oriſice of the spout, and whose height is the ſall producing the velocity. Mills of this kind are much in use in the south oſ Europe. The wheel is horizontal, and the vertieal axis carries the millstone; so that the mill is of the utmost simplicity: and this is its chieſ recommendation; for its power is greatly inferior to that of a wheel eonstructed in the usual manner. 2. The vanes may be arranged round the rim of the wheel, not like the sails of a wind-mill, in planes inclined to the radii, but parallel to the axis, or to the planes passing through the axiss They may either stand on a sole, like the oblique floats recommended by De Parceux, as above-mentioned; or they may stand on the side of the rim, not pointing to the axis, but aside from it. This disposition will admit the spout to be more conveniently disposed either for a horizontal or a vertical wheel. We shall conclude this article by describing a contrivance of Mr Burns, the inventor oſ the double-bucketed wheel, for fixing the arms of a water-wheel. It ĩs well known to mill-wrights, that the method of fixing them by making them to pass through the axle, weakens it exceedingly, and by lodging water in the joint, soon causes it to rot and fail. They have, thereſore, of late years put cast-iron flanches on the axis, to wvhich each arm is bolted: or the flanches are so fashioned as to form boxes, serving as mortices to receive the ends of the arms. These answer the purpose completely, but are very expensive; and it is found that arms of fir, bolted into flanches of iron, are apt to work loose. Mr Burns has made wvooden flanches oſ a very eurious construction, which are equally firm, and cost much less than the iron ones. This flanch consists of eight pieces, four oſ which compose the ring represented in Fig. I5. meeting in the joints ab, ab, ab, ab, directed to the centre O. The other ſour are covered by these, and their joints are represented by dotted lines a æ8, æ5 æ8. These two rings break joint in such a manner that an arm MN is contained between the two nearest joints a' & of the one, and æ'ẽ of the other. The tenon formed on the end of the arm A, &e. is of a particular shape: one side, GF is directed to the centre O; the other side, BCDE, has a small shoulder BC; then a long side CD directed to the centre O; and then a third part DE parallel to GF, or rather diverging a little from it, s50 as to make up at E the thickness of the shoulder BC; that is, a line from B to E would be parallel to CD. This side of the tenon fits exactly to the corresponding side of the mortise; but the mortise is wider on the other zide, leaving a space GFX© a little narrower at FK than at Gh. These tenons and mortises are made extremely true to the square; the pieces are put round the axle, vith a few blocks or wedges of soft wood put between them and the axle, leaving the space empty opposite to the place of each arm, and firmly bolted together by bolts between the arm mortises. The arms are then put in, and each is prossed home to the side CDE, and a vedge HF of hard wood is then put into the empty part oſ the mortise and driven home. When it comes through the flanch and touches the axle, the part which has come through is cut off with a thin chisel, and the wedge is driven better home. The spaces under the ends of the arms are nov filled with wedges, which are driven home from opposite sides, till the circle of the arms stands quite perpendicular on the axle, and all is fast. It needs no hoops to keep it together, for the wedging it up round the axle makes the two half rings drav close on the arms, and it cannot start at its own joints till it erushes the arms. Hoops, however, can do no harm, when all is once wedged up, but it would be improper ©o put them on before this be done. VOL. II. E Ir would be an entertaining and not an uninstruetive piece of information to learn the progressive steps by which the ingenuity of man has invented the various methods of raising water. A pump must be considered as the last step of this progresss Common as it is, and overlooked even by the curious, it is a very abstruse and reſined invention. Nothing like it has been found in any oſ the rude nations whom the restless spirit of the Europeans has discovered, either in the new continent of America or the islands of the Pacific Ocean. Nay, it was unknown in the cultivated empire of China at the time oſ our arrival there by sea; and it is still a rarity everywhere in Asia, in places unſrequented by the Europeans. It does not appear to have been known to the Greeks and Romans in early times; and perhaps it came from Alexandria, vhere physical and mathematical science was mueh cultivated by the Greek school under the protection of the Ptolemies. The perſormances of Ctesibius and Hero are spoken of by Pliny and Vitruvius as curious novelties.  It is perhaps not diſficult to trace the  In the early Greek writings, it does not appear that the words 'urrXas, arrrEy  urriaæ, &. were used to express any thing like what we call a pump. Tn all these pussages the words either express generally the drawing of water, or, more particularly, the drawing it with - - steps by which those mechanicians were led to the invention. The Egyptian wheel was a common machine all over Asia, and is still in use in the remotest corners, and vas brought by the Saracens into Spain, where it is still very common under its ancient name NorIA. The Danish missionaries found in a remote village in the kingdom of Siam the immediate offspring of the noria. It was a wheel turned by an ass, and carrying round, not a string of earthen pots, but a string of wisps of hay which it drew through a vooden trunk. This rude chain-pump was in frequent use for vatering the rice-fieldss It is highly probable that it is of great antiquity, although we do not recollect its being mentioned by any of the Greek or Roman writers. The Arabs and Indians were nothing less than innovators; and ve may suppose with great safety, that what arts we now ſind among them they possessed in very remote periodss. Now the step from this to the pump is but short, though it is nice and refined à and the forcing pump of Ctesibius is the easiest and most natural. Let AB (Plate XII. Fig. I.) be the surface oſ the vater in the vell, and D the height where it is to be delivered. Let DC be a long wooden trunk, reaching as deep under water as possiblee Let the rope EF be fitted with its knot of hay . When it is drawn up through the a bucket or something similar.Arra, which is the primitive, is a drain, sink, or receptacle for collecting scattered water, either for use, or to get rid oſ it; hence it came to signiſy the sink or well of a ship; and æ72ã» was synonimous with our verb  to bale the boat.” (Odyss. O. 416. M. 41l. Euryp. Hecuba, 1025.) Aruæ is the vessel or hucket with which water is dravn. 'Aræ is the service (generally a punishment) of drawing water. Aaẽ⸗,  to draw water with a bucket: hence the force of Aristotle's expression (Oecon. 1.), 7yaę iuã arrain rœ lrs. See even the late authority of the New Testament, John ii. 8.; iv. T. 1. Here aanuæ is evidently something which the voman brought along with her; probably a bucket and rope. trunk, it will bring up along with ĩt all the water lying between C and A, which will begin to run out by the spout D as soon as the knot gets to G, as far below D as C is belov A All this is very obvious; and it required but little reflection to be assured, that iſ F was let down again, or pushed down, by a rod instead of a rope, t would again perform the same offico. Here is a very simple pump. And if it was ever put in practice, it behoved to show the supporting power of the atmosphere, becaus the water would not only be lifted by the knot, but would even ſollow it. The imperſection of this pump hehoved to appear at first sight, and to suggest its remedy. By pushing down the knot V, which we shall henceforward call the piston, all the force expended in lifting up the water between A and G is thrown away, hecause it is again let down. A valve G, at the bottom, would prevent this. But then there must be a passage made for the water by a lateral tube KBD (Fig. 2) And if this'be also furnished vith a valve H, to prevent its losing the water, we have the pump of Ctesibius, as sketched in Fig. 227 The valve is the great refinement: but perhaps even this had made its appearance beſore in the noria. For, in the more perfect kinds of these machines, the pots have a stop or valve in their bottom, which hangs open while the pot descends vith ĩts mouth downwards, and then allows it to fill readily in the cistern; whereas, without the valve, it would occasion a double load to the wheel. If ve suppose that the valve had made its appearance so early, it is not improbable that the common pump sketched in Fig. 3. was as old as that of Ctesibius. In this dissertation we shall ſirst give a short description of the chief varieties of these engines, considering them in their simplest ſorm, and we shall explain in very general terms their mode of operationn. We shall then give a concise and popular theory oſ their operation, furnishing principles to direet us in their construe- tion; and ve shall conclude with the description of a few peculiarities which may contribute to their improvement or perfection. There are but two sorts of pumps which essentially diſfer; and all the varieties that we see are only modifications of these. One of these original pumps has a solid piston; the other has a piston with a perforation and a valvee. We usually call the first 2 PorRCING PUMP, and the second a LIFTING OF SUCKING PUMP. Fig. 2. is a sketeh of the forcing pump in its most simple form and situation. It consists of a hollow cylinder ACca, called the oRKING BARREL, Open at both ends, and having a valve G at the bottom, opening upwards. This cylinder is filled by a solid piston EF, covered externally with leather or tow, by which means it fits the box of the cylinder exactly, and allows no water to eseape by its sides. There is a pipe KHD, which communicates laterally with this cylinder, and has a valve at some convenient place H, as near as possible to its junction with the cylinder. This valve also opens upwards. This pipe, usually called the RISING PIPE, Or MAIN, torminates at the place D, where the water must be delivered. Now suppose this apparatus set into the vater, so that the upper end of the eylinder may be under or even with the surſace oſ the water AB, the water vill open the valve G, and aſter filling the barrel and lateral pipe, vill also open the valve H, and at last stand at an equal height within and without. Now let the piston be put in at the top of the working barrel, and thrust down to K. It will push the vater before it. This will shut the valve G, and the vater will make its way through the valve II, and ſill a part B b oſ the rising pipe, equal to the internal capacity of the working barre. When this downward motion of the piston ceases, the valve II will fall down by its ovn veight and shut this passage. Now let the piston be drawn up again: the valve H hinders the vater in the ris- ing pipe ſrom returning into the working barrel. But now the valve Gis opened by the pressure of the external water, and the water enters and fills the eylinder as the piston rises. When the piston has got to the top, let ĩt be thrust down again: the valve G vill again be shut, and the water will be forced through the passage at H, and rise along the main, pushing before it the water already there, and vill now have its surface at L Repeating this operation, the water must at last arrive at D, however remote, and the next stroke would raise it to e; so that during the next rise of the piston the water in e D will be running off by the spout. The effect will be the same whatever is the position of the working barrel, provided only that it be under vater. It may lie horizontally or sloping, or it may be with its mouth and piston rod undermost. It is still the same forcing pump, and operates in the same manner and by the same means, viz. the pressure oſ the surrounding water. The external foree hich must be applied to produce this effect is opposed by the pressure exerted by the water on the opposite face of the piston. It is evident, from the common lavs of hydrostaties, that this opposing pressure is equal to the weight of a pillar of water, having the face of the piston ſor its base, and the perpendicular height d A of the place of delivery above the surface oſ the water AB in the cistern for its height. The ſorm and dimensions of the rising pipe are indiſferent in this respect, because heavy fluids press only in the proportion of their perpendicular heightt. Observe that it is not d F, but d A, which measures this pressure, which the moving ſoree must balance and surmount. The whole pressure on the under surface Ff oſ the piston is indeed equal to the weight of the pillar d Fſi; but part of this is balanced by the water AF fa. If indeed the water does not get into the upper part oſ the vorking barrel, this compensation does not obtain. While we draw up the piston, this pressure is removed, because all communication is cut off by the valve H, which noW bears the whole pressure oſ the water in the main. Nay, the ascent of the piston is even assisted by the pressure of the surrounding water. It is only during the descent of the piston therefore that the external force is necessary. Observe that the measure now given of the external force is only what is necessary for balancing the pressure of the water in the rising pipe. But in order that the pump may perform work, it must surmount this pressure, and cause the water to issue at D with such a velocity that the required quantity of vater may be delivered in a given time. This requires force, even although here were no opposing pressure; which would be the case if the main were horizonta. The vater ſills it, but it is at restt In order that a gallon, for instance, may be delivered in a second, the whole vater in the horizontal main must be put in motion vith a certain velocity. This requires forcee. We must therefore always distinguish between the state oſ equilibrium and the state oſ actual working. It is the equilibrium only that we consider at present; and no more is necessary for understanding the operation of the different species of pumps. The other foree is of much more intricate investigation, and will be considered by itself. The simplest form and situation of the lifting pump is represented by the sketch Fig. 3 The pump is immersed in the cistern till both the valve G and piston F are under the surface AB of the surrounding water. By this means the water enters the pump, opening both valves, and finally stands on a level within and without. Now drav up the piston to the surface AA It must liſt up the water which is above it (because the valve in the piston remains shut by its ovn weight); so that its surface vill now he at a, Aa being made equal to AF. In the meantime, the pressure of the surrounding vater forces it into the working barrel, through the valve G; and the barrel is now ſilled vith water. Now, let the piston be pushed down again; the valve G immediately shuts by its own veight, and in opposition to the endeavours which the water in the barrel makes to escape this vay This attempt to compress the water in the barrel causes it to open the valve F in the piston; or rather, this valve yields to our endeavour to push the piston down through the water in the working barre. By this means ve get the piston to the bottom of the barrel; and it has now above it the whole pillar of water reaching to the height a. Drawing up the piston to the surſace A a second time, must lift this double eolumn along vith it, and its surface now will be at h. The piston may again be thrust down through the water in the barrel, and again drawn up to the surface, which will raise the water to c. Another repetition vill raise it to d; and it will now show itself at the intended place of delivery Another repetition vill raise it to æ; and vhile the piston is now descending to make another stroke, the water in æ d will be running off through the spout D; and thus a stream vill be produced, in some degree continual, but very unequal. This is inconvenient in many cases: thus, in a pump for domestic uses, such a hobbling stream would make it very troublesome to fill a bucket. It is therefore usual to terminate the main by a cistern LMNO, and to make the spout small. By this means the water brought up by the successive strokes of the piston rises to such a height in this cistern, as to produce an efflux by the spout nearly equablee. The smaller we make the spout D the more equable vill be the stream; for when the piston brings up more vater than can be discharged during its descent, some of it remains in the cistern. This, added to the supply of next stroke, makes the water rise higher in the cistern than it did by the preceding stroke. This ill cause the eſlux to be quicker during the descent of the piston, but perhaps not yet suſficiently quick to discharge the whole supply. It therefore manma t m- rises higher next stroke; and at last it rises s0 high, that the increased velocity of efſlux makes the discharge precisely balance the supply. Nov, the quantity supplied in each stroke is the same, and occupies the same room in the cistern at top: and the surface will sink the same number of inches during the descent of the piston, whether that surſace has been high or low at the beginning. But because the velocities of the efflux are as the square roots of the heights of the water above the spout, it is evident that a sink of two or three inches will make a smaller change in the velocity of efflux when this height and velocity are great. This seems but a trifling observation; but it serves to illustrate a thing to be considered aſterwards, which is important and abstruse, but perfectly similar to this. It is evident, that the force necessary for this operation must be equal to the weight of the pillar of water d A a D, if the pipe be perpendicular. Iſ the pump be standing aslope, the pressure which is to be balanced is still equal to the weight of a pillar of water of this perpendieular height, and having the surface oſ the piston for its base. Such is the simplest, and, we may add, by far the best, form of the forcing and lifting pumps; but iĩt ĩs not the most usual. Ciruemstances of convenience, economy, and more frequently of fancy and habit, have caused the pumpmakers to deviate greatly from this form. It is not usual to have the working-barrel in the water; this, especially in deep vells, makes it of diſficult access for repairs, and requires long piston-rodss. This would not. do in a forcing pump, because they would bend. We have supposed, in our account of the liſting- pump, that the rise of the piston always terminated at the surface of the water in the cistern. This we did in order that the barrel might always be filled by the pressure of the surrounding water. But let us suppose that the rise of the piston does not end here, and that it is gradually drawn up to the very top: it is plain that the pressure of the atmo- sphere is by this means taken off from the water in the pipe (s|e PNEUMATICS), While it remains pressing on the water of the cistern. It vill thereſore cause the water to follow the piston as it rises through the pipe, and it will raise ĩt in this wvay 33 feet at a medium. If, thereſore, the spout D is not more than 33 feet above the surface of the water in the cistern, the pipe vill he full of water when the piston is at D. Let it be pushed doWn to the bottom; the vater will remain in the pipe, because the valve G vill shut: and thus we may give the piston a stroke of any length not exceeding 88 feet. I we raise it higher than this, the water vill not follow; but it will remain in the pipe, to be lifted by the piston, after it has been pushed down through it to the bottom. But it is not necessary, and would be very inconvenient, to give the piston so long a strokee The great use of a pump is to render effectual the reciprocation of a short stroke which we ean command, vwhile such a long stroke is generally out of our power. Suppose that the piston is pushed down only to b, it ill then have a column b 7 incumbent on it, and it will lift this column when again dravn  up. And this operation may be repeated like the former, vwhen the piston was always under water; for the pressure of the atmosphere vill always cause the water to ſollow the piston to the height of S3 feet. Nor is it necessary that the fixed valve G be placed at the lower orifice of the pipe, nor even under water. For, vhile things are in the state now deseribed, the piston dravn up to f, and the whole pipe full of water; if we suppose another valve placed at b above the surface of the cistern, this valve can do no harm. Nov let the piston descend, both valves G and b vill shutt. G may now be removed, and the water vill remain supported in the space b G by the air; and now the alternate motions of the piston vill produce the same effect as before. We ſound in the former case that the piston was carrying — —- _ur—_.p a load equal to the weight of a pillar of water oſ the height AD, because the surrounding vater could only support it at its own level. Let us see what change is produced by the assistance of the pressure of the atmosphere. Let the under surface of the piston be at b; when the piston was at f, 33 ſeet above the surface of the cistern, the water was raised to that height by the pressure of the atmosphere. Suppose a partition made at b by a thin plate, and all the water above it taken avay Now pierce a hole in this platee. The pressure of the atmosphere was able to carry the whole column 7fa. Part of this column is now removed, and the remainder is not a balance for the airs pressure. This will thereſore cause the water to spout up through this hole and rise to ſ, Therefore the under surface of this plate is pressed up by the contiguous water with a force equal to the weight of that pillar of water which it formerly supported; that is, with a foree equal to the weight of the pillar 7b. Now, the under surface of the piston, vhen at b, is in the same situationn. Tt is pressed upwards by the water below it, with a force equal to the weight of the column 7b: but it is pressed downwards by the whole pressure of the atmosphere, which presses on all bodies; that is, (with the weight of the pillar 7a. On the whole, therefore, it is pressed downwards by a force equal to the difference of the weights of the pillars ſa and ſb; that is, by a ſorce equal to the weight of the pillar b a. It may be conceived better perhaps in this vay. When the piston was under the surſace of the water in the cistern, it was equally pressed on both sides, both by the water and atmospheree. The atmosphere exerted its pressure on it by the intervention of the water; which being, to all sense, a perſect fluid, propagates every external pressure undiminishedl. When the piston is drawn up above the surface of the pit-water, the atmosphere continues to press on its upper surface with its hole weight, through the intervention of the water which lies above it; and its pressure must therefore be added to that of the incumbent water. It also continues to press on the under surſace oſ the piston by the intervention of the water; that is, it presses this water to the piston. But, in doing this, it carries the weight oſ this water which it is pressing on the piston. The pressure on the piston therefore is only the excess of the vhole pressure of the atmosphere above the weight of the column of water hich it is supporting Therefore the difference of atmospherie pressure on the upper and under surfaces of the piston is precisely equal to the weight of the column of water supported in the pipe by the air. It is not, however, the individual weight oſ this column that loads the piston; it is the part of the pressure of the atmosphere on its upper surface, which is not balanced by its pressure on the under surſace. In attempting therefore to draw up the piston, ve have to surmount this unbalanced part of the pressure of the atmosphere, and also the weight oſ the water which lies above the piston, and must be liſted by it: and thus the whole opposing pressure is the same as beſore, namely, the weight of the whole vertical pillar reaching from the surface oſ the water in the cistern to the place of delivery. Part of this weight is immediately carried by the pressure of the atmosphere; but, in lieu of it, there is an equal part of this pressure of the atmosphere abstracted ſrom the under surface of the piston, while its upper surface sustains its whole pressure. So ſar, then, these two states of the pump agreeBut they differ exceedingly in their mode of operation; and there are some circumstances not very obvious which must be attended to, in order that the pump may deliver any vater at the spout D. This requires, thereſore, a serious examination. Let the fixed valve G (Fig. 4.) be supposed at the surface oſ the cistern water. Let M m be the lowest, and Na the highest, positions oſ the piston, and let HA=nh be the height of a column oſ vater equiponderant with the atmosphere. When the pump is filled, not with water but vith air, and the piston is in its lowest position, and all in equilibrio, the internal air has the same density and elasticity with the external. The space MA a m, therefore, contains air of the common density and elasticity. These may be measured by h, or the weight of a column oſ water whose height is . Now, let the piston be drawvn up to Nn. The air vhich oceupied the space MA a m now occupies the space NA a n, and its density is noW Naan Its elasticity is now diminished, being proportionable to its density (see PNEUMATIOS), and no longer balances the pressure of the atmosphere. The valve G vill therefore be forced up by the water, which vill rise to some height SA. Nov let the piston again descend to M m. It cannot do this with its valve shut; for, when it comes down so ſar as to reduce the air again to its common density, iĩt is not yet at M, because the space below it has been diminished by the water which got into the pipe, and is retained there by the valve G. The piston valve thereſore opens by the air which we thus attempt to compress, and the superfluous air escapes. When the piston has got to M, the air is again of the common density, and occupies the space MSsm. Now draw the piston up to N. This air will expand into the space NS 5 n, and its density will be reduced to nS and its elasticity ill no longer balance the pressure of the atmosphere, and more vater will enter, and iĩt vill rise higher. This vill go on continually. But it may happen that the water will never rise so high as to reach the piston, even though not 83 ſeet above the water in the cistern: for the successive diminutions of density and elasticity are a series of quantities that decrense geometrieally, MAam and thereſore will have a limit. Let us see what determines this limit. At whatever height the water stands in the lower part of the pipe, the eight of the column of water SA a 5, together with the remaining elasticity oſ the air above it, exactly halances the pressure oſ the atmosphere (see PNæUmaTICs). Now the elasticity oſ the air in the space NS 5 n is equal to h x s m Therefore, in the case where the limit obtains, and the water rises no farther, we must have h=/AS +h or because the column is oſ the same diameter throughout, hAS +h & as and & u h= h—AS, /HS, and NS: usuHA: HS, MS: NS  HA—DHS: HA, or NM: NS  AS: AH, and NM X AH =/ NS x AS.Therefore, i? AN, the distance of the piston in its highest position from the water in the cistern, and NM the length of its stroke, be given, there is a certain determined height AS to which the water can be raised by the pressure of the air: for AH is a constant quantity; and therefore when MN is given, the rectangle ASxSN is given. If this height AS be less than that of the piston in its lowest position, the pump will raise no vater, although AN may be less than AH. Yet the same pump vill raise water very effectually, if it be first of all filled with water; and ve have seen proſessional engineers much puzzled by this capricious ſailure of their pumps. A little knowledge of the principles would have prevented their disappointment. To insure the delivery of water by the pump, the stroke must be such that the rectangle MNXAH may be greater than any rectangle that can be made of the parts AN, that is, greater than the square of hal? AN. Or, if the length of the stroke be already fixed by other circumstances, 7 which is a common case, ve must make AN s0 short that the square of its half, measured in feet, shall be less than 3 times the stroke oſ the piston. Suppose that the fixed valve, instead of being at the surſace of the water in the cistern, is at S, or anywhere between S and A, the perſormance of the pump vill be the same as before: but if it be placed anywhere above S, it vill be very different. Let it be at T. It is plain that when the piston is pushed down from N to M, the valve at T prevents any air from getting down; and thereſore, vhen the piston is dravn up again, the air contained in the space MT ? m will expand into the space NT i n, and S hich expresses the density of the air hich was leſt in the space TS s t by the former operationsThe air, therefore, in TS s 4 will also expand, vill open the valve, and now the vater vill rise above S. The proportion of NS to NT may evidently be such that the water vill even get above the valve T. This diminishes the space NT ? n; and therefore, vhen the piston has been pushed down to M, and again dravn up to N, the air ill be still more rarefied, and the water vill rise still higher. The ſoregoing reasoning, however, is suſficient to show that there may still be a height which the water will not pass, and that this height depends on the proportion between the stroke of the piston and its distance from the water in the cisternn. We need not give the determination, because it will comae in aſterwards in combination vith other circumstances. It is enough that the reader sees the physical eauses of this limitation: and, lastly, e see plainly that the utmost security will be given for the perſormance of the pump, when the fixed valve is so placed that the piston, when in its lowest position, shall come into contact with it. In this case, the rare faction of the air will be the completest possible; and if there were no space left between the piston and valve, its density will be This is less than and all were perſeetly air-tight, the rareſaction would be complete, and the valve might be any thing less than 38 feet from the surface of the water in the cistern. But this perfect contact and tightness is unattainable; and though the pump may be full of water, its continual downward pressure causes it to filtrate slowly through every crevice, and the air enters through every pore, and even disengages itself from the water, with which a considerable portion had been chemically combined The pump by this means loses water, and it requires several strokes of brisk working to fill it again: and if the leathers have become dry, so0 much admission may be given to the air, that the pump vill not ſill itself with water by any working. It is then necessary to pour water into it, which shuts up these passages, and s00n sets all to rights again. For these reasons, it is always prudent to place the fixed valve as low as other circumstances will permit, and to make the piston-rod of such a length, that when it is at the bottom of its stroke it shall be almost in contact with the valvee. When ve are not limited by other circumstances, it is evident that the best possible form is to have both the piston and the fixed valve under the surface oſ the water oſ the cistern. In this situation they are always wet and air-tight. The chieſ objection is, that by this disposition they are not easily come at vhen needing repair. This is a material objection in deep mines. In such situations, therefore, we must make the best compensation of different circumstances that e can. It is usual to place the ſixed valve at a moderate distance ſfrom the surface of the water, and to have a hole in the side oſ the pipe, by which it may be got out. This is careſully shut up by a plate firmly screwed on, with leather or cement between the parts. This is called the clack door. It would, in every case, be very proper to have a fixed valve in the lower end of the pipe.. This would combine all advantagess. Being always tight, the pipe would retain the water, and it would leave to the valve above it ita full efft of inereasing the rarefaction. A similar hole is made in the working barrel, a little above the highest position of the pistonn. When this neds repair, it ean be got at through this hole, without the immense trouble oſ drawing up the whole rods. Thus ve have condueted the reader, step by step, ſrom the simplest form oſ the pump ſo that which long experience has at last selected as the most generally convenient. This we shall now deseribe in some detail. The Suching- Pump consists of two pipes DCCD, BAAB (Fig. 5.), of which the former is called the Borrel, or the Working-Barrel, and the other is called the SuetionPipe, and is commonly of a smaller diameter.These are joined by means of stanches E, F, pierced with holes to receive screwed bolts:. A ring of leather, or of lead, covered vith a proper cement, is put between them; whieh, being strongly compressed by the screw-bolts, renders the joint perfectly ai- tightt. The lower end A of the suctionpipe is commonly spread out a little to facilitate the entry of the water, and frequently has a gratmg across it at AA to keep out ſilth or gravel. This is immerged in the standing water YZ. The working barrel is eylindrical, as evenly and smoothly hored as possible, that the piston may fill it exactly through its whole length, and move along it vith as little friction as may be consistent with air-tightness. The piston is a sort of truneated cone OPKL, generally made of wood not apt to split, such as elm or beech. The small end of it is cut off at the sides, 50 as to form a sort of areh OQP, by which it is fastened to the iron rod or spear. It is exhibited in different positions iu Figs. 6, 7, which vill give a more distinet notion of it than any description. The two ends of the eonical part may be hooped with brasss This cone has its larger end surrounded with a ring or band of strong leather fastened with nails, or by a copper hoop, which is driven on it at the smuller end. voL. II. r This band should reach to some distance beyond the base of the cone; the farther the better: and the whole must be of uniſorm thickness all round, so as to suffer equal compression between the cone and the working- barrel. The seam or joint oſ the two ends of this band must be made very close, but not sewed or stitched together. This would occasion bumps or inequalities, hich would spoil ĩts tightness; and no harm can result from the want of it, because the two edges ill be squeezed close together by the compression in the barrel. It is by no means necessary that this compression be great. This is a very detrimental error of the pump-makers. It oceasions enormous friction, and destroys the very purpose which they have in viev, viz. rendering the piston air-tight; for it causes the leather to wear through very soon at the edge oſ the cone, and it also wears the working-barre. This very soon becomes vide in that part which is continually passed over by the piston, while the mouth remains of its original diameter, and it becomes impossible to thrust in a piston which shall completely fill the worn part. Nov, a very moderate pressure is sufficient for rendering the pump perfectly tight, and a piece of glove leather would be suſficient ſor this purpose, if loose or detached from the solid cone; for suppose such a loose and flexible, but impervious, band of leather put round the piston, and put into the barrel; and let it even be supposed that the cone does not compress it in the smallest degree to its internal surfaceDPour a little water carefully into the inside of this sort of cup or dish, it will cause it to swell out a little, and apply itself close to the barrel all round, and even adjust itself to all its inequalities. Let us suppose it to touch the barrel in a ring of an inch broad all round. We can easily compute the force with which it is pressed. It is half the veight of a ring of water an inch deep and an inch broad. This is a trifle, and the frition occasioned by it not worth regarding; yet this trifling pressure is sufficient to make the pasl sage perſectly impervious, even by the most enormous pressure of a high column of incumbent water: for let this pressure be ever s0 great, the pressure by which the leather adheres to the barrel always exceeds it, because the incumbent fluid has no preponderating power by which it can force its vay between them, and it must insinuate itselſ precisely so far, that its pressure on the inside of the leather shall still exceed, and only exceed, the pressure by vhich it endeavours to insinuate itselſ; and thus the piston becomes perfectly tight with the smallest possible frietion. This reasoning is perhaps too refined for the uninstructed artist, and probably will not persuade him. To such we would recommend an examination of the pistons and valves contrived and executed by that artist, vhose skill far surpasses our highest conceptions, the all-wise Creator of this world. The valves which shut up the passages of the veins, and this in places where an extravasation would be followed by instant death, are cups of thin membrane, vhich adhere to the sides of the channel about half way round, and are detached in the rest of their circumferenc:. When the blood comes in the opposite direction, it pushes the membrane aside, and has a passage perfectly free. But a stagnation of motion allows the tone of the muscular (perhaps) membrane, to restore it to its natural shape, and the least motion in the opposite direction causes it instantly to elap close to the sides of the vein, and then no pressure whatever ean force a passage. We shall recur to this again, vhen deseribing the various contrivances of valves, &e. What we have said is enough ſor supporting our directions for constructing a tight piston. But ve recommended thick and strong leather, while our present reasoning seems to render thin leather preſerablee Ifthe leather be thin, and the solid piston in any part does not press it gently to the barrel, there will be in this part an unbalanced pressure of the ineumbent column of water, which would instantly burst even a strong leather bag; but When 648 PUMP. the solid piston, covered vith leather, exactly fills the barrel, and is even pressed a little to ĩt, there is no such rik; and now that part of the leather-band which reaches beyond the solid piston performs its office in the completes: manner. We do not hesitate, thereſore, to recommend this ſorm of a piston, which is the most common and simple of all, as preferable, when well executed, to any of thoæ more artificial, and frequently very ingenious, construetions, which we have met with in the works of the ſirst engineers. To proceed, then, with our deseription oſ the sucking-pump. At the joining oſ the working-barrel with the suctionFipe, there is a hole H, covered vith a valve opening upwards. This hole H is either made in a plate vhich makea a part of the suction-pipe, being cast along with it, or it i made in a separate plate. This last is the most convenient, heing easily removed and replaced. Diſferent views are given of this valve in Fig. 8, 9, 10. The diameter EF (Fig. 10.) of this plate is the same vith that of the flanehes, and it has holes corresponding to them, through which their bolts pass which keep all together. A ring oſ thiek leather NKL is applied to this plate, having a part cut out between N and L, to make room for another piece of strong leather NR (Fig. 9.) which composes the valve. The circular part of this valve is broader than the hole in the middle of Fig. 10. but not quite s0 broad as to fill up the inside of the ring of leather OQP of this Fig. which is the same with GKI of Fig 10. The middle of this leather valve is strengthened by two brass (not iron) plates, the uppermost of which is seen at R of Fig. 9: the one on its under side is a little smaller than the hole in the valveplate, that it may go freely in; and the upper plate R is larger than this hole, that it may compress the leather o its brim all round. It is evident, that when this plate with its leathers is put between the joint flanches, and all is mreweq together, the tail of leather N of Fig. 9 vill be oompressed between thè plates, and form a hinge, on which the valve can tum, rising and falling. There is a similar valve ſustened to the upper side, or broadest base of the piston. This description serves for both valves, and in gneral for most valves which are to be found in any parts of a pump. The reader vill now understand, without any repetition, the prooess of the whole operation of a sucking-pump. The piston rarefies the air in the working- barrel, and that in the suction-pipe expands through the valve into the barrel; and being no longer a balance for the atmospheric pressure, the water rises into the suction-pipe; another stroke of the piston produces a similar effect, and the vater rises further, but by a smaller step than by the preceding stroke: by repeating the strokes of the piston, the water gets into the barrel; and when the piston is now pushed down through it, it gets above ſhe piston, and must now be lifted up to any heightt. The suction-pipe is commonly of smauller size than the working-barrel, for the sake of economy. It is not necessary that it be so wide: but it may be, and often is, made too small. It should be of such a size, that the pressure oſ the atmosphere may be able to fill the barrel with water as fast as the piston rises. If a void is leſt below the piston, it is evident that the piston must be carrying the whole weight of the atmosphere, besides the water vhich is lying above it. Nay, if the pipe be only so vide, that the barrel shall fill precisely as fast as the pi rises, it must sustain all this pressuree The suction-pipe should be wider than this, that all the pressure of the atmosphere which exceeds the weight of the pillar in the suetion-pipe may be employed in pressing it on the under surface of the piston, and thus diminish the load. It cannot be made too wide; and too strict an economy in this respect may very sensibly diminish the perſormance oſ the pump, and more than defeat its own purpose This is most likely when the suction- pipe is long, because there the length oſ the pillar of water nearly balances the airs pressure, and leaves very little accelerating foree; so that water vill rise but slowly even in the widest pipe. All these things vill be made the subjects of computation aſterwards. It is plain that there will be ſimitations to the rise of the water in the suction-pipe, similar to what we found when the whole pump was an uniſorm eylinder. Let a be the height oſ the fixed valve above the water in the cistern: let B and b be the spaces in cubic measure between this valve and the piston in its highest and lowest positions, and thereſore express the bulks of the air whieh may oceupy these spaces: let 5 be the distance between the fixed valve and the vater in the suction-pipe, when it has attained its greatest height by the rarefaction of the air above it: let h be the height of a column of water in equilibrio, with the whole pressure of the atmosphere, and therefore having its weight in equilibrio with the elasticity of common air: and let æ be the height of the column whose weight balances the elasticity of the air in the suetion-pipe, when rareſied as much as it can be by the action of the piston, the vater standing at the height ay. Then, because this elasticity, together with the column a y in the suction-pipe, must balance the whole pressure of the atmosphere, (see PNEUMATICS), ve must have hæauæ +a , and y/a +xh. When the piston was in its lowest position, the bulk of E air between it and the fixed valve was h. Suppose e valve kept shut, and the piston raised to ĩts highest position, the bulk ill be B, and its density :a and its elasticity, or the height of the column whose weight will : . b balance it, will be à . Iſ the air in the suetion- pipe be denser than this, and consequently more elastic, it will lift the valve, and some vill come in; thereſore, when the pump has rarefied the air as much as it can, so that none does, in ſact, come in, the elasticity oſ the air in the suetion-pipe must be the same. Thereſore ?h i . b We had y= a +æ—h. Thereſore y=a +h5 h, a +8,, u Therefore vhen - h is less than a, the water will stop beſore it reaches the fixed valvee But when a is less than bt h, the water vill get above the fixed valve, v becoming negative. But it does not follow that the water vill reach the piston, that is, ill rise 5o high that the piston will pass through it in its descent. Things now come into the eondition of a pump of uniform dimensions from top to bottom; and this point will be determined by what was said vhen treating oſ such a pump. There is another form of the sucking pump which is much used in great water-works, and is of equal efficacy vith the one now deseribed. It is indeed the same pump in an inverted position. It is represented in Fig. 1l. where ABCD is the working-barrel, immersed, with its mouth downwards, in the water of the cistern. It is joined by means oſ flanches to the rising pipe or AIN. This usually consists of two partss. The first, BEFC, is bent to one side, that it may give room for the iron frames TXYV, which carries the rod NO of the piston M, attached to the traverses RS, TOV of this ſrame. The other part, EGHF, is usually oſf a less diameter, and is continued to the place oſ delivery The piston frame XTVY hangs by the rod Z, at the arm of a lever or working beam, not brought into the figuree The piston is perſorated like the former, and is surrounded like it with a band of leather in ſorm of a taper-dish. It has a valve K on its broad or upper base, opening when pressed from below. The upper end of the working-barrel is piercœd vith a hole, covered with a valve I, also opening upards. Now suppose this apparatus immersed into the cistern till the water is above it, as marked by the line 2, S, and the piston drawn up till it touch the end of the barrel When the piston is allowed to descend by its own weight, the water rises up through its valve K, and fills the barrel If the piston be now dravn up by the moving power of the machinery with which it is connected, the valve & shuts, and the piston pushes the water before it through the valve I into the main pipe EFGH. When the piston is again let down, the valve I shuts by its oWn weight and the pressure of the water incumbent on it, and the barrel is again ſilled by the water oſ the cisternn Drawing up the piston pushes this water into the main pipe, &. and then the water is at length delivered at the place required. This pump is usually called the Liftingpump ; perhaps the simplest of all in its principle and operation. It needs no farther explanation: and we proceed to describe The ForcixG. Puse, represented in Fig. 12. It oonsists oſ a working barrel ABCD, a suetion-pipe CDEF, and a main or rising pipe. This last is usually in three joints. The ſirst GHEI may be oonsidered as making part oſ the working barrel, and is commonly cast in one piece with itt. The second IKLM is joined to it by flanches, and forms the elbow which this pipe must generully havee. The third LNOM is properly the beginning of the main, and is continued to the place of delivery At the joint IK there is a hanging valve or elack 8; and there is a valve R on the top of the suction-pipe. The piston PQTV is solid, and is ſastened to a stout iron rod which goes through it, and is fixed by a key dravn through its end. The body oſ the piston is a sort of double cone, videning ſfrom the middle to each end, and is covered with two bands of very strong leather, fitted ũt in the manner already described. The operation of this pump is abundantly simple When the piston is thrust into the pump, it pushes the air beſore it through the valve S, for the valve R remains shut by its own weight. When it has reached near the bottom, and is dravn up again, the air which filled the small space between the piston and the valve S now expands into the barrel; for as soon as the air begins to expand, it ceases to bulance the pressure oſ the atmosphere, which therefore shuts the valve S. By the expansion of the æir in the barrel the equilibrium at the valve R is destroyed, and the air in the suction-pipe lifis the valve, and expands into the barrel; consequently it ceases to be a halance for the pressure of the atmosphere, and the water is forced into the suction-pipe. Pushing the piston down again forces the air into the barrel through the valve S, the valve R in the meantime shuttmg When the piston is again drawn up, S shuts, R opens, the air in the suctionpipe dilates anew, and the water rises higher in it. Repeating these operations, the water gets at last into the working barrel, and is forced into the main by pushing down the piston, and is pushed along to the place oſ delivery. The operation of this pump is therefore twoſold, sucking and forcing In the first operation, the same ſorce must be employed as in the sucking-pump, namely, a force equal to the weight of a column of water having the seotion of the piston for its base, and the height oſ the piston above the water ih the cistern for its height. It is for the sake of this part of the operution that the upper cone is added to the piston. The air and water would pass by the sides of the lower oone while the piston is drawn up; but the leather of the upper cone applies to the surface of the barrel, and prevents thiss The space contained between the ſarrel and the valve S is a great obstruction to this part of the operation, because this air cammot be rareſied 1o a very grèat degree. For this reason, the suction-pipe oſ a forcing-pump must not be made long. It is not indeed necessary; for by placing the pump a few feet lower, the vater vill rise into it without diffieulty, and the labour of suction is as much diminished as that of impulsion is increasedl. However, an intelligent artist will always endeavour to make this space between the valve S and the lowest place of the piston as small as possible. The power employed in forcing must evidently surmount the pressure oſ the whole water in the rising pipe, and (independent of what is necessary for giving the vater the required velocity, so that the proper quantity per hour may be delivered) the piston has to withstand a force equal to the weight of a column of vater having the section of the piston for its base, and the perpendicular altitude of the place of delivery above the lower surſace oſ the piston for its height. It is quite indifferent in this respect what is the diameter of the rising pipe; because the pressure on the piston depends on the altitude of the water only, independent oſ its quantit. We shall even see that a small rising pipe vill require a greater force to convey the water along it to any given height or distance. When we would employ a pump to raise water in a crooked pipe, or in any pipe of moderate dimensions, this form of pump, or something equivalent, must be used. In bringing up great quantities of water from mines, the common sucking-pump is generally employed, as really the best of them all: but it is the most expensive, because it requires the pipe to be perpendicular, straight, and of great dimensions, that it may contain the piston-rods. But this is impracticable when the pipe is crooked. If the forcing-pump, constructed in the manner now deseribed, be employed, we cannot use forcers ith long rods. Thesũ would bend when pushed down by their further extremity. In this case, it is usual to employ only a short and stiff rod, and to hang it by a chain, and load it with a weight superior to the weight of water to be raised by it. The machinery therefore is employed, not in forcing the water along the rising pipe, but in raising the weight which is to produce this effect by its subsequent descent. In this ease, it would be much better to employ the lifting-pump of Fig. 1I. For a the load on the forcers must be greater than the resistances which it must surmount, the ſorce exerted by the machine must in like manner be greater than this load. This double excess would be avoided by using the lifting-pump. It will readily occur to the reader that the quantity of water delivered by any pump ill be in the joint proportion of the surface or base of the piston and its velocity; for this measures the capacity of that part of the workingbarrel which the piston passes over. The velocity of the water in the conduit-pipe, and in its passage through every valve, will be greater or less than the velocity of the piston in the same proportion that the area of the piston or working-barrel is greater or less than the area of the conduit or valvee For whatever quantity of water passes through any section of the working-barrel in a second, the same quantity must go through any one of these passages. This enables us to modify the velocity of the water as we please: we can increase it to any degree at the place of delivery by diminishing the aperture through which it passes, provided ve apply suſficient force to the piston. It is evident that the operation of a pump is by starts, and that the water in the main remains at rest, pressing on the valve during the time that the piston is withdrawn from the bottom of the working-barrel. It is in most cases desirable to have this motionſquable, and in some cases it is absolutely necessary Thus, in the engine for extinguishing fires, the spout of water going by jerks could never be directed with a certain aim, and half of the water would be lost by the way; because a body at rest cannot in an instant be put in rapid motion, and the ſirst portion of every jerk oſ water would have but a small velocity. A very ingenious contrivance has been ſallen upon for obviating this inconvenience, and procuring a stream nearly equable We have not been able to disoover the author. At any convenient part of the rising pipe beyond the valve S there is annexed a capaciqus vessel VZ (Fig- 18. No I and 2.) close atop, and of great strength. When the water is forced along this pipe, part of it gets into this vessel, keeping the air conſined above it, and it fills it to such a height V, that the elasticity of the confined air balances a column reaching to T, we shall suppose, in the rising pipe. The next stroke of the piston sends forward more water, which would fll the rising pipe to some height above T. But the pressure of this additional column causes some more of it to go into the air vessel, and compress its air so much more that its elasticity now balances a longer column. Every succeeding stroke of the piston produces a like effect. The water rises higher in the main pipe, but some more oſ it goes into the air-vessel. At last the water appears at the place of delivery; and the air in the airvessel is now s much compressed that its elasticity balances the pressure of the whole olumn. The next stroke of the piston sends ſorward some more water. If the diameter oſ the orifiœœ of the main be suſficient o let the water flow out with a velocity equal to that of the piston, it will so flow out, rising no higher, and producing no sensible æddition to the compression in the air-vessel. But if the oriſic]e of the main be contracted to half its dimensions, the water sent forward by the piston canuot flow out in the time of the stroke without a greater velocity, and thereſore a greater force. Part of it, thereſore goes into the air-vessl, and increases the compression. When the piston has ended its stroke, and no more water comes forward, the compression of the air in the air-vessel being greater than what was sufficient to balance the pressure of the water in the main pipe, now forces out some of the water which is lying beloW it. This cannot return towards the pump, beeause the valve S is now shut. It therefore goes forward along the main, and produces an efſlux during the time oſ the piston's rising in order to make another stroke In order that this eſſlux may be very equable, the air-vessel must be very large If it be small, the quantity of water that is discharged by it during the return of the piston makes s great a portion' of its capacity, that the elasticity of the confined air is too much diminished by this enlargement of its bulk, and the rate of efflux must diminish aceordingly. The eapacity of the air-vessel should be so great that the change of bulk of the compressed air during the inaction of the piston may be inconsiderablee It must thereſore be very strong. It is pretty indiſferent in what way this air-vessel is connected with the rising pipe. It may join it laterally, as in Fig. I5. No I. and the main pipe go on without interruption; or it may be made to surround an interruption oſ the main pipe, as in Fig. 18, No 2. It may also be in any part of the main pipe. If the sole effect intended hy it is to produce an equable jet, as in ornamental water-works, it may be near the end of the main. This vill require much less strength, because there remains but a short eolumn of water to compress the air in it. But it is, on the whole, more advantageous to place it as near the pump as possible, that it may produce an equable motion in the whole main pipe. This is of considerable advantage; when a column of waler several hundred feet long is at rest in the main pipe, and the piston at one end of it put at oncæ into motion, even with a moderate velocity, the strain on the pipe would be very greatt. Indeed if it were possible to put the piston instantaneously into motion with a finite velocity, the strain on the pipe, tending to burst it, would be next to infinite. But this seems impossible in nature; all changes of motion which we observe are gradual, because all impelling bodies have some elasticity or soſtness by which they yield T to compressionn. And, in the way in which pistons are commonly moved, piz. by cranks, or something analogous to them, the motion is very sensibly gradual. But stll the nir-vessel tends to make the motion along the main-pipe less desultory, and therefore diminishes those strains which would really take place in the main pipe. It acts like the springs oſ a travelling-carriage, whose jolts are incomparably less than those of a cart; and by this means really enables a given force to propel a greater quantity of water in the same time. We may here by the way observe, that the attempts of mechanicians to correct this unequal motion of the pistonrod are misplaced, and if it could be done, would greatly hurt a pump. One of the best methods oſ producing this effect is to make the piston-rod consist of two parallel bars, having teeth in the sides which front each other. Let a toothed wheel be placed between them, having only the half of its circumſerence furnished with teeth. It is evident, without any farther description, that if this wheel be turned uniſormly round its axis, the piston-rod will be moved uniformly up and down without intermission. This has often been put in practice; but the machine always went by jolts, and seldom lasted a few days. Unskilled mechanicians attributed this to deſeet in the execution: but the fault is essential, and lies in the principle. The machine could not perform one stroke, if the first mover did not slacken a little, or the different parts of the machine did not yield by bending or by compressioſ ; and no strength of materials could withstand the violence of the strains at every reciprocation of the motion. This is chieſly experienced in great works which are put in motion by a water-wheel, or some other equal power exerted on the mass of matter of which the machine consistss The watervwheel being of great weight, moves with considerable steadiness or uniformity; and when an additional resistance is opposed Io it hy the beginning oſ a new stroke of the piston, its great quantity of motion is but little affected by this addition, and it proceeds very little retarded; and the machine must either yield a little by bending and compression, or go to pieces, which is the common event. Cranks are free from this inconvenience, because they accelerate the piston gradually, and bring it gradually to rest, while the water-wheel moves round with almost perfect uniformity. The only inconvenience (and it may be considerable) attending this slow motion of the piston at the beginning oſ its stroke is, that the valves do not shut vith rapidity, so that some water gets back through them: But when they are properly formed and loaded, this is but trifling. We must not imagine, that because the stream produced by the assistance oſ an air-barrel is almost perſectly equable, and because as much water runs out during the returning of the piston as during its active stroke, it therefore doubles the quantity of water. No more water ean Tun out than vhat is sent forward by the piston during its effective stroke The continued stream is produced only by preventing the whole of this water from being discharged during this time, and by providing a propelling force to act during the pistons return. Nor does it enable the moving force of the piston to produce a double effect: for the compression which is produced in the air-vessel, more than what is necessary for merely balancing the quiescent column of vater, reacts on the piston, resisting its compression just as much as the column of water vould do which produces a velocity equal to that of the efflux. Thus if the water is made to spout with the velocity of eight feet per second, this would require an additional eolumn of one foot high, and this would just balance the compression in the air-vessel, hich maintains this velocity during the non-action of the piston. It is, however, a matter of fact, that a pump furnished with an air- vessel delivers a little more water than it would do without it. But the difference depends on the combination of many very dissimilar cireumstances, which it is extremely diſficult bring into caleulationn S8ome of these will be mentioned aſterwards. To describe, or even to enumerate, the immense variety of combinations of these three simple pumps would fill a volume. We shall select a few, which are more deserving of notice. I. The common sucking-pump may, by a small addition, be converted into a lifting-pump, fitted for propelling the water to any distance and vith any velocity. Fig. 14. is a Sucking-pump, whose working. barrel ACDB has a lateral pipe AEGHF connected with it close to the top. This terminates in a main or rising pipe IK, furnished or not with a valve L. The top of the barrel is shut up by a strong plate MN, having a hollow neck terminating in a small flanch. The piston rod QR passes through this neck, and is nicely turned and polished. A number of rings of leather are put over the rod, and strongly compressed round it by another ſlanch and several screwed bolts, as is represented at OP. By this contrivance the rod is elosely grasped by the leathers, but may be easily dravn up and down, vhile all passage oſ air or vater is effectually prevented. The piston S is perſorated, and ſurnished vith a valve opening upwardss There is also a valve'I' on the top of the suction-pipe YX; and it will be of advantage, though not absolutely necessary, to put a valve L at the bottom of the rising pipe. Now suppose the piston at the bottom of the working-barrel. When it is dravn up, it tends to compress the air above it, because the valve in the piston remains shut by its own weightt. The air therefore is driven through the valve L into the rising pipe, and escapes. In the meantime, the air which occupied the small space between the piston and the valve T expunds into the upper part of the working-barrel; and its elasticity is so much diminished thereby, that the atmosphere presses the water of the cistern into the suetion-pipe, where it vill rise till an equilibrium is again produced. Thè next downward stroke of the piston allows the air, which had come from the suction- pipe into the barrel during the ascent of the piston, o get through its valvee. Upon drawing up the piston, this air is also drawn off through the rising-pipe. Repeating this process brings the water at last into the workingbarrel, and it is then driven along the rising-pipe by the piston. This is one of the best forms of a pump. The rarefaction may be very perfect, because the piston can be brought 50 near to the bottom of the working barrel; and, for ſoreing water in opposition to great pressures, ĩt appears preferable to the common foreing-pump; because in that the piston-rods are compressed and exposed to bending, which greatly huris the pump by wearing the piston and barrel on one sidee This s0on renders it less tight, and much water squirts out by the sides of the piston. But in this pump the piston-rod is alvays drawn or pulled, which keeps it straight; and rods exert a much greater ſorce in opposition to a pull than in opposition to compression. The collar of leather round the piston-rods is found by experience to need very little repairs, and is very impervious to water. The whole is very accessible for repairs; and in this respect much preferable to the common pump in deep mines, where every fault of the piston obliges us to draw up some hundred feet of piston-rodss By this addition, too, any common pump for the service of a house is converted into an engine ſor extinguishing fire, or may be made to convey the water to every part of the house; and this without hurting or obstructing its common uses. All that is necessary is to have a large cock on the upper part of the working-barrel opposite to the lateral pipe in this ſiguree. This cock serves for a spout when the pump is used for common purposes; and the merely shutting this VOL. 1I. 2u cock converts the whole into an engine for extinguishing fire, or for supplying distant places with water. It is scarcely necessary to add, that for these services it will be proper to connect an air- vessel with some convenient part of the rising-pipe, in order that the current of the water may be continual. J We have frequently spoken of the advantages of a continued current in the main pipe. In all great works a considerable degree oſ uniformity is produced by the manner of disposing the actions of the diſferent pumps; ſor it is very rarely that a machine works but one pump. In order to maintain some uniſormity in the resistance, that it may not all be opposed at once to the moving power, with intervals of total inaction, which would produce a very hobbling motion, it is usual to distribute the work into portions which succeed alternately; and thus both diminish the strain, and give greater uniſormity of action, and frequently enable a natural power which we can command, to perſorm a piece of work, which would be impossible if the whole resistance were opposed at once. In all pump machines therefore ve are obviously directed to construct them 0 that they may give motion to at least two pumps, vhich work alternately. By this means a much greater uniformity of current is produced in the main pipe. It vill be rendered still more uniform if four are employed, succeeding each other at the interval of one quarter of the time of a complete stroke. But ingenious men have attempted the same thing with a single pump, and many diſferent constructions ſor this purpose have been proposed and executed. The thing is not of much importance, nor of great research. We shall content ourselves thereſore with the description of one that appears to us the most perfect both in respect of simplicity and effect. II. It consists of a working-barrel AB (Fig. 15.) close at both endss The piston C is solid, and the rod OP Passes through a collar oſ leathers in the plate, which closes the upper end of the working-barre. This barrel communicates laterally with two pipes H, ; the communications m and n being as near to the top and bottom of the barrel as possiblee Adjoining to the passage m are two Yalves F and G opening upwards. Similar valves accompany the passage n. The two pipes H and K unite in a larger rising pipe L. They are all represented as in the same plane; but the upper ends must be be sent backwards, to give room for the motion of the piston-rod OP. Suppose the piston close to the entry of the lateral pipe n, and that it is dravn up, it compresses the air above it; and drives it t hroughthe valve G, where it escapes along the rising pipe; at the same time it rarefies the air in the space below itt. Thereſore the weight of the atmosphere shuts the valve E, and causes the water of the cistern to rise through the valve D, and fill the lower part of the I pump. When the piston is pushed down again, this water is first driven through the valve E, because D immediately shuts; and then most of the air vhich was in this part of the pump at the beginning goes up through it, some of the water coming back in ĩts stead. In the meantime, the air vhich remained in the upper part of the pump after the ascent of the piston is rarefied by its deseent; because the valve G shuts as soon as the piston begins to descend, the valve F opens, the air in this suction-pipe Ff expands into the barrel, and the vater rises into the pipes by the pressure of the atmosphere. The next rise oſ the piston must bring more vater into the lower part of the barrel, and must drive a little more air through the valve G, namely, part of that which had come out oſ the suction-pipe Ff; and the next descent of the piston must drive more water into the rising pipe H, and along vith it most if not all of the air which remained below the piston, and must rareſy still more the air remaining above the piston; and more vater will come in through the pipe Ff, and get into the to his partieular views, or o judge oſ the merit of such as may be proposed to him. We must nov take notio; of some very considerable and important varieties in the form and contrivance oſ the essential parts of a pump. III. The forcing-pump is sometimes oſ a very diſſeram form from that already described. Instead of a piston, vhich applies itsælf 1o the inside of the hurrel, and slides up and down in it, there is a long cylinder POQ (Fig. 16.) nicely turned and polished on the outside, and of a diameter somewhat less than the inside of the barrel. This oylinder (called a PLUNGER) slides through a collar of leathers on the top of the working-barrel, and is constructed as follows: The top oſ the harrel terminates in a flanch a b, pierced vith ſour holes ſor receiving scre-bolts. There are two rings of metal, c d, ef, of the same diameter, and having holes corsesponding to those in the flanch. Four rings of soſt leather, of the same size, and similarly pierced with holes, are well soaked in a mixture oſ oil, tallow, and a little rosinn. Two of these leather rings are laid on the pump ſlanch, and one of the metal rings above them. The plunger is then thrust down through them, by which it turns their inner edges downwardss. The other two rings are then slipped on at the top of the plunger, and the scond metal ring is put over them, and then the whole are slid down to the metal ringg By this the inner edges of the last leather rings are turned upwards. The three metal rings are now forced together by the screwed bolts; and thus the leathern rings are strongly compressed hetween them, and made to grasp the plunger so closely that no pressure can force the water through between. The upper metal ring just allows the plunger to pass through it, but vithout any play; so that the turned-up edges oſ the leathern rings do not come up between the plunger and the upper metal ring, but are lodged in a little conical taper, vhich is given to the inner edge oſ the upper plate, its hole being wider below than above. It ĩs on this triſling circumstance that the great tightness oſ the eollar depends. To prevent the leathers from shrinking by drought, there is usually a little cistern formed round the head of the pump, and kept full of water. The plunger is either forced down by a rod from a working-beam, or by a set oſ metal weights laid on it, as is represented in the figure. It is hardly necessary to be particular in explaining the operation oſ this pump When the plunger is at the bottom of the barrel, touching the fixed valve M with its lower extremity, it almost completely fills it. That it may do it completely, there is sometimes a small pipe RSZ branching out from the top of the barrel, and fitted with a cock at S. Water is admitted till the barrel is completely filled, and the cock is then shutt. Now when the plunger is drawn up, the valve N in the rising pipe must remain shut by the pressure of the atmosphere,. and a void must be made in the barre. Therefore the valve M on the top of the suetion-pipe must be opened by the elasticity of the air in this pipe, and the air must expand into the barrel; and, being no longer a balance for the atmosphere, the water in the cisterm must be forced into the, suction-pipe, and rise in ĩt to a certain heightt. When the plunger descends, it must drive the water through the valve N (for the valve M vill immediately shut), and along with ĩt most of the air vhich had come into the barre. And as this air occupied the upper part of the barrel, part oſ it will remain when the plunger has renched the bottom; but a stroke or two will expel it all, and then every succeeding stroke of the descending piston will drive the water along the rising pipe, and every ascent of the plunger vill be followed by the water from the cistern. The advantage proposed by this form oſ piston is, that it may be more accurately made and polished than the inside oſ a working-barrel, and it is of much easier repair- Yet we do not find that it is much used, although an invention oſ last century (we think by Sir Samuel Morland), and much praised by the writers on these subjects. It is easy to see that the sucking-pump may be varied in the same vay. Suppose this plunger to be open both at top and bottom, but the bottom filled with a valve opening upward. When this is pushed to the bottom of the barrel, the air which it tends to compress liſts the valve (the lateral pipe FIK being taken away and the passage shut up), and escapes through the plunger. When it is drawn up, it makes the same rareſaction as the solid plunger, because the valve at O shuts, and the water will come up ſrom the cistern as in the former case. If the plunger be now thrust down again, the valve M shuts, the valve O is foged open, and the plunger is filled with water. This vill be lifted by it during its next ascent; and when it is pushed down again, the water which filled it must now be pushed out, and vill flow over its sides into the cistern at the head of the barrel. Instead of making the valve at the bottom of the piston, it may be made at the top; but this disposition is much inferior, because it cannot rarefy the air in the barrel one half. This is evident; for the capacity oſ the barrel and plunger together cannot be twice the capacity oſ the barrel IV. It may be made aſter a still different form, as represented in Fig. 17. Here the suction-pipe CO comes up through a cistern KMNL deeper or longer than the intended stroke oſ the piston, and has a valve C at top. The piston, or what acts in lieu of it, is a tube AHGB, open at both ends, and of a diameter somewhat larger than that oſ the suction-pipe. The interval between them is filled up at HG by a ring or belt of soſt leather, Which is fastened to the outer tube, and moves up and down vith it, sliding along the smoothly polished surface of the suetion-pipe with very little friction. There is a valve I on the top of this piston, opening upwards. Water is poured into the outer cistern The outer œylinder or piston being dravn up ſrom the bottom, there is a great rareſaction of the air which was between them, and the atmosphere presses the water up through the suetionpipe to a certain height; for the valve I keeps shut by the pressure oſ the atmosphere and its ovn weight. Pushing down the piston causes the air, vhich had expanded from the suetion-pipe into the piston,  escape through the valve I; drawing it up a second time, allows the atmosphere to press more water into the suction-pipe, to fill it, and also part of the piston. When this is pushed down again, the water which had come through the valve C is now forced out through the valve I into the cistern KMNL., and nov the whole is full of water. When, thereſore, the piston is drawn up, the vater ſollows, and ſills it, if not 33 ſeet above the water n the cistem: and when it is pushed down again, the water which filled the piston is all thrown out into the cistern; and aſter this it delivers its ſull contents oſ water every stroke. The water in the cisteem KMNL effectually prevents the entry of any air between the two pipes; so that a very moderate compression of the belt of soſt leather at the mouth of the piston cylinder is suſficient to make all perſectly tight. It might be made diſferently. The ring of leather might be ſastened round the top of the inner eylinder at DE, and slide on the inside of the piston eylinder; but the first ſorm is most easily executedl. Musehenbroeck has given a ſigure oſ this pump in his large system oſ natural philosophy, and speaks very highly of its perſormance. But we do not see any advantage which it posseses over the common sucking-pump. He indeed says that it is without friction, and makes no mention oſ the ring of leather between the two cylinderss Such a pump vill D rais]e water extremely well to a small height, and it seems to have been a model only which he had examined: but if the suction-pipe is long, it will by no means do without the leather; for, on drawing up the piston, the water of the upper cistern will rise between the pipes, and fill the piston, and none will come up through the suction- pipe. We may take this opportunity oſ observing, that the many ingenious contrivances oſ pumps without friction are oſ little importance in great works; because the ſriction which is completely sufficient to prevent all escape of water in a well-construeted pump is but a very trifling part of the whole force:. In the great pumps which are used in mines, and are worked by a steam-engine, it is very usual to make the pistons and valves without any leather whatever. The working. barrel is bored truly cylindrieal, and the piston is made oſ metal of a size that vill just pass along it without stickingg When this is drawn up with the velocity competent to a properly loaded machine, the ꝗuantity of water which eseapes round the piston is insignifieant. The piston is made without leathers, not to avoid frietion, which is also insignificant in such works; but to avoid the necessity of frequently drawing it up for repairs through such a length oſ pipes. V. If a pump absolutely without frietion is wanted, the following seems preferable for simplicity aud performance to any we have seen, when made use of in proper situations. Let NO (Fig. 18.) be the surface oſ the water in the pit, and X the place of delivery The pit must be as deep in water as from  to NO. ABCD is a wooden trunk, round or square, open at both ends, and having a valve P at the bottom. The top oſ this trunk must be on a level with K, and has a small cistern EADF. It also communicates laterally with a rising pipe GHE, furnished with a valve at H opening upwardss LM is a beam of timber 30 fitted to the trunk as to fill it vithout sticking, and is oſ at least equal length. It hangs by a chain from a work- ſ ing-beam, and is loaded on the top with weights exceeding that oſ the column of water which it displacess. Now suppose this beam allowed to descend from the position in which it is drawvn in the figure, the water must rise all around it, in the crevice which is between it and the trunk, and also in the rising pipe; because the valve P shuts, and H opens; so that when the plunger has got to the bottom, the water vill stand at the level of K When the plunger is again dravn up to the top by the action of the moving pover, the water sinks again in the trunk, but not in the rising pipe, because it is stopped by the valve H. Then allowing the plunger to descend again, the water must again rise in the trunk to the level oſ K, and it must noW flow out at ; and the quantity discharged will be equal to the part of the beam below the surſace of the pit-water, deducting the quantity hich fills the small space between the beam and the trunk. This quantity may be reduced almost to nothing; for if the inside of the trunk and the outside of the beam be made tapering, the beam may bę let down till they exactly fit; and as this may be done in square work, a good workman can make it exceedingly accurate. But in this case, the lower half of the beam and trunk must not taper; and this part of the trunk must be of suſficient width round the beam to allow free passage into the rising pipe. Or, which is better, the rising pipe must branch off from the bottom oſ the trunk A discharge may be made from the cistern EADF, s that as little water as possible may descend along the trunk when the piston is raised. One great excellence oſ this pump is, that it is perfectly free from all the deficiencies which in common pumps result from want of being air-tightt. Another is, that the quantity oſ the water raised is precisely equal to the power expended; for any want of aceuracy in the work, while it oceasions a diminution of the quantity of water discharged, makes an equal diminution in the weight which is neces: N i - dlli Feaiu—-=;la —mu_  ;m_ uutuns d -—- ———. u;; sary for pushing down the plunger. We have seen a machine consisting of two such pumps suspended from the arms of a long beam, the upper side of which was formed into a walk with a rail on each sidee A man stood on one end till it got to the bottom, and then walked soberly up to the other end, the inclination being about twenty- five degrees at first, but gradually diminished as he went along, and changed the load of the beam. By this means he made the other end go to the bottom, and so on alternately, with the easiest oſ all exertions, and what we are most ſitted for by our strueturee With this machine, a very feeble old man, veighing 110 pounds, raised 7 cubic feet of water 113 ſeet high in a minute, and continued working 8 or I0 hours every day A stout young man, veighing nearly 185 pounds, raised 83 to the same height; and when he carried 30 pounds conveniently slung about him, he raised 9i feet to this height, working 10 hours a-day without fatiguing himself. This exceeds Desagulier's maximum of a hogshead of water 10 feet high in a minute, in the proportion of  to 7 nearly. It is limited to very moderate heights; but in such situations it is very eſfectual. It was the contrivance of an untaught labouring man, possessed of uncommon mechanical genius. VI. The most ingenious contrivance oſ a pump without frietion is that of Mr Haskins, deseribed by Desaguliers, and called by him the Quicksilver Pump. Its construetion and mode of operation are pretty complicated; but the following preliminary observations vill, we hope, render it abundantly plain. Let i Im E (Fig. 19.) be a cylindrical iron pipe, about six ſeet long, open at top. Let e  hf be another cylinder, connected with it at the bottom, and of smaller diameter. It may either be solid, or, if hollow, it must be close at top. Let a cd b be a third iron cylnder, of an intermediate diameter, so that it may move up and down between the other two without touching either, but with as little interval as possible. Let this middle eylinder communicate by means of ihe pipe AB, with the upright pipe FE, having valves C and D (both opening upwards) adjoining to the pipe oſ communication. Suppose the outer eylinder suspended by chains from the end of a working-beam, and let mercury be poured into the interval between the three cylinders till it ſills the space to oꝑ, about  of their heightt. Also suppose that the lower end of the pipe FE is immersed into a cistern o water, and that the valve D is less than 38 ſeet above the surſace oſ this vater. Now suppose a perforation made somewhere in the pipe AB, and a communication made vith an àir-pump. When the air-pump is vorked, the air contained in CE, in AB, and in the space between the inner and middle eyliuders, is rarefied, and is abstracted by the air-pump; for the valve D immediately shuts. The pressure of the atmosphere vill cause the water to rise in the pipe CE, and will cause the mercury to rise between the inner and middle cylinders, and sink between the outer and middle cylinderss Let us suppose mereury 12 times heavier than water: then for every foot that the water rises in EC, the level between the outside and inside mereury vill vary an inch; and if ve suppose DE to be 30 ſeet, then if we can rareſy the air so as to raise the water to D, the outside mercury vill be depressed to q, 7r, and the inside mereury will have risen to s, t, s q and ?r, being about 0 inches. In this state oſ things, the water will run over by the pipe BA, and every thing will remain nearly in this positionn. The columns oſ water and mercury balance each other, and balance the pressure of the atmosphere. Wahile things are in this state of equilibrium, if ve allow the eylinders to descend a little, the water vill rise in the pipe FE, which we may now consider as a suction-pipe; for by this motion the capacity of the whole is enlarged, and therefore the pressure oſ the atmosphere will still keep it full, and the situation oſ the mercury vill agoin be such that l all shall be in equilibrioo. It will be a little lower in the mside space and higher in the outside. Taking this view of things, we see clearly how the water is supported by the atmosphere at a very considerable height. The apparatus is analogous to a syphon which has one leg filled with water and the other with mercury. But it was not necessary to employ an air-pump to fill it. Suppose it again empty, and all the valves shut by their own weight. Let the cylinders descend a little The capacity of the spaces below the valve D is enlarged, and thereſore the included air is rareſied, and some of the air in the pipe CE must diffuse itself into the space quitted by the immer eylinder. Thereſore the atmosphere will press some water up the pipe FE, and some mercury into the inner space between the cylinders When the eylinders are raised again, the air whieh came from the pipe CE would return into it again, but is prevented by the valve C.Raising the cylinders to their former height would compress this air; it therefore liſts the valve D, and escapes. Another depression oſ the cylinders will have a similar effect. The water will rise higher in FC, and the mercury in the inner space; and then, aſter repeated strokes, the water vill pass the valve C, and fill the whole apparatus, as the air-pump had caused it to do before The position of the cylinders, when things are in this situation, is represented in Fig. 20, the outer and inner cylinders in their lowest position having descended about 80 inches. The mereury in the outer space stands at q, 7, a little above the middle of the cylinders, and the mercury in the inner space is near the top ?s of the inner cylinderr. Now let the cylinders be drawvn up. The water above the mereury cannot get back again through the valve C, which shuts by its own veightt. We therefore attempt to compress it; but the mereury yields, and descends in the imner space, and rises in the outer, till both are quickly on a level, about the height v v. Ifwe continue to raise the cylinders, trifling. The expense would be enormous;. for with whatever care the cylinders are made, the interval between the inner and outer cylinders must contain a very great quantity of mercury The middle eylinder must be made of iron plate, and must be without a seam, for the mercury would dissolve every solder. For such reasons, it has never come into general use. But it would have been unpardonable to have omitted the description of an invention which is s0 original and ingenious; and there are some oceasions where it may be of great use, as in nice experiments for illustrating the theory of hydraulics, it would give the finest pistons for measuring the pressures of water in pipes, &e. It is on precisely the same principle that the cylinder bellows, described in the article PNEUMATICS, are constructed. We beg leave to conclude this part of the subject with the description of a pump vithout frietion, which may be constructed in a variety oſ ways by any common carpenter, vithout the assistance of the pump-maker or plumber, and vill be very effective for raising a great quantity of water to small heights, as in draining marshes, marle pits, quarries, &. or even for the service of a house. VII. ABCD (Fig. 2l.) is a square trunk of carpenters work open at both ends, and having a little cistern and spout at top. Near the bottom there is a partition made of board, perforated with a hole E, and covered with a clack. Lſſſ represents a long cylindrical bag or pudding, made of leather or of double canvass, with a fold oſ thin leather such as sheep-skin between the canvass bags. This is firmly nailed to the board E with soſt leather between. The upper end of this bag is ſixed on a round hoard, having i hole and valve F. This board may be turned in the lathe vith a groove round its edge, and the bag fastened to it by a cord bound tight round it. The fork of the piston-rod FG is firmly fixed into this board; the bag is kept distended by a number of wooden hoops or rings of strong vire £f, sſdf, &c. put into it at a few inches distance ſrom each other. It will be proper to eonneet these hoops before putting them in, by three or four cords from iop to bottom, which vill keep them at their proper distances. Thus vill the bag have the ſorm of a barber's bellows powderpui. The distance between the hoops should be about twice the breadth of the rim oſ the wooden ring to which the upper valve and piston-rod are fixed. Nov let this trunk be immersed in the water. It is evident that if the bag be stretched from the compressed form which its own weight will give it by drawing up the pistonrod, its capacity vill be enlarged, the valve F will be shut by its ovn weight, the air in the bag will be rarefied, and the atmosphere vill press the water into the bagg When the rod is thrust down again, this water will come out by the valve F, and fill purt of the trunk. A repetition of the operation vill have a similar effect; the trunk will be filled, and the vater will at last be discharged by the spout. Here is a pump vithout friction, and perfectly tight. For the leather between the folds of canvass renders the bug impervious both to air and water. And the canvass has very considerable strength. We know from experience that a bag of 5ix inches diameter, made of sail-cloth No 3, vith a sheep-skin between, will hear a column of I5 feet of vater, and stand six hours work per day for a month without failure, and that the pump is considerably superior in effect to a common pump of the same dimensions. We must only observe, that the length oſ the bag must be three times the intended length of the stroke; so that when the pistonrod is in its highest position, the angles or ridges oſ the may be pretty acutee. IF the bag be more stretched than this, the force which must be exerted by the labourer becomes much greater than the weight of the column of water which he is raising. If the pump be laid aslope, which is very usual in these occasional and hasty drawings, it is necessary to make a guide ſor the piston- rod within the trunk, that the bag may play up and down  0 GGy  /5,ss] 9323u. Va dmuiil æ/ſiiilil vithout rubbing on the sides, which would quickly wear it out. The experienced reader vill see that this pump is very like that of Gosset and De la Deuille, described by Belidor, vol. IL. p. 130, and most writers on hydraulics. It would be still more like it, if the bag were on the under side of the partition E, and a valve placed farther down the trunk. But we think that our form is greatly preferable in point of strength. When in the other situation, the column of vater lifted by the piston tends to burst the bag, and this vith a great ſorce, as the intelligent reader well knows But in the form recommended here, the bag is compressed, and the strain on æach part may be made much less than that which tends to burst a bag of six inches diameter. The nearer the rings are placed to each other the smaller vill the strain be. The same bag-piston may be employed for a forcingpump, by placing it below the partition, and inverting the valve; and it will then he equally strong, because the resistance in this case too will aet by compression. We now come naturally io the consideration of the diſferent forms which may be given to the pistons and valves of a pump. A good deal of what ve have been describing already is reducible to this head; but, having a more general appearance, changing as it were the whole ſorm and structure oſ the pump, it was not improper to keep these things together. The great desideratum in a piston is, that it be as tight as posible, and have as little friction as is consistent with this indispensable qualit. We have already said, that the common form, when careſully executed, has these properties in an eminent degree And aceordingly this ſorm has kept its ground amidst all the improvements which ingenious artists have made. Mr Belidor, an author of the ſirst reputation, has given the deseription of a piston which voL. II. Lx is necessary: it will extend over the whole surface of the piston, and be equally great in every part oſ its surface; and ve suspect that the frietion will therefore be very great. We have very high authority for supposing that the adhesion oſ a piston of the common form, carefully made, will be such as will make it perfectly tight; and it is evident that the adhesion of Belidors piston will be much greater, and it will be productive oſ worse consequences. If the leather bag is worn through in any one place, the air escapes, and the piston ceases to be compressed altogether; whereas in the common piston there will very little harm result from the leather being worn through in one place, especially if it project a good way beyond the base of the cone. We still think the common piston preſerablee Belidor's piston would do much better inverted as the piston oſ a sucking-pump; and in this situation it would be equal, hut not superior, to the common. Belidor deseribes another forcing-piston, which he hadexecuted with success, and prefers to the common wooden forcer. It consists of a metal eylinder or cone, having a broad flanch united to it at one end, and a similar flanch which is screwed on the other end. Between these two plates are a number of rings of leather strongly compressed by the two flanches, and then turned in a lathe like a block of wood, till the whole fits tight, when dry, into the barrel. It will swell, says he, and soften with the water, and withstand the greatest pressuress We cannot help thinking this but an indifferent piston. When it wears, there is nothing to squeeze it to the barrel. It may indeed be taken out and another ring or two oſ leather put in, or the flanches may be more strongly screwed together: but all this may be done with any kind of piston; and this has therefore no peculiar merit. The following will, ve presume, appear vastly preſerable ABCD (Fig. 24) is the solid wooden or metal block of the piston; EF is a metal plate, which is turned hollow or dish-like below, 5 as to recœive within it the solid block. The piston-rod goes through the whole, and has a shoulder above the plate EF, and a nut H below. Four screw-bolts, such as i , Im, also go through the vhole, having their heads æ, m sunk into the block, and nuts above at i, . The packing or stuſfing, as ĩt is termed by the workmen, is represented at NO. This is made as solid as possible, and generally consists of soſt hempen twine well soaked in a mixture of oil, tallow, and rosin. The plate EF is gently screved down, and the whole is then put into the barrel, fitting it as tight as may be thought proper. When it wears loose, it may be tightened at any time by serewing down the nuts ĩ I, vhich cause the edges of the dish to squeeze out the packing, and compress it against the barrel to any degree. The greatest difficulty in the construetion oſ a piston is to give a suſficient pussage through it for the water, and yet allow a firm support for the valve, and fixture for the piston-rod. We shall see presently that it occasions a considerable expense of the moving power to forœ a piston vith a narrow perſoration through the water lodged in the vorkmg-barre. When we are raising water to a small height, such as 10 or 20 feet, the power :0 expended amounts to a fourth part of the whole, if the water-way in the piston is less than one-half of the seetion of the harrel, and the velocity of the piston two feet per second, which is very moderate. There can be no doubt, thereſore, that metal pistons are preferable, because their greater strength allows much wider apertures. The ſollowing piston, deseribod and recommended by Belidor, seems as perſect in these respects as the nature oſ things will allow. We shall thereſore describe it in the author's own words as a model, which may be adopted with confidence in the greatest works:  The body of the piston is a truncated metal cone Fig. 25.), haviug a small fillet at the greater end. Fig. 26. shows the proſile, and Fig. 27. the plan of its upper base; where appears a cross bar DD, pierced with an oblong mortise E for receiving the tail of the piston-rod. A band of thick and uniſorm leather AA (Fig. 26. and 28.) is put round thjs cone, and secured by a brass hoop BB ſirmly driven on its smaller end, where it is previously made thinner to give room for the hoop. sc This piston is covered with a leather valve, fortified vith metal plates GG Fig. 29.) These plates are wider than the hole of the piston, so as to rest on its rim. There are similar plates below the leather of a smaller size, that they may go into the hollow of the piston; and the leather is firmly held between the metal plates by screws H, H, vhich go through all. This is represented by the dotted circle IX. Thus the pressure of the incumbent column of vater is supported by the plates GG, whose circular edges rest on the brim of the water-way, and thus straight edges rest on the cross bar DD of Fig. 26. and 27. This valve is laid on the top of the conical box in such a manner that its middle FF rests on the cross bar. To bind all together, the end of the piston-rod is formed like a cross, and the arms MN (Fig. 30.) are made to rest on the diameter FF of the valve, the tail EP going through the hole E in the middle of the leather, and through the mortise E of the cross bar of the box; and also through another bar QE Fig. 28. and 29.) which is notehed into the lower brim of the box. A key V is then driven into the hole T in the piston-rod; and this wedges all fast. The bar QR is made strong; and its extremities project a little, so as to support the brass hoop BB, which binds the leather band to the piston.box. The adjoining scale gives the dimensions of all the parts, as they were executed for a steam-engine near Condò, where the piston gave complete satisſaction. This piston has every advantage of strength, tightness, and large vater-way The form of the valve (which has given it the name of the butterfſiy-valve) is extremely fo- vourable to the passage of the water; and as it has but half the motion of a complete circular valve, less water goes back while it is shutting. The following piston is also ingenious, and has a good deal of meritt. OPPO (Fig. Sl.) is tſię box of the piston, having a perforation Q, covered above vith a ſlat valve K, which rests on a metal plate that forms the top oſ the box. ABCBA is a stirrup of iron to which the box is fixed by strews a, a, a, a, vhose heads are sunk in the wood. This stirrup is perſorated at C, to receive the end of the pistonrod, and a nut H is screwed on below to keep it fast. DEFED is another stirrup, whose lower part at DD forms a hoop like the sole of a stirrup, which embraces a small part of the top oſ the wooden box. The lover end of the pistonrod is screwed; and beſore it is put into the holes oſ the two stirrups (through which holes it slides freely) a broad nut G is screwed on it. It is then put into the holes, and the nut H firmly serewed up. The packing RR is then wound about the piston as tight as possible till it completely fills the working-barrel of the pump. When long use has rendered it in any degree loose, it may be tightened again by screwing down the nut G. This causes the ring DD to compress the packing between it and the projecting shoulder of the box at PP; and thus causes it to swell out, and apply itself closely to the barrel. We shall add only another form of a perforated piston; vhich being on a principle different from all the preceding, vill suggest many others; each of which ill have its peculiar advantagess. OO in Fig. 2. represents the box of this piston, fitted to the working- barrel in any of the preceding vays as may be thought best. AB is a crossbar of four arms, which is fixed to the top of the hox. CF is the piston-rod going through a hole in the middle oſf AB, and reaching a little way beyond the bottom of the box. It has a shoulder D, which prevents its going too ſar through. On the lower end there is a thick metal plate, turned conical on its upper side, s0 as to fit a conical seat PP in the bottom of the piston-box. When the piston-rod is pushed down, the friction on the barrel prevents the box from immediately yielding. The rod therefore slips through the hole of the eross-bar AB. The plate E, therefore, detaches itself ſfrom the box. When the shoulder D presses on the bar AB, the box must yield, and be pushed down the barrels, and the water gets up through the perſoration. When the piston. rod is dravn up again, the box does not move till the plate E lodged in the seat PP, and thus shuts the water-way; and then the piston lifts the water which is above it, and acts as the piston of a sucking-pump. This is a very simple and effective construetion, and makes a very tight valvee It has been much recommended by engineers of the first reputation, and is frequently used; and from its simplicity, and the great solidity oſ vhich it is capable, it seems very fit for great workss But it is evident that the water-way is limited to less than onehalf of the area of the working-barrel. For if the perforation oſ the piston be one-half of the area, the diameter ol the plate or ball EF must be greater; and therefore less than halſ the area will be leſt for the passage of the water by its sides. We now come to consider the ſorms which may be given to the valves of a hydraulic engine. The requisites oſ a valve are, that it shall be tight, of suſficient strength to resist the great pressures to which it is exposed, that it afford a sufficient passage for the water, and that it do not allow much to go back while it is shutting. We have not much to add to what has been said already on this subject. The valves which accompany the pump of Fig. 5. are called clack-valves, and are all the most obvious and common; and the construction deseribed on that occasion is as perſect as any. We only add, that as the six feet diameter, which discharged 20 hogsheads of vater every stroke, and made 12 strokes in a minute, raisng the water above 22 feet. There is another form of valve, called the button or tailvalve. It consists of a plate of metal AB (Fig. 34.) turned conical, 50 as exactly to fit the conical cavity a b oſ its box. A tail CD projects ſrom the under side, which passes through a cross-bar EF in the bottom of the hox, and has a little knob at the end, to hinder the valve from rising too high. This valve, hen nicely made, is unexceptionable. It has great strength, and is thereſore proper for all severe strains, and it may be made perfectly tight by grinding. Accordingly it is used in all cases where this is of indispensable consequence. It is most durable, and the only kind that will do for passages where steam or hot water is to go through. Its only imperſection is a small water-way; which, from what has been said, cannmot exceed, nor indeed equal, one- half of the area oſ the pipe. If we endeavour to enlarge the vater-way, by giving the cone very little taper, the valve frequently sticks so fast in the seat that no force can detach themAnd this sometimes happens during the working of the machine; and the jolts and blows given to the machine in taking it to pieces, in order to discover what has been the reason that it has discharged no vater, frequently detaches the valve, and ve find it quite loose, and cannot tell what has deranged the pump. When this is guarded against, and the diminution of the water. way is not of very great consequence, this is the best ſorm of a valve. Analogous to this is the simplest of all valves, represented in Fig. 35. It is nothing more than a sphere oſ metal A, to which is fitted a seat with a small portion BC oſ a spherical cavity. Nothing can be more effectual than this valve; it always ſalls into its proper place, and in every position fits it exactly. Its only imperſection is the n great diminution of the water-way. If the diameter oſ the sphere does not considerably exceed that of the hole, the touching parts have very little taper, and it is very apt to stick fast. It opposes much less resistance to the passage of the water than the ſlat under-surſace of the button-valve. N. BIt would be an improvement of that valve to give it a taper- shape below like a boys top. The spherical valve must not be made too light, otherwise it will be hurried up by the water, and much may go back while it is returning to its place. Belidor describes with great minuteness (vol. II. p. 221, &c.) a valve which unites every requisite. But ĩt is of such nice and delicate construetion, and its defects are so great when this exactness is not attained, or is impaired by use, that we think it hazardous to introduce it into a machine in a situation where an intelligent and accurate artist is not at hand. For this reason we have omitted the description, which cannot be given in few words, nor without many figures; and desire our curious readers to consult that author, or peruse Dr Desaguliers' translation of this passage. Its principle is precisely the same with the following rude contrivance, with which we shall conclude the descriptive part of this article: Suppose ABCD (Fig. 36.) to be a square wooden trunk. EF is a piece of oak-board, exactly fitted to the trunk in an oblique position, and supported by an iron pin which goes through it at I, one-third oſ its length from the lower extremity EThe two ends of this board are bevelled, s0 as to apply exactly to the sides of the trunk. It is evident, that if a stream of water comes in the direction BA, its pressure on the part IF oſ this board will be greater than that upon"EI. It will therefore ſorce it up and rush through, making it stand almost parallel to the sides oſ the trunk. To prevent its rising so far, a pin must be put in its ay When this current of water changes its diretion, the pressure on the upper side of the board being again greatest on the portion IF, it is forced back again to its former situation; and ĩts two extremities resting on the opposite sides of the trunk, the passage is completely stopped. This board thereſore performs the office of a valve; and this valve is the most perfect that can be, because it offers the freest passage to the water, and it allows very little to get back while it is shutting; for the part IE brings up half as much water as IF allows to go down. It may be made extremely tight, by fixing two thin fillets H and G to the sides of the trunk, and covering those parts of the board with leather which applies to them; and in this state it perfectly resembles Belidor's fine valve. And this construction of the valve suggests, by the way, a form of an occasional pump, which may be quickly set up by any common carpenter, and vill be very effectual in small heights. Let a b c de (Fig. 86.) be a square box made to slide along this wooden trunk without shake, having two of its sides projecting upwards, terminating like the gable-ends of a house. A piece of wood è is mortised into these two sides, and to this the piston-rod is fixed. This box being furnished with a valve similar to the one below, will perform the office of a piston. If this pump be immersed so deep in the water that the piston shall also be under vater, we scruple not to say that its performance vill be equal to any. The piston may be made abundantly tight by covering its outside neatly with soſt leatherAnd as no pipe can be hored with greater accuracy than a very ordinary workman can make a square trunk, we presume that this pump vill not be very deficient even for a considerable suction. We now proceed to the last part of the subject, to consider the motion of water in pumps, in reference to the force vwhich must be employedl. What we have hitherto said vith respect to the ſorce which must be applied to a piston, related only to the sustaining the water at a certain height; but in actual service we must not only do this, but we must discharge it at the place of delivery in a certain quantity; and this must require a foree superadded to what is necessary for its mere support at this height This is an extremely intricate and diſficult subject, and very imperfeetly understood even by professed engineers. The principles on which this knovledge must be ſounded are of a much more abstruse nature than the ordinary laws of hydrostatics; and all the genius of Newton was employed in laying the foundation of this part of physical scienceIt has been much cultivated in the course of this century by the first mathematicians of Europe. Daniel and John Bernoulli have written very elaborate treatises on the subject, under the very apposite name of HYDRODN AMICS; in which, although they have added little or nothing to the fundamental propositions established in some sort by Newton, and acquiesced in by them, yet they have greatly contributed to our progress in it by the methods which they have pursued in making application of those fundamental propositions to the most important eases. It must be acknovledged, however, that both these propositions, and the extensions given them by these authors, are supported by a train of argument that is by no means unexceptionable; and that they proceed on assumptions or postulates which are but nearly true in any case, and in many are inadmissible: and it remains to this hour a wonder or puzzle how these propositions and their results correspond vith the phenomena which we observe. But fortunately this correspondence does obtain to a certain extent. And it seems to be this correspondence chieſly vhich has given these authors, with Newton at their head, the confidence which they place in their respective principles and methods: for there are considerable differences among them in those respects; and each seems convinced that the others are in a mistake. D' Alembert and La Grange have greatly correeted the theories of their predecessors, and have proceeded on postulates which come much nearer to the real state of the casee. But their investigations involve us in such an inextricable maze of analytical investigation, that even when we are again conducted to the light of day by the clue which they have given us, ve can make no use of what we there discovered. But this theory, imperſect as iĩt is, is of great service. It generalizes our observations and experiments, and enables us 1o compose a practical doctrine ſrom a heap of facts which otherwise must have remained solitary and unconnected, and as combersome in their application as the characters of the Chinese writing. The fundamental proposition of this practical hydrodynamics is, that water, or any fluid contained in an open vessel of indeſinite magnitude, and impelled by its weight only, will flow through a small orifice with the velocity vhich a heavy body would acquire by falling from the horizontal surface of the ſluid. Thus, if the orifice is 16 feet under the surface of the water, it will issue with the velocity oſ 32 feet in a second. Its velocity corresponding to any other depth h of the orifice under the surface, will be had by this easy proportion: As the square root of 16 is to the square root of h; s0 is 82 feet to the velocity required: or, alternately,  16: 82 d h: v, and u 82 vh 8h: that is, multiply the square root o the height in ſeet by cight, and the product is the required velocity. On the other hand, it frequently oocurs, that we want to disoover the depth under the surſace which vill produce a known velocity v. Therefore  h v and h/ 5 that is, divide the square of the velocity by 64, and the quotient is the depth wanted in feet. This proposition is suſficient for all our purposess For since water is nearly a perfect fiuid, and propagates all impressions undiminished; we can, in place of any pressure of a piston or other cause, substitute a perpendicular eolumn of water whose weight is equal to this pressure, and will thereſore produce the same efflux. Thus, if the surface of a piston is halſ a square foot, and it be pressed down with the weight oſ 500 pounds, and we would wish to know vith what velocity it would cause the water to flow through a small hole, ve know that a column of water of this weight, and of half a foot base, would be 16 feet high. And this proposition teaches us, that a vessel of this depth vill have a velocity of eſflux equal to 82 feet in a second. If therefore our pressing power be of such a kind that it can continue to press forward the piston with the force of 500 pounds, the water ill flow with this velocity, whatever be the size oſ the hole All that remains is, to determine vhat change of actual pressure on the piston results from the motion oſ the piston itself, and to change the velocity of efflux in the subduplicate ratio oſ the change of actual pressure. But before we can apply this knowledge to the circumstances which take place in the motion of water in pumps, ve must take noticæ of an important modification oſ the fundamental proposition, which is but very obscurely pointed out by any good theory, but is established on the most regular and unexceptionable observation. If the eſſlux is made through a hole in a thin plate, and the velocity is computed as above, we shall discover the quantity of water which issues in a second by observing, that it is a prism or cylinder oſ the length indicated by the velocity, and having its transverse section equal to that of the orifico. Thus, in the example already given, supposing the hole to be a square inch, the solid contents of this prism, or the quantity of water issuing in a second, is 1 x 82 x 12 cubic inches, or 84 cubic inches. This we can easily measure by receiving it in a vessel of known dimensions. Taking this method, we uniformly find a deficiency of nearly 88 parts in 100; that is, if we should obtain 100 gallons in any number of seconds, ve shall in fact get only 62. This is a most regular ſact, whether the velocities are great or small, and whatever be the size and form of the orifioo. The deficiency increases indeed in a very minute degree with the velocities. If, for instance, the depth of the orifice be one foot, the discharge is s; if it be 16 feet, the discharge is ſv⸗e. This deficiency is not owing to a diminution of velocity; or the velocity may be easily and accurately measured by the distance to which the jet will go, if directed horizontally. This is found to correspond very nearly with the proposition, making a very small allowance for friction at the border of the hole, and for the resistance oſ the air. Sir Isanc Newton ascribed the deficiency with great justice to this, that the lateral columns of water, surrounding the column which is incumbent on the orifice, press towards the orifice, and contribute to the expense equally with that column. These lateral filaments, therefore, issue obliquely, crossing the motion of the central stream, and produce a contraction of the jet; and the whole stream does not acquire a parallel motion and its ultimate velocity till it has got to some distance from the orifice. Careſul observation showed him that this was really the case. But even his genius could not enable him to ascertain the motion of the lateral filaments by theory, and he was obliged to measure every thing as he saw it. He ſound the diameter 6ſ the jet at the place oſ the greatest contraction to be precisely suCh as accounted for the deficiency. His explication has been unanimously acquiesced in; and experiments have been multiplied to ascertain all those circumstances which our theory cannot determine à priori. The most complete set of experiments are those of Michelotti, made at Turin at the expense of the Prince of Piedmont. Here jets were made of 1, 2, 8, and 4 inches diameter; and the water received into cisterns most accurately formed of brick, and lined with stucoo. It is the result of these experiments vhich we have taken for a measure of the deficiency. We may thereſore consider the vater as ſlowing through a hole oſ this contracted dimension, or substitute this for the real orifice in all caleulations. For it is evident that if a mouth-piece (s0 to call it) were made, whose internal shape precisely tallied with the form which the jet assumes, and if this mouth- piece be applied to the orifice, the water vill flov out without any obstructionn. The vessel maj therefore be considered as really having this mouth-pieceNay, ſrom this we derive a very important observation,  that if, instead of allowing the water to flov through a hole of an inch area made in a thin plate, we make it flow through a hole in a thick plank, s0 formed that the external oriſice shall have an inch area, but be widened internally agreeably to the shape which nature forms, both the velocity and quantity vill be that which the fundamental proposition determiness Michelotti measured with great care the form oſ the great jets of three and four inches dinmeter, and found that the bounding curve was an elongated trochoid. He then made a mouth-piece of this form for his jet of one inch, and another for his jet of two inches; and he found the discharges to be æ⸗ and /*ùs; and he, vith justice, aseribed the triſling deficiency which still remuained, partly to frietion and partly to his not having exactly suited his mouth-piece to the natural form. We imagine that this last circumstance vas the sole cause: for, in the first place, the water in his experiments, before getting at his jet-holes, had to pass along a tube of eight inches diameter. Now a jet of four inches bears too great a proportion to this pipe; and ĩts narroWness undoubtedly hindered the lateral clumns from eontributing to the eſflux in their due proportion, and therefore rendered the jet less convergent. And, in the next place, there can be no doubt (and the observations of Daniel Bernoulli confirm it) but that this convergency begins within the vessel, and perhaps at a very considerable distance from the orificee. And we imagine, that iſ accurate observations could be made on the motion of the remote lateral particles within the vessel, and an internal mouth-piece were shaped according to the curve which is described by the remotest particle that we can observe, the efflux of water would almost perfectly tally vith the theory But indeed the coincidence is already suſficiently near for giving us very valuable information. We learn that the quantity of water which ſlows through a hole, in consequence of its ovn weight, or by the action of any force, may be increased one halſf by properly shaping the passage to this hole; for we see that it may be increased from 62 to near 99. But there is another modiſication of the eſflux, which ve confess our total incapacity to explain. If the water issues through a hole made in a plate whose thickness is about twice the diameter of the hole, or, to express it better, if it issues through a pipe whose length is about twice its diameter, the quantity discharged is nearly 4, of what results from the proposition. If the pipe be longer than this, the quantity is diminished by friction, vhich increases as the length of the pipe increases. If the pipe be shorter the vater vill not fill it, but detaches itselſ at the very entry of the pipe, and flows with a contracted jet. When the pipe is of this length, and the extremity is stopped with the finger, so that it begins to flow with a full mouth, no subsequent contraction is observed; but merely striking on the pipe with a key or the knuckle is generally suſficient to detach the water in an instant from the sides of the pipe, and reduce the efflux to .9. This effect is most unaccountablee It certainly arises from the mutual adhesion or attraction between the water and the sides oſ the pipe; but hov this, acting at right angles to the motion, should produce an inerease from 62 to 82, nearly ;, we cannot explain. It shows, however, VOL. II. 2y the prodigious force oſ this attraction, which in the space of two or three inches is able to communicate a great velocity to a very great body of water. Indeed the experiments on capillary tubes show that the mutual attraction of the parts of water is some thousands of times greater than their weight. We have only further to add, that every increase of pipe beyond two diameters is accompanied with a diminution oſ the discharge; but in what ratio this is diminished it ĩs very diſficult to determinee. We shall only observe at present that the diminution is very great. A pipe oſ 2 inches diameter and 30 feet long has its discharge only i3 oſ vhat it would be if only 4 inches long. If its length be 60 feet, its discharge will be no more than 5. A pipe of 1 inch diameter would have a discharge oſ 4 and /4b in the same situation. Hence we may conclude that the discharge of a 4-inch pipe of 80 ſeet long vill not exceed ꝗ of vhat it would be if only 8 inches long. This will suffiœ for our present purposes; and the determination of the velocities and discharges in long conduits from pump-machines will be found in our dissertation on Waræa- Worxs. At present we shall confine our attention to the pump itslf;, and to what will contribute to its improvement Before we can proceed to apply this fundamental proposition to our purpose, we must anticipate in a loose way a position of continual use in the construction of water-works. Let water be supposed stagnant in a vessel EFGH Fig. 37.), and let it be allowed to flow out by a tylindrical pipe HIKL, divided by any number of pãrtitions B, C, D, &c. Whatever be the areas B, C, D, of these orifices, the velocity in the intermediate parts of the pipe vill be the same; for as much passes through any one orifice in a second as passes through any other in the same time, or through any section of the intervening pipe. Let this velocity in the pipe be V, and let the area oſ the pipe Le A. The velocity in the oriſices B, C, D, must be v v &e. Let g be the velocity acquired in a second by a heavy body. Then, by the general proposition, the height of water in the vessel which will produce the velocity 3 Aſter this passage the ; : . VIA: in the first orifice alone, is 355 velocity is again reduced to V in the middle of the space between the ſirst and second orifices. In the second orificœ VA this velocity is changed to ſi This alone would have re2 quired a height of water b But the water is already moving vith the velocity V, which would have resulted from a height of water in vessel (Which we shall, in the language oſ the art, call the Head of Water) equal to 2 Thereſore there is only required a head of water via v:v:/n . 57 33 ) Thereſore the whole height necessary for producing the eſflux through both oriſices, 50 as still to preserve the velocity V in the intervening : ipe, is ſ AA In lik the third Fipe, is 5x J t G- n like manner the C i 2 orifico D would alone require a head oſ water 5 x 51 and all the three would require a head æ p| + 52 By this induction may easily be seen what head is necessary ſor producing the efſlux through any number of orifices. Let the expense or quantity of water discharged in an unit of time (suppose a second) be expressed by the symbol Q. This is measured by the product of the velocity VA by the area of the orific]e, and is therefore VA, o 2 x B, or ⸗- x C, &e. and V: S . Thereſore ve may compute the head of water (which we shall express by H) in reſerence to the quantity oſ water discharged, because this is generally the interesting circumstancee In this view  a'8 {a7? ve have H x a : which shows that the head of water necessary for producing the dicharge increases in the proportion oſ the square of the quantity of water hich is discharged. These things being premised, it is an easy matter to determine the motion of water in a pump, and the quantity discharged, resulting from the action of any force on the piston, or the force which must be applied to the piston in order to produce any required motion or quantity discharged. We have only to suppose that the force employed is the pressure of a column of water of the diameter of the vorking-barrel; and this is over and above the force which is necessary for merely supporting the water at the height of the place of delivery The motion of the water will be the same in both cases. Let us, first of all, consider a sucking-pump. The motion here depends on the pressure of the air, and ill be the same as if the pump were lying horizontally, and communicated with a reservoir, in which is a head oſ water sufficient to overcome all the obstructions to the motion, and produce a velocity of efflux such as we desire And here it must be noted that there is a limit. No velocity of the piston can make the water rise in the suction-pipe with a greater velocity than what would be produced by the pressure of a column of water 33 feet high; that is, about 46 feet per second. Let the velocity of the piston be V, and the area oſ the working-barrel he A. Then, if ihe vater ſills the barrel as fast as the piston is drawvn up, the discharge during the i—————————————m  —m—— rise of the piston, or the number of cubic feet oſ water per second, must be æ VXA. This is always supposed, and we have already ascertained the circumstances which ensure this to happen. If, therefore, the water arrived with perfect freedom to the piston, the force necessary for giving it this velocity, or for discharging the quantity VXA in a second, would be equal to the weight of the pillar of 2 water whose height is i and base A. It does not appear at first sight that the force necessary for producing this discharge has any thing to do with the obstructions to the ascent of the water into the pump, because this is produced by the pressure of the atmosphere, and it is the action of this pressure which is measured by the head of water necessary for producing the internal motion in the pump. But we must always recolleet that the piston, before bringing up any water, and supporting it at a certain height, was pressed on both sides by the atmosphere While the air supports the column below the piston, all the pressure expended in this support is abstracted from its pressure on the under part of the piston, while its upper part still supports the whole pressuree The atmosphere continues to press on the under surface of the piston, through the intermedium of the water in the suctionpipe, with the difference of these two forcesNow, while the piston is drawn up vith the velocity V, more of the atmospheric pressure must be expended in causing the water to follow the piston; and it ĩs only with the remainder of its vhole pressure that it continues to press on the under surface of the piston. Therefore, in order that the piston may be raised with the velocity V, a ſorce must be applied to it, over and above the force necessary for merely supporting the column of water, equal to that part of the atmospherie pressure thus employed; that is, equal to the weight of the head of water necessary for ſorcing the water up through the suction- pipe, and producing the velocity V in the working-barrel. Therefore let B be the area of the mouth of the suetionpipe, and C the area of the fixed valve, and let the suction-pipe be of equal diameter with the working-barrel The head necessary for producing the velocity V on the : porking barsl s 34-1) If d express the density of water; that is, iſ d be the number of pounds n a cubic foot of water, then d A vill express the weight . . V: . of a column whose base is A, and height V all being reckoned in feet. Thereſore the force which must be ap: plied, vhen estimated in pounds, will be d Av 25 &) The ſirst general observation to be made on what has been said is, that the power which must be employed to produce the necessary motion, in opposition to all the obstacles, is in the proportion of the square of the velocity which we would produce, or the square of the quantity of water ve would discharge. We have hitherto proceeded on the supposition, that there is no contraction of the jet in passing through these two orifices. This ve know would be very ſar from the truth. We must thereſore accommodate things to these circumstances, by diminishing B and C in the ratio of the contraction, and calling the diminished areas b and c; then : 2 we have p &/ i5 a What this diminution may be, depends on the form of the parts. If the fixed valve, and the entry into the pump, are simply holes in thin plates, then  % B and c 1W C. The entry is commonly widened or trumpet-shaped, which diminishes greatly the contraction: but there are other obstacles in the way, arising ſrom the strainer usually put round it to keep out filth. The valve may have its contraction greatly diminished also by its box being made bell-shaped internally; nay, even giving it a cylindrical box, in the manner of Fig. 83. is better than no box at all, as in Fig. 5.; for such a cylindrical box will have the unaccountable effect of the short tube, and make b  Ns B, instead of  B. Thus we see that circumstances seemingly very trifling may produce great effects in the perſormance of a pump. We should have observed that the valve itself presents an obstacle which diminishes the motion, and requires an increase of power; and it would seem that in this respect the clack or butterfly-valve is preferable to the button-valve. Exomple. Suppose the velocity of the piston to be 2 feet or 24 inches per second, and that the two contracted areas are each ith of the area of the pump, which is not much less than what obtains in ordinary pumps. We have v:rrA A  &æ1) = ſi @5 + a5 1)  56,7 inches, and the force which we must add to what will merely support the column is the weight of a pillar of water incumbent on the piston, and something more than three feet high. This would be a sensible portion of the vhole force in raising water to small heights. We have supposed the suction-pipe to be of the same diameter with the working-barrel; but it is usual to make it of smaller diameter, generally equal to the water-way oſ the fixed valvee This makes a considerable change in the force necessary to be applied to the piston. Let a be the area of the suction-pipe, the aren of the entry being still B; and the equivalent entry without contraction being still b, we have the velocity at the entrance ay and the producing head of vater After this the velociAV 25 . AV i ; i ty is changed to  in the suction-pipe, vith which the vater arrives at the valve, whero it is again changed to AV and requires ſor this change a head of water equal o XV 255 A*V? equivalent to the effect of a head of water ę TherBut the velocity retained in the suction-pipe is ſore the head necessary for producing such a current through the fixed valve, that the water may follow the pis2 .V: :V2 ton with the velocity V, is 2 n or 2 2 2 z - A52) ſiis is eridently less thn before, because a is less than A, and therefore a is greater than unity, vhich was the last term oſ the former formula. There is some advantage, therefore, derived from making the diameter of the suction-pipe less than that of the working-barrel: but this is only because the passage of the fixed valve is smaller, and the inspection of the formula plainly points out that the area of the suetion-pipe should be equal to that of the fixed valvee When it is larger, the vater must be accelerated in its passage through the valve; which is an useless expense of force, because this velocity is to be immediately reduced to Vin the working-barrel. If the foregoing example be computed with a equal to onefourth of A, ve shall find the head H equal to Z9 inches instead of 37. But this advantage oſ a smaller suction-pipe is in all cases very moderate; and the pump is alvays inſerior to one of uniform dimensions throughout, having the oriſice at the fixed valve of the same arean And if these orifices are considerably diminished in any proportion, the head necessary ſor overcoming the obstacles, so that the required velocity V may still be produced in the working-barrel, is greatly increased. If we suppose the area a one-ninth of A, vhich is frequently done in house-pumps, where the diameter of the suction-pipe does seldom exceed one- third of that of the working-barrel; and suppose every thing made in proportion to this, which is also usual, because the unskilled pump-makers study a symmetry which satisſies the eye; ve shall find that the pump taken as an example vill require a head of vater—13 feet and upwards. Besides, it must be observed, that the friction of the suetionpipe itself has not been taken into the account. This alone is greater, in most cases, than all the obstructions we have been speaking of; for if this pipe is three inches diameter, and that of the working-barrel is six, which is reckoned a Iliberal allowance for a suction-pipe, and if the fixed valve is 25 feet above the surſace of the pit-water, the frietion oſ this pipe ill amount to one-third of the whole propelling force. Thus we have enabled the reader to ascertain the force necessary for producing any required discharge of water from a pump of known dimensions; and the converse of this determination gives us the discharge which will be 2 2 produced by any given force. For making 5 + a 2 (7hich is a known quantity resulting from the dimen: : sions of the pump) /M, we have H æ M, and Vi/ pover which we have at command, vhich exceeds what is necessary for merely supporting the column of water. Thus, if we have a pump whose piston has an area of ith oſa square foot, its diameter being 6 inches; and we have to raise the water 82 feet, and can apply a power of 525 pounds to the piston; we wish to know at what rate the piston will be moved, and the quantity of water discharged ? Merely to support the column of water of this height and dia. Now H is that part of the natural meter, roquires 500 pounds. Thereſore the remaining pover, which is to produce the motion, is 25 pounds. This is the weight of a column one ſoot four inches high, and H =1,838 ſeet. Let us suppose the diameter of the suction-pipe à of that of the working-barrel, so that a  4. We may suppose it executed in the best manner, having its loer extremity trumpet-shaped, formed by the revolution of the proper throchoid. The contraction at the ent57 may thereſore be considered as nothing, and  4, a and 5 = 16. We may also suppose the orifice of the fixed valve equal to the area of the suction-pipe, s that 2 5 is also =16, and there is no contraction here; and A A: thereſore is also 16. And, lastly, z is also I6. c . : 2 2 Therefore AL2 or M, / I6  1I6  I6, 6: %H / 16. We have also 2 3 64. Nov V - ſerx Lss  2,309 feet, and the piston will move vith the velocity of to ſeet ſour inches nearly. Its velocity will be less than this, on acoount both of the frietion oſ the piston and the frietion of the water in the suetion-pipe. These two circumstances vill probably reduce it to one foot eight inches; and it can hardly he less than this. We have taken no notice of the friction of the water in the working-barrel, or in the space above the piston, because it is in all cases quite insignificant. The longest pipes employed in our deep mines do not require more than a ſew inches of head to overcome it. But there is another circumstance vhich must not be omitted. This is the resistance given to the piston in its descent. The pistons of an engine for draving water ſrom deep mines must descend again by their own weight in order to repeat their strokee This must require a preponderance on that end of the working-beam to which they are attached, and this must be overcome by the moving power during the effective stroke It makes, therefore, part of the whole work to be done, and must be added to the weight of the column of water which must be raised. This is very easily ascertainedl. Let the velocity of the piston in its descent be V, the area of the pump-barrel A, and the area oſ the piston-valve a. It is evident, that while the piston descends ith the velocity V, the water which is displaced by the piston in a second is (A—a) V. This must pass through the hole of the piston, in order to occupy the space above, which is left by the piston. If there were no contraction, the water would go through with the velocity V; but as there vill always be some contraction, let the diminished area of the hole (to be discovered by experiment) be b; the velocity therefore will be V az This requires for its production a head of 2 vater æ &l This is the height of a columm of water vhose base is not A but A—a. Calling the density of water d, we have for the weight oſ this column, and the 6 aV °2av:a—7 foree p is d x A—a x 4  2807 This we see again is proportional to the square of the velocity of the piston in its descent, and has no relation to the height to which the water is raised. If the piston has a bution-valve, its surſace is at least equal to a; and thereſore the pressure is exerted on the vater by the whole surſace oſ the piston. In this case we av? A⸗ '8b° We cannot ascertain this value with great precision, because it is extremely diſficult, if possible, to determine the resistance in so complicated a case. But the ſormula ĩs exact, if b can be given exactly; and we know vithin very moderate limits what it may amount to. In a pump of the very best construction, with a button-valve, b cannot ex5 ceed one-half of A; and thereſore cannot be less than : 5 : 8. In this case, 3 will be x In a good steam: engine pump V is about three feet per second, and : is shall have p — considerably greater than beſore. about li feet, which is but a small matter. We have hitherto been considering the sucking-pump alone: but the forcing-pump is of more importance, and apparently more diſficult of investigationHere we have to overcome the obstructions in long pipes, with many bends, contractions, and other obstructions But the consideration of what relates merely to the pump is abundantly simple. In most cases we have only io force the water into an air-vessel, in opposition to the elasticity oſ the air compressed in it, and to send it thither with a certain velocity, regulated by the quantity oſ water discharged in a given time. The elasticity of the air in the air-vessel propels it along the Mainn. We are not now speaking of the force necessary for counterbalancing this pressure of the air in the air-vessel, which is equivalent to all the subsequent obstructions, but only of the force necessary for propelling the water out of the pump vith the proper velocity. We have in a manner determined this already. The piston is solid, and the water which it forces has to pass through a valve in the lateral pipe, and then to move in the direction oſ the Main. The change of direction requires an addition oſ force to what is necessary for merely im- pelling the water through the valve. Its quantity is not easily determined by any theory, and it varies according to the abruptness of the turn. It appears from experiment, that when a pipe is bent to a right angle, without any curvature or rounding, the velocity is diminished about 2,. This would augment the head of water about 2. This may be added to the contraction of the valve-holee Let c be its natural area, and vhatever is the contraction competent to its form increase it ⸗, and call the contracted area VEA a : : This must be added to the head L necessary for merely g c. Then this will require a head of water giving the velocity Vto the water. Therefore the whole õ 1): au for thi 18 %5 t ; an iſ pover p necessary or 1s . dAV?:  A* purpose is It cannot escape the observation of the reader, that in all these formulæ, expressing the height of the column of water which would produce the velocity V in the workingbarrel of the pump, the quantity which multiplies the conſi aa depend h d stant ſactor a5 epends on the contracted passages which are in different parts of the pump, and increases in the duplicate proportion oſ the sum of those contractions. It is therefore of the utmost consequence to avoid all such, and to make the Main which leads from the forcing- pump equal to the working-barrel. If it be only of half the diameter, it has but one-fourth of the area, the velocity in the Main is four times greater than that of the piston, and the force necessary for discharging the same quantity of water is I6 times greater. It is not, however, possible to avoid these contractions altogether, without making the main pipe wider than the barrel. For if only so wide, with an entry of the same l size, the valve makes a considerable obstruetionn. Unskilful engineers endeavour to obviate this by making an enlargement in that part of the Main which contains the valve. This is seen in Fig. 14. at the valve L. Iſ this be not done with great judgment, it will increase the obstructions. For if this enlargement is full of water, the water must move in the direction of its axis with a diminished velocity; and when it comes into the main, it must again be acceleratedc In short, any abrupt enlargement vhich is to be aſterwards contracted, does as much harm as a contraction, unless it be so short that the water in the axis keeps its velocity till it reaches the contraction. Nothing would do more service to an artist, who is not well founded in the theory of hydrodynamies, than to make a few simple and cheap experiments with a vessel like that of Fig. 37. Let the horſzontal pipe be about three inches diameter, and made in joints which can be added to each other. Let the joints he about six inches long, and the holes from one-fourth to a whole inch in diameter. Fill the vessel with water, and observe the time oſ its sinking three or four inches. Each joint should have a small hole in its upper side to let out the air; and when the vater runs out by it, let it be stopped by a peg. He ill see that the larger the pipe is in proportion to the orifices made in the partitions, the eſſlux is more diminishedl. We believe that no person would suspect this who has not considered the subject minutely. All angular enlargements, all boxes, into which the pipes from different working-barrels, unite their water before it goes into a Main, must therefore be avoided by an artist who would execute a good machine; and the different contractions which are unavoidable at the seats of valves and the perforations of pistons, &e. should be diminished by giving the parts a trumpet-shape. In the air-vessels represented in Fig. 13. this is of very great consequence. The throat O, through which the wa7 E ter is forced by the expansion of the confined air, should always be formed in this manner. For it is this which produces the motion during the returning part oſ the stroke in the pump constructed like Fig. 18. No l. and during the whole stroke in No 2. Neglecting this seemingly trifling circumstance ill diminish the performance at least one-fifth. The construction of No l. is the best, for it is hardly possible to make the passage oſ the other so free from the effects of contraction. The motion of the water during the returning stroke is very much contorted. There is one circumstance that ve have not taken any notice of, viz. the gradual acceleration of the motion of water in pumps, When a force is applied to the piston, it does not in an instant communicate all the velocity which it acquires. It acts as gravity acts on heavy bodies; and if the resistances remained the same, it would produce, like gravity, an uniformly accelerated motion. But we have seen that the resistances (which are always measured by the force which just overcomes them) increase as the square of the velocity increases. They therefore quickly balance the action of the moving power, and the motion becomes uniform, in a time so short that we commit no error of any consequence by supposing it uniform from the beginning. It would have prodigiously embarrassed our investigations to have introduced this circumstance; and it is a matter oſ mere speculative curiosity: for most of our moving powers are unequal in their exertions, and these exertions are regulated by other laws. The pressure on a piston moved by a crank is as variable as its velocity, and in most cases is nearly in the inverse proportion of its velocity, as any mechanician vill readily discover. The only case in which we could consider this matter with any degree of comprehensibility is that oſ a steam-engine, or of a piston which forces. by means of a weight lying on it. In both, the velocity becomes uniſorm in a very small ſraction of a second. We have been very minute on this subjeet; for although it is the only view oſ a pump which is of any importance, it is hardly ever understood even by. professed engineers. And this is not peculiar to hydraulics, but is seen in all the branches oſ practical mechanicss. The elementary knowledge to be met with in such books as are generally perused by them, goes no farther than to state the ſorces which are in equilibrio by the intervention of a machine, or the proportion of the parts of a machine vhich will set two known ſorces in equilibrio. But when this equilibrium is destroyed by the superiority of one oſ the forces, the machine must move; and the only interesting question is, what will be the motion ?, Till this is answered with some precision, ve have learned nothing oſ any importancee Few engineers are able to answer this question even in the simplest cases; and they cannot, ſrom any conſident science, say what ill be the perſormance oſ an untried machine. They guess at it with a success proportioned to the multiplicity of their experience and their own sagacity. Yet this part of mechanios is as susceptible of accurate computation as the cases of equilibriumm We therefore thought it our duty to point out the manner of proceeding so circumstantially, that every step should be plain and easy, and that convietion should always accompany our progress This we think it has been in our pover to do, by the very simple method of substituting a column of water acting by its weight in lieu of any natural power which ve may chance to employ. To such as wish to prosecute the study of this important part of hydraulies in its most abstruse parts, ve recommend the perusal oſ the dissertations oſ Pitot and Bossut, in the Memoirs of the Academy of Paris; also the dissertations of the Chevalier de la Borda, 1766 and 1767; also the Hydroulique of the Chevalier de Buat. END OF VOLUME SECOND.