Digitizeò by Google SYSTEM OF NICAL PHILOSOPH JOHN ROBISON, LL. D. IJPESSOR OF NATUEAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINRURGHWITH NOTES, DAVID BREWSTER, LL. D. I ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON, AND SFC”RFTARY TO THP ROYAL SOCIETV OF FDINBURGU. IN FOUR VOLUMES, AND A VOLUME OF PLATES VOL. IV. EDINBURGH: FOR JOHN MURRAY, LONDON 1829. CONTENTS OF Page ELECTRICITY  Magnetism 205 Variation oſ the Compass Temperament of the Scale of Musiem  Speaking Trumpet  452 486 Marine Trumpet .Musical Trumpet   Wateh-Work- --— 580 Seamanship 610 ELECTRICITY. We cannot but be somevwhat surprised that, among the many gttempts which have been made by the philosophers oſ Britain to explain the wonderſul phenomena which are classed under the name of Eleetricity, no author of eminence, besides the Honourable Mr. Cavendish and Lord Mahon, have availed themselves of their susceptibility oſ mathematical discusion; and our wonder is the greater, because it was by a mathematical view of the subject, in the phenomena of attraction and repulsion, that the celebrated philosopher Franklin vas led to the only knowledge of electricity that deserves the name of science; for we had scarcely any leading ſacts, by which we could class the phenomena, till he published his theory of positive and negative, or plus and minus, electricity. This is founded entirely on the phenomena of attraction and repulsion. These furnish us with all the indications of the presence of the mighty agent, and the marks of its kind, and the measures of its foreco. Mechanical force accompanies every other appearance; and this accompaniment is regulated in a determinate manner. Many of the effects of electricity are strictly mechanical, vOoL. Iv. a 2 j ELECTRICITY. producing local motion in the same manner as magnetism or gravitation produce it. One should have expected that the countrymen oſ Newton, prompted by his success and his fame, would take to this mode of examination, and would have endeavoured to deduce, ſrom the laws observed in the action of this motive force, an explanation of other wonderſul phenomena, which are inseparably conneeted with those oſ attraction and repulsion But this has not been the case, iſ we except the labours of the two philosophers above mentioned, and a ſew very obvious positions which must occur to all the inventors and improvers oſ eleetrometers, batteries, and other things oſ measurable nature. This view has, however, been taken of the subject by a philosophęr of unquestioned merit, Mr. pinus oſ the Imperial Academy oſ St. Petersburgh. This gentleman, struck vith the resemblance of the electrical properties of the tourmalin to the properties of a magnet, which have alvays been eonsidered as the subjeet oſ mathematical discussion, fortunately remarked a wonderſul similarity in the whole series oſ electrical and magnetical attractions and repulsions, and set himself seriously to the classifieation of them. Having done this with great suceess, and having maturely reflected on Dr. Franklin's happy thought oſ plus and minus electricity, and his consequent theory oſ the Leyden phial, he at last hit on a mode of conceiving the whole subject of magnetism and electricity, that bids ſuir for leading us to a ſull explanation of all the phenomena; in as far, at least, as it enables us to class them with precision, and to predict what vill be the result of any proposed treatment. He candidly gives it the modest name of a hypothesis. This was published at St. Petersburgh in 1759, under the title of Theoria Electritatis et Magnelismi, and is unquestionably one of the most ingenious and brilliant performances oſ this century. It is indeed most surprising that it ĩs 50 little known in this country. This, we imagine, has ELECTRICITY. S been chieſly owing to the very slight and almost unintelligible acecount which Dr. Priestley has given of it in his history of electricity; a work which proſesses to comprehend every thing that has been done by the philosophers of Europe and America for the advancement of this part of natural science, and which indeed contains a great deal of instructive information, and, at the same time, so many loose conjectures and insigniſieant observations, that the reader reasonably believes that he has let nothing slip that was worthy of notic. We do not pretend to account for the manner in which Dr. Priestley has mentioned this work, so much, and s0 deservedly celebrated on the Continentt. We cannot think that he has read it so as to comprehend it, and imagine, that secing so much algebraic notation in every page, and being at that time a novice in mathematical learning, he eontented himself with a few seattered paragraphs vhich were free of those embarrassments; and thus could only get a very imperſect notion of the system. The Hon. Mr. Cavendish has done it more justice in the Glst volume of the Philosophical Transactions, and considers his own most excellent dissertation only as an extension and more accurate application of æpinus's Theory. That we have not an account of this exposition of the Franklinian theory of electricity in our language, is a material vant in British literature; and we trust, therefore, that our readers vill be highly pleased with having the ingenious discoveries of the great American philosopher put into a form so nearly approaching to a system of demonstrative science. We propose, thereſore, in this place, to give such a brief account of pinus's theory of electricity, as will enable the reader to reduce to a very simple and easily remembered Iaw all the phenomena of eleetricity which have any close dependence on the mechanical effects of this powerful agent of nature; referring for a demonstration of what is purely mathematical to Sir Isaac Newtons Principia, and the Dissertation by Mr. Cavendish already mentioned, except in . * =LECTRICITY. such important articles as we think ourselves able to present in a new, and, ve hope, a more ſamiliar ſorm. We do not mean, in this place, to give a system of philosophical electricity, nor even to narrate and explain the more remarkable phenomena. We conſine ourselves to the phenomena which may be called mechanical, producing measurable motion aæ their immedidte effeot; and thus giving us a principle for the mathematical examination oſ the cause oſ electrical phenomena. We shall consider the reader as acquainted with the other physical effects of electricity, and shall frequently refer to them for prooſs. Moreover, as our intention is merely to give a synoptical view oſ this elaborate and copious performance of Mr. ZEpinus, hoping that it will excite our countrymen to æ careſul perusal of so valuable a work, we shall omit most oſ the algebraic investigations contained in it, and present the conelusions in a more ſamiliar, and not less convincing, form. At the same time ve vill insert the valuable additions made by Mr. Cavendish, and many important particulars not noticed by either oſ those gentlemen. HYPOTHESIS OF ZPINUS. 1. TuE phenomena of electricity are produced by a fluid of peculiar nature, and therefore called the ELECTRIC FLUID, having the ſollowing properties: 2. First, Its particles repel each other, with a force decreasing as the distances increase. 3. Second, Its particles attract the particles of some ingredient in all other bodies, with a force decreasing, according to the same law, with an increase oſ distance; and this attraction is mutual. 4. Third, The electric fluid is dispersed in the pores of other hodies, and moves with various degrees oſ facility ELECTRICITY. 5 through the pores oſ different kinds of matter. In those bodies which we call non-electrics, such as water or metals, it moves without any perceivable obstruction; but in glass, rosins, and all bodies called electrics, it moves with very great difficulty, or is altogether immoveable. 5. Fourth, The phenomena of electricity are of two kinds; I. Such as arise from the actual motion of the fluid from a body containing more into one containing less of it. 2. Such as do not immediately arise from this transſerence, but are ĩnstances of its attraction and repulsion. These things being supposed, certain consequences necessarily result from them, which ought to be analogous to the observed phenomena of electricity, if this hypothesis be complete, or some farther modiſication of the assumed properties is necessary, in order to make the analogy perfect. 6. Suppose the body A (Plate I. fig. l.) to contain a certain quantity of fluid. Its particles adjoining to the surſace, sUCh as P, are attracted by the particles of common matter in the body, but repelled by the other particles of the ſluid. The totality of the attractive ſorces acting on P may be equal to the totality of the repulsive forces, or may he unequal. If these two sums are equal, P is in equilibrio, and has no tendency to change its place. But there may be such a quantity oſ fluid in the body, that the repulsions of the fluid exceed the attractions of the common matter. In this case, P has a tendency to quit the body, or there is an expulsive force acting on it, and it will quit the body if it be moveable Because the same must be admitted in respeet of every other particle of moveable fluid, iĩt is plain that there will be an eſflux, till the attraction of the common matter for the particles oſ fluid is equal to the repulsion of the remaining fluid. On the other hand, if the primitive repulsion of the fluid acting on the particle P be less than the attractions of the common matter, there will be the same, or at least a similar, superiority of attraction acting on the ELECTRICITY. q pels the fluid competent to a particle of matter in B, just as much as it attracts that particle oſ matter; and also, that the ſluid belonging to a purticle of matter in A, repels the fluid belonging to a particle of matter in B, just as much as the particle oſ matter in A attracts it. Thus the whole fluid in the one repels the whole fluid in the other as much as it attracts the whole matter. Since this must be conceived of every particle of comnion matter in a body, ve must admit, that vhen a body is in its natural state, the quantity of electric fluid in it is proportional to the quantity of matter, every particle being united with an equal quantity of fluid. This, however, does not necessarily require that different kinds of matter, in their natural or saturated state, shall contain the same proportion of ſluid. It is suſicient that each contains such a quantity, uniſormly distributed among its particles, that its repulsion for the fluid in another body is equal to its attraetion for the common matter in itt. It is, however, more probable, for reasons to be given aſterwards, that the quantity of electric fluid attached, or competent, to a particle of all kinds of matter is the same We shall now consider more particularly the immediate results of this hypothesis, in the most simple cases, ſrom which we may derive some elementary propositions. 10. Since our hypothesis is accommodated to the fact, that bodies in their natural state, having their natural quantity oſ electrie fluid, are altogether inactive on each other, by making this natural quantity such, that its mutual repulsion exactly balances its attraction for the common matterit follows, that wve must deduce all the clectric phenomena from a redundancy or deficiency of eleetrie fluid. This accordingly is the Franklinian doctrine. The redundant state of a hody is called by Dr. Franklin rosiTIVE or PLUS ELECTRICITY, and the deſicient state is called NEGATIVE or MIXUS ELECTRICITY. ELECTRICITY. H Q: fſær: b and prefix the sign; because ve are to consider attractions as positive, and repulsions as negative, quantities. I2. Unless, thereſore, the particle P be withheld by some other force, it will quit the body, being expelled by a force And as every superſicial particle is in a similar situation, we see that there will be an eſflux from an overcharged body, till all the redundant ſluid has quitted it. This efſlux will indeed gradually diminish as the expe lling force r diminishes; that is, as ſ diminishes, but will never cease till J be reduced to nothing. But iſ there be either an external force acting on the superficial ſluid in the opposite direction, or some internal obstruction to its motion, the efilux ill stop when the remaining expelling force is just in equilibrio with this external force, or this obstruction. 13. On the other hand, if the body contains less than its natural quantity of ſluid, there will be an influx from without; for jf there be a deficiency of fluid æf, the particle P ill be repelled with the force x ,  r L It is attracted with the force a; and thereſore the whole action ĩs sr ſr . ar + li& + T (because a r=o); that is, P is attracted with the force Fluid will thereſore enter from all quarters, as long as there is any deficiency o' the quantity necessary for saturation, unless it be opposed by some ex ternal force, or hindered by some internal obstruction. When there is a deficiency of fluid, there is a redundancy of matter, such that its attraction ſor external fluid is equal to the repulsion of a quantity 7 of fluid.. This conſirms the 10 ELECTRICITT. assumption in § I0, that the action of a body on the electric stuid depends entirely on the redundant ſluid, or the redundamt matter of the body. 14. The eſflux or influx may be prevented, either by surrounding the body with substances, through the pores of which the fluid cannot move at all, or by the body itself being of this constitutionn. And thus we see, that the very circumstance of being impervious to the ſluid, or completely permeable, renders the body capable or incapable of permanently exhibiling electrical phenomena, if surrounded by permeable bodies. This circumstance alone, thereſore, is sufficient to constitute the difſerence hetween electrics per se, and non electrics. AHere, then, is a numerous class of phenomena, which receive an explanation by this hypothetical constitution of the electric fluid. All electries per se are bodies fit ſor confining electricity in bodies which are rendered capable (by whatever means) oſ producing electrical phenomena; and no conductor, or substance which allows the electricity to pass through it, can be made electric by any of the means which produee that effect in insulators. And it is well known, that the electricity oſ electries is vastly more durable than that of non electrics in similar situations. It ĩs true, indeed, that an electrie, which has been excited so as to exhibit electric phenomena with great vivacity, loses this power very quickly iſf plunged into water, or any other condueting body. But this is owing to the redundancy or deficiency being quite superficial, so that the parts which are disposed to give out or to take in the fluid are in immediate contact with the condueting matter. That the redundancy or deſiciency is superſicial, follos from this hypothesis; ſor when the surſace is overcharged by the means employed ſor exciting, the impermeability of the electrie per se prevents this redundant ſluid ſfrom penctrating to any depth; and when the surſace has been rendered deficient in fluid, the same impermeability prevents the ſluid from expanding from the interior parts, so as to contribute to the replenishing the superſicial stratum with ſluid. ELECTRICITY. 1l If, indeed, we could fall on any way of overcharging the interior parts of a glass hall, or of abstracting the natural quantity from them, it is highly probable, that it would continue to attract or repel even aſter it had been plunged in water. Although the surrounding water would instantly take off the fluid redundant contained n the very surſace, the repulsion oſ the fluid in the internal parts would still be sensible; nay, if a very small permeability be supposed, the body would again become overcharged at the surface; just as we see, that when we plunge a red hot hall of iron into water, and take it out again immediately, ĩt is black on the surſace, and may he touched with the finger; but in half a minute aſter, it again becomes red hot. Perhaps this may be accomplished vith a globe of sealing wax, which is permeable while liquid, by electrifying it in a particular vay while in that state, and allowing it to freeze. But the reader is not far enough advanced in the hypothesis to understand the process which must be followed. He cannot but recolleet, however, many examples in coated glass, &c. where the eleetricity is most pertinaciously retained by a surſace in very close contact with conductors. 15. Let us now suppose a hody N S (ſig. 2.), containing in the half NA a quantity f of redundant fluid, and in the half AS let there be a deficiency g oſ fluid; that is, let there be a quantity of matter unsaturated, and such as will attract fluid as much as the quantity g of fluid would repel it. Let the fluid necessary for the saturation of each half of NS be Q, as before. Let the attraction of the whole matter of NA ſor a particle of fluid at N be a; and let ? be the repulsion exerted on the same particle N by the whole uniformly ditributed ſluid in NA, and let ? be the repulsion exerted by the same quantily of fluid in the remote part SA. Then the force with which the partiele N or S is attraeted by the merely saturated hody NS must be = a r r. This is evidently nothing, if the body be in its natural stat. But as NA contains the redundant ſluid ſ, and SA ĩs deficient by 12 ELECTRICITY. the quantity g, the whole action must be a ſær xr  But because a9 rr =o, the action herifr comes =p5, or because r is greater than 7, the parIrę Q . In like manner, : i gar7~r the particle S is attracted with the force l ticle N is repelled with the ſorce 16. In the mean time, a particle C, situated at the middle, must be in equilibrio, if the body be in its natural state, being equally attracted, and also equally repelled, on both sides. But as ve suppose that NA is overcharged with the quantity f, C must be repelled in the direction CS with the ſorce 4 And if e also suppose that AS is deficient by the quanr tity g, C is attracted in the direction CS with a foree & : Thereſore, on the whole it is urged in the direction CS with sfrr ſtęexr Q l 17. Hence we leam, that as long as there is any redundancy in AN, and deficiency in AS, there is a tendency of the redundant fluid to move ſrom N towards S; and, if the body be altogether permeable by the electric fluid, we cannot have a permanent state till the ſluid is similarly distributed, and equally divided, between the two halves of NS. Thereſore a state like that assumed in this example cannot be permanent in a condueting body, unless an external force act on it; but it may subsist in a non-conductor, and in a lesser degree, in all imperfect conductors. IS. It is necessary, in this place, to consider a little the nature oſ that resistance which must be assigned to the motion of the electrie fluid through the pores of the body. Iſ iĩt resemble the resistance opposed by a perſect ſluid, arising he force ELECTRICITY. 13 plely from the inertia of its purticles, then there is no inequality of force so minute but that it will operate a uniform distribution of the ſluid, or at least a distribution which will make the excess o the mutual attractions and repulsions precisely equal and opposite to the external ſorce which keeps it in any state of unequal distributionn But it may resemble the resistance to the descent of a parcel oſ small shot disseminated among a quantity of grain, or the resistance to motion through the pores of a plastic or ductile body, such as clay or leadc. Here, in order that a particle may change its place, it must overcome the tenacity of the adjoining particles oſ the body. Therefore, when an unequal distribution has been produced by an external force, the removal or alteration of that force will not be followed by an equable distribution of the fluid. In every part there will remain such an inequality of distribution, that the want of equilibrium between the electric attractions or repulsions is balanced by the tenacity of the parts. 19. We learn farther from the foregoing propositions, that a particle at N is less repelled than if the part AS were overcharged as AN is: for in that case, it would be ex pelled by a ſorce ii , which is much greater naiẽAnd, in like manner, the particle S is attracted with less force than it would be if NA were equally undercharged vith SA. 20. The condition of the body now deseribed may be changed by different methods. The redundant fluid in AN may flow into AS, where it is deſicient, till the whole be uniformly distributed; or fluid may escape from AN, and fluid may enter into AS, till the body be in its natural state The first method will be s0 much the slower as the body is less permeable, or more remarkably electric per se; and the second method will be slower than iſ the whole body were overcharged or undercharged. 21. What we have been now saying oſ a body NS that is 9vercharged at one end, and undercharged at the other, and ELECTRICITY. 15 25. When the tendency to efilux or influx is induced in this manner, by a due proportion of the redundancy and deficiency of electric fluid, the part of the body where this obtains is by no means in its natural state, and may contain either more or less than its natural quantity. But it neither acts like an overcharged nor like an undercharged body, and may thereſore be called NEUTRAL. The reader who is conversant with electrical experiments, will recollect numberless instances of this, and vill also recollect that they are important ones. Such, for example, is the case with the plates and covers of the electrophorus. These circumstances, thereſore, claim particular attention. 26. As the quantities f and & may be so chosen, that the apparatus shall be neutral, either at S or at N; they may likewise he so, that either end shall exhibit either the appearance of redundancy or deficiency. Thus, instead of neutrality at N, ve may have repulsion, as at the ſirst, by making g& less in any degree - . If, on the contrary, g be greater thanſb, the extremity N, though overcharged, vill attract fluid. In like manner, if g be less -“ the extremity S, although undercharged, will repel fluid.—We may make the following general remarks. 20. First, Both extremities Nand S cannot be neutral at the same time: for since the neutrality arises from the increased quantity of redundancy or deſiciency at the other extremity, so as to compensate for its greater distance, the activity of that extremity must be proportionably greater on the ſuid adjoining to its surface, whether externally or internall. When an overcharged extremity is rendered neutral, the other extremity attracts fluid more strongly; and when a deficient extremity is rendered neutral, the other repels fluid more strongly. All these elementary corollaries will be fully veriſied aſterwards, and give clear explanations of the most curious phenomena. ELECTRICITY. I7 oſ its conneetion with the ſluid residing in the body, which fluid is the only subject of the action of the other hody. In considering these phenomena, we shall content ourselves with a more general view of the actions which take place between the fluid or tangible matter of the one body, and the ſluid or matter of the other, so as to gain our purpOse by more simple ſormulæ than those hitherto employed. They were premised, however, because we must have recourse to them on many very important particular occasions. 30. Let there be two bodies, A and B, in their natural state. Let the tangible matter in A be called M, and let the fluid necessary for its saturation be called F, and let m and f be the tangible matter and the fluid in B. Let the mutual action between a single partiele of fluid and the matter necessary for its saturation be expressed by the indeterminate symbol æ, because it varies by a change of distance. The actions are mutual and equal. Therefore when the motion of B by the action of A is determined, the motion oſf A is also ascertainedl. We shall therefore only consider how A is aſſected. I. Every particle of fluid in A tends toward every particle of matter in B witèſ the force 2z. The whole tendency of A toward B may thereſore be expressed by æ, multiplied by the product of F and m 2. Every particle of fluid in A is repelled by every particle of fluid in B, with the same foree 22. 3. Every particle of matter in A ĩs attracted by every particle of fluid in B, with the same force. We may express this more clearly and briefly thus: I. F tends toward m with the force  F m æ 2. F tends from f with the force F f æ 3. M tends toward ſ with the ſoree V M f⸗ Therefore the sensible tendeney of A to or from B will be =2 x Fm  M7VFZ. But, by the hypothesis, the attraction of a particle of the fluid in A for a particle of the matter in B, is equal to its repulsion for the particle or parVOL. Iv. l i8 ELECTRICITY. cel of the fluid attached or competent to that particle oſ matter. Thereſore the attraction F m æ is balanced by the repulsion F ſ 2. Therefore there remains the attraction of the matter in A ſor the fluid in B unbalanced, and the hody A vill tend tovard the body B, with the ſorce M fſ1, or B attracts A with the ſorce M2. A must therefore move toward B. And, by the 3d law oſ motion, B must move toward A vith equal ſorce. 3l. But the ſact is, that no tendency oſ any kind is observed hetween bodies in their natural state. The hypothesis thereſore, is not complete. If we abide by it, as far as it is already expressed, we must ſarther suppose, that there is some repulsive force exerted between the bodies to balancæ the attraction of M for ſ. Mr. pinus, thereſore, supposes, that every particle of tangible matter repels another particle as much as it attracts the fluid necessary for its saturation. The whole action of B on A vill now be = x F mF M n  M7. Fmæ is balanced by F ſz, and M mæ by M ſ2, and no excess remains on either side. 32. æ pinus acknowledges, that this cireumstance appeared to himselſ to be hardly admissible; it seeming inconceivable, that a particle in A shall repel a particle in B, or tend ſrom it, electrically, while it attracts it, or tends toward it, by planetary gravitationn. We cannot conceive this; but more attentive consideration shewed him, that there is nothing in it contrary to the observed analogy oſ natural operations. We must acknovledge, that we see innumerable instances of inherent forces oſ attraction and repulsion; and nothing hinders us from reſerring this lately discovered power to the class oſ primitive and ſundamental powers of naturee Nor is there any diſſiculty in reconciling this repulsion with universal gravitation; for while bodies are in their natural state, the electric attractions and repulsions precisely balance ench other, and there is nothing to disturb the phenomena oſ planetary gravitation; and when bodies are not in their natural electrieal state, it is a fact that their gravitation is disturbed. Although we cannot conceive a body to have a ELECTRICITY. 19 tendency to another body, and at the same time a tendency from it, when we derive our notion of these tendencies entirely from our own consciousness of effort, endeavour, conotus, nisus accedendi seu recedendi, nothing is more certain than that bodies exhibit at once the appearances which we endeavour to express by these wordss. We can bring the north poles of two magnets near each other, in which case they recede ſrom each other; and if this be prevented by some obstacle, they press on this obstacle, and seem to endeavour to separate. If, while they are in this state, we electriſy one of them, we find that they will now approach each other; and ve have a distinct proof that hoth tendencies are in actual exertion by varying their distances, so that one or other force may prevail; or by placing a third body, which shall be affected by the one but not by the other, &e. We do not understand, nor can conceive in the least, how either force, or how gravity, resides in a body; but the effects are past contradiction. It must be granted, therefore, that this additional circumstance of  pinuss hypothesis has nothing in it that is repugnant io the observed phenomena of nature. N.B. It is not necessary to suppose (although Mr. æpinus does suppose it), that every atom of tangible matter repels every other atom. It will equally explain all the phenomena, if we suppose that every particle contains an atom or ingredient having this property, and that it is this atom alone which attracts the particles of electrical fluid. The material atoms having this property, and their corresponding atoms oſ fluid, may he very few in comparison with the number of atoms which compose the tangible matter. Their mutual speciſic action heing very great in comparison with the attraction of gravitation (as we certainly observe in the action oſ light), all the phenomena of eleetricity will be produced without any sensible eſfeet on the phenomena of gravitation, even although neither the electrie fluid nor its ally, this ingredient of tangible matter, should not gravitate. But this supposition is by no means necessary. 2 ELECTRICITY. 2l redundant matter m, will attract each other with the force m æ. 36. Fourth, It follows from these premises, that iſ either of the bodies be in its natural state, they vill neither attract nor repel each other; for, in such a case, one of the factors F, or f, orM, orm, which is necessary for making a product, is vantingg. This may be perceived independent of the mathematical ſormula; for if A contain redundant fluid, and B be in its natural state, every particle of the redundant fluid in A is as much repelled by the natural fluid in B as it is attracted by the tangible matter. 37. The three first propositions agree perfectly with the known phenomena of electricity; for bodies repel each other, whether both are positively or both are negatively electrified, and hodies alvays attract each other when the one is positively and the other negatively electrifiedc But the fourth case seems very inconsistent with the most ſamiliar phenomena. Dr Frankln and all his ſollowers assert, on the contrary, that electrified bodies, hether positive or negative, alvays attract, and are attracted, by all bodies which are in their natural state of electricity. But it will be clearly shewn presently, that they are mistaken, and that Franklins theory necessarily supposes the truth oſ the fourth proposition, othervwise two bodies in their natural state could not be neutral or inactive, as any one may perceive on a very slight examination by the Franklinian principles. Tt will presently appear, vith the fullest evidence; and, in the mean time, we proceed to explain the action of bodies which are overcharged in some part, and undercharged in another. 38. Let the body B (fig. 4.) be overcharged in the part B n, and undercharged in the part Bj, and let ſ/ and m be the redundant fluid and common matter in those parts; let A be overcharged, and contain the redundant ſluid ; let 3 and 7 express the intensity oſ action corresponding with the distances of A from the overcharged and undercharged part; of B; the part B n repels A with the force Fſ 1, 3 ELECTRICITY. 28 39. Second, Iſ the redundancy and deficiency in the two portions of B be inversely proportional to the forces, so that F: m =2: z, we shall have & 2mm 2, and w ſ7. In this case these two actions balance each other, and A is neither attracted nor repelled when at this precise distance ſrom the overcharged side of B. B may be said to be NuUTRAL with respect o A, although A and the adjoining sile of B are both overcharged. 40. But if A be placed at the same distance on the other side of B, the eſfect will be very different: For because m and m? is now changed into m z, and ſ' æ into sſæ, we have the action on A æF X & f 7), ?Pr x 7 that is, A ĩs strongly attracted. In like manner, ſ and W may be so proportioned, that when A, containing redundant fluid, ĩs placed near the undercharged end oſ SB, it shall neither be attracted nor repelled, B becoming neutral with regard to A at that precise distance. For this purpose m must be =ls . And if A be now placed at the same distance on the other side of B,  V 2 it ill be repelleq vith the ſoree F 5 Thus, when the overcharged end is rendered neutral to an overcharged hody, the other end strongly attracts it; and when the undercharged end is rendered neutral to the same body, the overcharged end strongly repels it. Similar appearances are exhibited vhen A is undercharged. These cases are of frequent occurrence, and are important, as will appear aſterwards. 41. It is easy now to see what changes vill be made on the action of B on 4, by changing the proportion of ? and . If m be made greater nn, A will be attracted in ELECTRICITY. 25 tance. This shews that æ increases faster than ? when A is brought nearer to B. Nov, since the bodies may be again rendered neutral at a greater distance than beſore, and the same appearances are still observed, it follows, that the law of action is such, that every diminution of distance causes æ to increase faster than 2?. We shall find this to be valuable inſormation. 43. Let us, in the last place, inquire into the sensible eſfect on A when it also is partly overcharged and partly undercharged. This is a much more complicated case, and is susceptible of great variety of external appearances, according to the degrees of redundancy and deficiency, and according to the kind of electricity (positive or negative) of the ends which ſront each other. 44. First, then, let the overcharged end of A (ſig: 5.) ſront the undercharged end of B, they being overcharged n N and n, but undercharged in S and 5. Let F and f be the quantity of fluid natural to each; and let F and ſ be the redundancy in N and n, and M' and n the deficiency in S and s. Moreover, let Z and Z' represent the intensity of actions oſ a particle in N on a particle in n and 5; and let 3 and ? represent the actions of a particle in S on a particle in n and in s; or, in other words, let Z, Z, æ, ?, represent the intensity of action between particle and particle, corresponding to the distances N4, N n, S s, S n. Proceeding in the same manner as in the former examples, ve easily see, that the action of B on A is EnzZVræMn⸗  Msæ zZrs mæ + Mſ⸗ ; the attractions are considered as positive quantities, having the sign + prefixed to them, and the repulsions are negative, having the sign This action will be either attractive or repulsive, according as the sum oſ the first and last terms oſ the numerator exceeds or falls short of the sum of the second and third: And the value of each term vill be greater or less, accord- 20 ELECTRICITY. ing to the quantity oſ redundant ſluid and matter, and alo 20cording to the intensity oſ the electrie action It would require several pages o state all those possible varieties. We shall thereſore content ourselves at present with stating the simplest case; because a clear eonception of this will enable the reader to ſorm a pretty distinet notion of the other possible cases; and also, because this case is very frequent, ænd is the most useſul for the explanation of phenomena. We shall suppe, that the redundant part oſ each body is just as much overcharged as the deſicient part is undercharged; æ that FM, and ſ =/u. In this case, the formula becomes - /r+: D. Here we see that the sensible or external eſſect on A depends entirely on the law oſ electric action, or the variation oſ ĩts intensity by a change oſ distancem If the sum oſ Z and ? exceæed the sum of Z and 7, A uill be attracted; but i? Z+ 2 be les than T7 + 2 A uill be repelledc This circumstance suggests to us a very perspicuous method oſ expresing these actions between particle and particle, so that the imagination shall have a ready concœption of the circumstance which determines the external complicated eſfect oſ this internal actionn. This will be obtained by measuring off ſfrom a fixed point oſ a straight Iime portions respectively equal to the distances N3, N æ, S ⸗, and S æ, between the points o the two bodies A and B, where ve suppos the ſorces oſ the redundant ſfluid and redundant matter to be concentrated, and erect ordinates having the Proportion of those ſforces IF the law oſ action be known, even though very imperſectly, we shall se, ĩth one glance, of which kind the movements or tendencies oſ the bodies will be. Thus, in fig. 5, draving the ſine C⸗, take C 2/N,, C/Nn CrS,, and Ct /S n, and erect the ordinates Pæ. Qę R7, and Tt. Iſ the electric action be like all the other attractions and repulsions which we are familiarly acquamted with, decreasing with an increa of distance, and E ELECTRICITY. x decreasing more slowly as the distances are greater, these ordinates will be bounded by a curve PORTZ, which has its convexity turned toward the axis We shall presently get ſull proof that this is the case here; but we premise this general view of the subject, that we may avoid the more tedious, but more philosophical, process of deducing the nature of the curve from the phenomena now under consideration. 45. This construetion evidently makes the pair oſ ordinates P ꝑ, Q q, equidistant with the pair Rr, Tt. Also, Pp, Rr, and Qq Ti, are equidistant pairs. It is no less clear, that the sum of Pꝑ and Tt, exceeds the sum of Q  and R7r. For if Cæ be bisected in V, and Vo be dravn perpendicular to it, cutting the straight lines PT and QR n æ and y, then æ v is the halſ sum of Pꝑ and Ti, and yo is the half sum of Q q and R?r. Moreover, if Qm and Tn are drawn parallel to the base, we see that P m exceeds R7; and, in general, that if any pair of equidistant ordinates are brought nearer to C, their difference increases, and vice versa. Also, if two pairs of equidistant ordinates be brought nearer to C, each pair by the same quantity, the difference of the nearest pair will increase more than the difference of the more remote pair. And this will hold true, although the first of the remote pair should stand between the two ordinates of the first pair. If the reader will take the trouble of considering these simple consequences with a little attention, he will have a notion of all the effects that are to be expected in the mutual actions of the two bodies, sufficiently precise for our present purpose. We shall give a much more accurate account oſ these mathematical truths in treating the subject of MAGNETISM, Where precision is absolutely necessary, and where it vill be attended vith the greatest success in the explanation of phenomena. 46. Nov let us apply this to our present purpose. First, then, When the overcharged end of A ĩs turned toward the ELECTRICITY. 29 Iſ the centre B be placed somewhere on the line AD, drawn through a certain point of the body NAS, (which ill be determined aſterwards), at right angles to NAS, the body B vill assume the position n BS', parallel to NAS, but subcontrary. For if we forcibly give it any other position n BS, it is plain that N repels n and attracts s, while S attracts n and repels . These four forces evidently combine to turn the body round its centre, and cannot balance each other till B assume the position n Bæ, where n is next to S, and 5' is next to N. If the centre oſ B have any other situation, such as B, the body vill arrange itself in some such position as n B5. It may be demonstrated, that if B be infinitely small, so that the acũon of the end of A on each of its extremities may be considered as equal, B will arrange itself in the tangent BT of a curve NB'S, such that if we drav NB', SB, and from any pont T of the tangent drav TE parallel to BN, and TF parallel to B'S, we shall have BE to BF, as the ſorce of S to the force of N. This arrangement oſ B' will be still more remarkable and distinct if N be an overcharged sphere, æand S an undercharged one, and both be insulatedl. We must leave it to the reader's reflection to see the changes which vill arise from the inequality of the redundancy and deficiency in A or B, or hoth, and proceed to consider the consequences oſ the mobility oſ the electrie ſluid. These will remove all the diſficulty and paradox that appears in some of the foregoing propositions. 51. Let the body A (fig. 4.) contain redundant ſluid, and Iet B be in its natural state, but let the fluid in A be ſixed, and that in B perfectly moveable; it is evident that the redundant fluid in A will repel the moveahle fluid in B, toward its remote extremity N, and leave it undercharged in S. The fluid will be rarefied in S, and constipated in N. We need only consider the mutual actions oſ the redundant fluid and redundant matter. It is plain that things are now in the situation described in § I5: A must be attracted by ELECTRICITY. EJ the side of s; and the repulsion of the redundant fluid in A must be conceived as balancing the united action of those two forces residing in B. 53. Hence we may conclude, that the density of the fluid in B vill inerease gradually from s to n. It will be extremely diſſicult to obtain any more precise idea of its density in the different parts oſ B, even although we knew the law of action between single particles. This must depend very much on the form and dimensions oſ B; ſfor any individual particle sustains the sensible action oſ all the redundant ſluid and redundant matter in it, since we suppose it aſfected by the more remote fluid in A. All that we can say oſ it in general is, that the density in the vicinity of s is less than the natural density; but in the vicinity of n it is greater; and therefore there must be some point between s and n where the ſluid will have its natural density. This point may be called a NEUTRAL point. We do not mean by this that a particle of superficial fluid will neither be attracted nor repelled in this placee This vill not always be the case (although it will never be greatly otherwise); nor vill the variation of the density in the difſerent parts oſ B be proportional to the force oſ A on those parts. Some eminent naturalists have been of this opinion; and, having made experiments in which it appeared to be otherwise, they have rejected the whole theory. But a little reſlection will convince the mathematician, that the sum oſ the internal ſorces which tend to urge a particle of fluid ſrom its place, and which are balanced by the action of A are not proportional to the variations oſ density, although they incrense and decrease together. We shall take the proper opportunity oſ explaining those experiments; and vill also consider some simple, but important cases, here we think the law oſ distribution oſ the fluid ascertained with tolerable precision If we suppose, on the other hand, that A is undercharged, the redundant matter in A will attract the moveable fluid in ELECTRICITY. 38 nlong the conduetor. Besides, it is well known that a condueting wire becomes positive at one end, and negative at the other, by the mere vicinity oſ an overcharged and undercharged body, and this in an instant, although it be surrounded with sealing-wax, or other non-conductors, to any thickness: in this case there can be no atmospheres to operate on the included fluidc. To this we may add Dr. Franklin's judicious experiment of whirling an electrified ball many times round his head, with great rapidity, by means of a silk line, without any sensible diminution of its electricity. It is not conceivable that an electric atmosphere could remain attached to the ball; nor could it be instantaneously formed round the ball, in every point of its motion, 50 as to be operative the moment he stopped it and tried it; for this would have exhausted or greatly diminished the electricity of the ball; whereas that sagacious philosopher aſfirms (and any person will find ĩt true), that when the air is dry, he did not observe the electricity more diminished than that of another ball which remained all the while in the same place. 55. Let the overcharged body A (fig. 6.) be brought near the ends of two oblong conductors B and C in their natural state, and lying parallel to each other; the fluid will be propelled toward their remote ends N, n, where it will be condensed, while it will be rarefied in the ends S and s, adjacent to A. Both will be attracted by A, and vill attract it. But the redundant fluid in NB will repel the redundant ſluid in n C; and the redundant matter in SB will repel the redundant matter in s C. For this reason the bodies B and C will repel each other, and vill separate; but SB attracts n C, and NB attracts s C; and on this account the bodies should approach: but the distances of the attracting parts being greater than those of the repelling parts, the repulsions must prevail, and the bodies must really separate. It is equally clear that the very same sensible appearance vill result from bringing an undercharged body near the VOL. IV. C ELECTRICITY. S85 vill not be so unequable a distribution of the fluid, and therefore there ill not be such a strong attraction between imperſect as between perfect conductors. But besides this, we see that an incomparably longer time must elapse before things come to a state of equilibrium Each particle of fluid employs time to overcome the obstacle to its motion, and it cannot advance till aſter the succeeding ones, each escaping in its turn, have again come up vith the foremost. An important consequence results ſrom this The neutral point, where the ſluid is of the natural density, will not be so far from the other body as it would have been without thes obstructions; and this point will be a considerable while of advancing along the imperfeet conductor. At the first approach of the overcharged electrie, the near extremity of the imperſect conductor becomes a little undercharged, and the neutral point advances from the very extremity a small way, the displaced fluid being crowded a little before it, and giving way by degrees as its foremost particles get past the obstructions. The motion forvard takes place over a considerable extent at the very first; namely, in that part of the conductor where the propelling power of the neighbouring electric ĩs just able to push a particle over the obstruetionn. As the propulsion goes on, the neutral point must gradually advance, and at last reach a certain distance, determined by the degree oſ the obstruction. It is plain, that the final accumulation at the remote end of the imperſect eonduetor will be less than in a perfect conductor, and the neutral point will be nearer to the other end. 57. There is another remarkable consequence of the obstrucetion. It must always happen that, at the beginning of the action, the greatest constipation will not be towards the remote extremity, but in a place much nearer to the disturbing cause. Beyond this, the constipation vill diminish. As time elapses during this operation, this constipated fluid acts on the ſluid heyond it by repulsion, and may do this vith suſſicient ſorce to displace some oſ it, and render a part o c ẽ 36 ELECTRICITY. the imperfect conduetor deficient, with a small eonstipatio beyond it. This may, in like manner, produce a rareſaction farther on, followed by another condensation; and this may be ſrequently repeated when the obstruction is very great, and the repulsion of the overcharged body very great also. This can be strictly demonstrated in some very simple cases, but the demonstration is very tedious: As the result, however, is of the first importance in the theory oſ electricity, and serves to explain some of the most abstruse phenomena, we wish the reader to have some stronger ground of conſidence than the above bare assertion. He may observe similar effects of causes precisely similar. If we dip the end oſ a ſlat ruler into water, and if, aſter allowing the water to become perſectly still, ve move the ruler gently along in a direction perpendicular to the face, we shall observe a single wave heap up before the ruler, and keep beſore iĩt, all the rest of the water before it remaining still: but iſ ve do the same thing in a vessel of clammy ſluid, especially if the clammy part is sWvimming on the surſace of a more perfect fluid, like a cream, we shall observe a series of such waves to curl up before the ruler, and form before it in succession; and if we have previously spotted the surface of the eream, we shall see that ĩt is not the same individual waves that are pushed beſore the ruler, but that they are successively formed out of different parts of the surſace, and that the particles which, at one ſime, form the summit of a wave, are, imme.diately aſter, at the bottom, &e. In like manner, when a cannon is fired in clear air, at no great distance, we hear a single snap; but, in a thick fog, we hear the snap both preceded and followed by a quivering noise, resembling the rushing of a fluttering wind, which lasts perhaps half a second. A slight reſlection on these ſacts will shew that they are necessary results oſ the mechanical laws oſ such obstruetion. The consequence oſ this mode of action must be, that an imperſect conductor may have more than one neutral point, BELECTRICITY. 3 ænd more than one overcharged and undercharged portion, s0 that its action on distant bodies may be extremely various. The formula of  28. was accommodated to this case, and vill be found to have very curious resultss Another body may be placed in the direction oſ the axis, and vill be attracted at one distance, repelled when this distance is increased, and again attracted when at a still greater distance, &e. &e. Suppose the obstruction not to be considerable: The immediate operation of the neighbouring overcharged body will be the produotion of an undercharged part in the adjoining extremity, an overcharged part beyond this, an undercharged portion farther on, &e. In a little while these will shift along the conductor; one after another vill disappear at the farther end, and the body vill have at last but one neutral pointt. A greater obstruetion vill leave the body, finally, with more than one neutral point, and their ultimate number will be greater in proportion as the obstruction to the fluid's motion is supposed greater. 58. No, let the overcharged body, the cause of this unequal distribution, be removedlc. We have seen § 17. that when a body contains its natural quantity of fluid, but unequally distributed, there is a ſorce acting on every particle, and tending to restore the original equable distribution; and that such a force remains as long as there is any inequaIity in this respect. If, thereſore, there be no obstruction, the uniform distribution will take place immediately; for it is well known, that the speed with which electricity is propagated is immense. The elasticity, or the attractive and repulsive forces, must be very great indeed when compared with any that we know, except, perhaps, the force which impels the particles of lightt. The electricity, thereſore, of a perfect conductor, that is, its power of acting on other bodies in the same way that an original eleetrie acts on them, must be quite momentary, and cease as soon as the inducing cause is removed. The conductor is electrical merely in e3S 38 ELECTRICITY. consequence oſ its position. Hence the propriety of our denominations Nothing material is supposed in this theory to be communicated from the overcharged body: Nay, this theory teaches, that the sensible electricity of the overcharged body is augmented in some respects; for it becomes more overcharged in the part nearest to the conductor. Indeed it becomes less overcharged on the other end, and will act less forcibly on that side than if the conduetor were avay. It may be remarked here (it should have been mentioned in § 55.), that when F is presented in the manner shewn in fig. 6. the body B becomes more strongly overcharged at the end remote from A, and more strongly undercharged at the end next to A, than when F is away. The contrary may happen, by presenting a body in the manrer of E. We wish these particulars to be kept in mind. In the mean time, all these circumstances are necessary consequences of the supposition, that nothing is communicated from A to B or C. The electricity induced on perfect conductors is momentary, requiring the continual presence of a body that is electrified in some vay or other. But the case is quite otherwise in imperſeet conductors. When the overcharged, or otherwise electrical body A is removed, the forees which tend to restore the uniform distribution of the fluid immediately operate, and must restore it in partt. They cannot, however, do it completely: For when the force which urges any particle from an overcharged to an undercharged part is just in equilibrio with the obstruction, ĩt will remain, just as a number oſ grains of small shot may lie, uniformly mixed with a mass oſ clammy fluid, or, as such fluids retain heavy mud, in a state of equable or inequable diffusion. Iſ the resistance arise merely from the inertia of the tangible matter, there is no force so small but it ill in time restore the uniform distribution. But this cannot be the case in solid bodies. Their particles exert lateral forces, by which they maintain themselves in particular situations; these must be overcome by superior forces. ELECTRICITY. l 39 We should therefore expeet, that imperfect conductors vill retain part of their inequable constitution; and, in consequence of this, their power of affecting other bodies like electries; that is, their ELECTRICITY. For we must observe (having neglected to do it in the beginning), that the term electricity is as oſten used to express this power oſ producing electrical phenomena as it is used ſor expressing a substance supposed to be the original cause of all these appearances. It is necessary to keep this distinction in mind; because there are many phenomena which clearly indicate the transference oſ this cause, and they must not be conſounded with others, where the exhibition oſ electric phenomęna is evidently propagated to a distance. We must not alvays suppose, that when the electric appearances are exhihited in an instant at. the far end of a wire 47 miles long, the same numerical particles of the electric fluid have moved over this spac. We must distinguish those cases where this must be grALd from those in which it certainly has not happened: Of these there are innumerable instances. 59. We have now to observe, that by this theory the single circumstance of perfect and imperfect conducting power is sufficient for establishing the whole difference between idio-electrics and non-electriess. The idio-electries are susceptible of excitation in various ways, and retain their eleetricity; and this may be done in any part of them without affecting the rest in any remarkable degree. This cannot be done in perſect conductors, plainly because they are perſect conductors. Any inequality of distribution of the electric fluid, which is all that is necessary ſor rendering them electrie, is immediately destroyed by its uniſorm diffusion. We can have no direct prooſ of their incapability of excitation; but iſ they can be excited, they cannot shew it. We doubt, however, their excitability; because the appearances in the ęxcitation of electries seem to indicateę, that opposite states of two bodies are necessary previous to the appearance of electricity. This is impossible in perfect conductorss By 40 ELECTRICITY. this theory, therefore, perfect conductors are necessarily non- electries; and non-conductors are necessarily (if excitable) idio-eleetries. With respeet to the particular phenomena which may be expected on the removal of the original electrie; it may just be remarked, that the electric appearances of the imperfect conductor vill go off in the contrary order to that oſ their indicationn. The accumulation and deficieney will diminish gradually, and the neutral point or points will gradually approach the end which had fronted the original electriec. The imperſect conductor will be finally leſt with one or more neutral points, according to the magnitude of the obstructions, and the force which had been employed in its eleetrification: And their final state will be so much the more inequable, and consequently they will retain so much the greater electric powers, as they are less perfect conductors. 60. The last observation which we shall make on this head at present is, that whether electrified by induction, or by ſriction, or most other modes of excitation, the electrification will be nearly superficial in bodies which conducet very imperfſectly; and bodies which are altogether impervious ũ there be any such) must have the accumulation or deficiency altogether at their surſace. Iſ a glass globe be such a body, it will hardly be possible to clectrify it to any depth; and all that we can expect is alternate strata oſ overcharged and undercharged glass. If these strata are once formed, they tend greatly to make the body retain its superſicial electricity. A superſicial stratum of redundant fluid, tending, by the mutual repulsion of its particles, to escape, is retained by the stratum oſ redundant matter immediately below it: And the almost insuperable obstrucetion prevents the fluid of the stratum beyond this ſrom eoming up to supply the vacancy. Iſ we can ſall on any contrivance to produce such deficient strata within the glass, we shall mae it much more retentive, and capable of holding fast a much greater quantity. We have already mentioned something of this in ELECTRICITY. 41 § I4. and we recommend the case to the attentive consideration oſ the reader. 61. TuuS have ve given a sketch of the leading doctrines of this elegant theory of Mr. Epinus, all legitimately deduced from the circumstances assumed in the hypothesis concerning the mechanical properties of that substance which he calls the electric fiuid. Let us now see with what success this hypothesis may be applied to account for the phenomena. It would have heen more philosophical to have arranged the phenomena, and from the comparison to have deduced the hypothesis But this would have required much more room than can be afforded in a work like ours. We presume, that many of our readers, namely, all such as are already conversant with electrical phenomena and vith electric experiments, have seen, as we vent along, the perſect agreement of the hypothesis with the various phenomena of attraction and repulsion, and all those which are usually classed under the name of electric atmospheres: and we are confident, that when they compare the consequences that should necessarily result from such a fluid with the legitimate consequences of the mechanical action of elastic atmospheres, they will acknowledge the great superĩority of this hypothesis in point of simplicity, perspicuity, and analogy with other general operations of nature. To such readers it would not be necessary to state any farther comparison; but there are many wvho have not yet formed any distinet systematic view of the appearances called electrical. We do not know any way of giving such a view of them as by means of this hypothesis; and ve may venture to say, that ĩt will enable the student of Nature to class them all, with hardly a single exeeption. After which, the hypothesis may be thrown aside by the fastidious philosopher; and the useful elassification, and general laws of the electric phenomena, will remain ready foundations for a more perſect theory. For the sake of such readers, thereſore, we shall ELECTRICITY. 43 inch in diameter, with round ends, and well polished, to prevent all dissipation. The foot must be so narrow as to allow them to touch each other at the ends. 5. Two balls (fig. 12.), one of glass, and the other oſ glass coated vith sealing wax, each furnished with an insulating handle, the other end of which may be occasionally stuck into a fool or into the side of a block of wood, which can be slid up or down on a wooden pillar, and fſixed at any height. These balls should be about three inches in diameter. They must be excited by rubbing with dry varm flannel. 6. Some little pieces of gilt card (fig. 13.), about two inches long, half an inch broad, and rounded at the ends, and made as smooth as possiblee. Each must have a dimPle struck in the middle with a polished blunt point, so that ĩt will traverse ſreely like a mariner's needle when set on a glass point, rounded in the flame of a lamp. More artiſicial needles may be made of some light wood, having small cork balls at the ends, all gilt and polished, and turning, in like manner, on glass stalks: also some similar needles made oſ sealing wax, one end of each being black, and the other red. The mechanical phenomena of electricity may be expressed in a fow simple propositionss The most general ſact that we know, and from which all the rest may be deduced, ĩ the ſollowing: If any body A is electrified, by any means whatever, and àf another body B is brought into its neighbourhood, the Iast becomes electrical by position G3. Set the brass conductors in a row, touching each other, as represented in figz. 11. by A, B, C; and let a pith ball electrometer, having silk threads, be set near one end of the conductors. Excite one of the above mentioned globes by rubbing it withdry flanne. When this is brought near the end oſ the conductor, the pith-ball will approach the other end. But the globe must not be brought so near as to cause ELECTRICITY. 45 oſ the eonduetor more remote than that where the knob of the electrometer touches itt. This will be more remarkably the case as the threads are longer. Accordingly, an electrometer with very long threads will never collapsee The place of the neutral point cannot be accurately ascertained in this vay. Lord Mahon imagined, that its situation B was determined (in his experiments with a long conductor) to be such, that D c was harmonically divided in B and o; and he finds this to be agreeable to the result of an electric atmosphere whose density is inversely proportional to the square of the distance. But we cannot deduce this from his narration of the experiment. He gives no reason for his selection of the point D, nor tells us the form and dimensions of the electric employed, nor takes into account the action of the fluid in the long conductor. It is evident that no computation can be instituted, even on his lordships principles, till all this be done. We have always ſound, that the neutral point was ſarther from the electrie, in proportion as the conductor was smaller, and when the electricity was stronger; and that the differences in this respeet were so very considerable, that no dependence could be had on this experiment for determining the law of action. It should be s0, both according to Lord Mahon's and Mr æpinuss theory. But to proceed with our examination: Having touched the end c of the conductor with the knob oſ the electrometer, bring it avay. The balls will continue to repel each other, and they are attracted by any body that is in its natural state. Touch the same end with the knob oſ the other electrometer, and bring it also away; the balls of the two electrometers will he found to repel each other: but if one has touched the conductor at c, and the other has touched it at a, the electrometers vill strongly attract each other. All this is quite conformable to the theory. If the ſluid has been compressed at c, and thereſore the halls of that electrometer are overcharged, they must repel each orher, and repel any other body electriſied in the same way. 46 ELECTRICITY. They must attract and be attracted by any natural body. But the halls of the other electrometer having touched the conductor at ꝗ, must be undercharged, and the redundant ſluid of the one must attract the redundant matter of the other. If the conductor has been electrified by the vicmity oſ excited glass, the electrometer which touched it in the remote end e, will be repelled by a piece of excited glass, but attracted by excited sealingwax. The electrometer which touched the conductor in a will he attracted by excited glass, and repelled by excited sealing- wax. The contrary ill be observed iſ the conductor has had ĩts electricity mduced on it by the vicmity oſ the globe covered with sealing- wax. This is a complete prooſ that Mr. Duſays doctrine of vitreous and resinous electricity is unfounded. Both kinds of electricity are produced in a conducting body, without any material communication, by mere juxta-position to a body possessed oſ either the vitreous or the resinous electricity. 642. We have not yet mentioned any reasons which indũcate which end of he conductor ĩs electrical by the redundancy of electrie fluid, nor is the reader prepared for seeing their force. It is generally believed, that the remote end oſ a conductor which is electrified by glass, excited hy rubbing it With ſlannel or amalgamated leather, is electrical by redundancy. No diſference has been observed in the attractions and repulsions But there are other marks oſ dũistinction æhich are constant, and undoubtedly arise from a difference in the mode oſ action of those mechanical forces. IF, while the excited glass globe remains at D, a glass mirror, foiled as usual with tin- leaſ, be made to touch the remote end of the conductor, and slowly dra=n transversely, s that the conductor dra=s a line as it were across itthis murror being laid down with the ſolled side undermost, the dust, which sttles on ĩt in the course of a day or two, will be chieſly collected along this line, somewhat in the form oſ the fibres oſ a ſeather. But ĩ the conductor was render- ELECTRIGITY, u; ed electrical by the globe covered vith sealing- wax, the dust vill be eolleeted along this line in little spots like a row oſ beadss. The appearances will be reversed iſ the mirror has been passed across the end of the conduetor which is nearest to the excited electriee In short, in whatever way the draving point has been electriſied, if it repel a ball which has touched excited glass, the line will be feathered; but if it ãattract such a ball, the line vill be spotted. There are many vays of making this appearance much more remarkãble than this; but we have mentioned it on ſhis occasion, because the circumstances which occasion the diſference, whatever iĩt is, are the most simple possible Nothing is communicated; and thereſore the effect must arise ſrom the unnatural state of a substance or power residing in the body. IF it be a substance sui generis, the electric action must arise from a different distribution oſ this substance; from a redundancy and deficiency of it in the diſferent portions of the conductor. Without pretending as yet to say which is redundant, we shall suppose, with Dr Pranklin, that the electrieity oſ excited glass is so; and ve shall use the vords redundant and positive to distinguish this electricity ſrom the other. This is merely that we may, on many occasions, considerably abbreviate language. The different electrical states oſ the diſferent portions of the conductor may be seen in another way, which is perhaps more simple anũ unexceptionable than that already nãrratedl. While the globe remains at D, take the two extreme pieces A and C aside; or, ĩ only two pieces have been used, draw the remote piece farther avay. Now remove the excited globee. When we examine A separately, ve shall find it wholly negative, or undercharged, strongly repelling a ball electrified by sealing-wax, and attracting a ball electrified by glass The other piece C exhibits positive electricity, attracting and repelling what A repelled and attracted. If only three pieces oſ the conductor have been employed, the middle piece B is generally positive; but this in a very ſaint degree. ELECTRICITY. 49 ſirst conductor renders the second electrie, by propelling its fluid to a greater distance. The second conductor now acts on the ſluid that is moveable in the first, and causes a greater accumulation in its end vhich is farthest ſrom the electric; that is, renders it more electric. 66. Suppose that instead of employing an excited globe of glass, we had made use oſ a conducting body, slightly overcharged. Thus if we employ the conductor A, overcharged, to induce electricity on C; this will produce the same general effect on our set of conductors. But if we have previously examined the force of the redundant body, by suspending a pith-ball near it, and observing its deviation from the perpendicular, ve may sometimes be led to think, that it has imparted something to the other body. For if the other body and the pith- ball be on opposite sides oſ the redundant body, the pith- ball vill fall a little; indicating a diminution of eleetric force. But this should happen according to the theory; for it was shewn, in § 52. that the constipation in the remote end of the overcharged body will be diminished, and along with this, its action on the pith-bal. We should find the electricity of the other end, next the eonductor, increased, could we discover an easy way of examining it; but an electrometer applied there will be too much aſfected by the conductor. The same conclusions may be drawn ſrom the following facts: Hang up a rush-pith electrometerr. Approach it below with a body slightly electrified The legs of the electrometer immediately diverge, though attracted by the electrified body. Hold the hand above the electrometer, and they will diverge still more; touch the top oſ it, and they spread yet farther. Hold the electrified hody (very weakly electriſied) above the electrometer, so that its legs may diverge a littlee Hold the hand above the electrified body; the legs of the electrometer will come nearer each other. These appearances are observed whether the electric be msitive or negativee We need not take up time in explaining this by the theory, its agreement is so obvious. vOL. IV. D ELECTRICITY. 51 conductors have affectæd them ſor some time by the action of the disturbing electric, the removal of this electrie will not cause the electrometers to hang perpendicular; they will often be attracted by the conduetors, and often repelled; but the intelligent experimenter, avare of these circumstances, vill know what allowances to make. 67. The theory obtains a still more complete support from a comparison with similar experiments made with imperfect conductors. If, in place of the series A, B, C, (fig. Il.) of metalline conductors, we employ cylinders of glass or sealing wax, or even dry wood or marble, and electrometers with silk threads in place of the rush-pith electrometers, we shall ſind all the appearances to be such as the theory enables us to predict. If, for example, we use a single cylinder A of glass, we shall find that the neighbourhood of the electric D (fig. 12.) scarcely induces any electricity on A The eleetrometer will hardly exhibit the smallest attraction, and iĩts motions will be almost entirely such as arise from the immediate influence of the electric body D. A cylinder of very dry wood vill be more affected by the electric D; and a circumstance of theoretical importance is very distinctly observed, namely, the gradual shifting of the neutral point. It will be found to advance along the eylinder for a very long while, when every circumstance is very ſavourable, the air very dry, and the wood almost a non-conductor; and ĩts final situation will be found much nearer to the electric than in the brass conductor. Several instructive experiments of this kind may be found in a treatise published in 1783 by Dr. Thomas Milner at Maidstone in Kent, entitled,  Experiments and Observations on Electricity?7 The author does not profess to advance any new doctrines, but only to exhibit experiments scientiſically arranged for ſorming a system. He supports the Franklinian system as it was generally understood at that time; but is much embarrassed for the explanation of the repulsion of negative electriecss The pinian correction of this theory did not offer itself to his mind. 9 j ELECTRICITY. 53 be ſound negative, and the other will be found positive, if examined with an electroscope. And nov, if the two globes be removed, this little needle will remain electrieal for entire days in dry frosty weather, and its ends will approach any body that is brought near it (taking care not to come too close); and the end which pointed to the positive globe uill avoid a piece of rubbed sealing wax, but will approach a piece of rubbed glass; but the other end vill be affected in the opposite vay. In short, it proves an electric needle vith a positive and negative pole. l If two small insulated balls are moderately electriſied and placed about six inches asunder, this needle, when carried round them, vill arrange itself exactly as a magnetic needle does when carried round a magnet of the same length. If the same trial be made with the needle of gilt eard, it will arrange itself in the sume manner that a soſt iron needle arranges itself near a magnet, but either end will turn indiſferently to either globe. Tf a thin brass plate, coated with red sealing wax, be set on the positive and negative globes, and we sprinkle (from a considerable height) a fine powder of black sealing wax, and then pat the plate gently vith a glass rod so as to agitate it a little, the particles of wax powder vill gradually arrange themselves into eurve lines, diverging from the point over one oſ the globes, and converging to the point over the other, precisely like the curves formed by iron-filings sprinkled on a paper held over a magnet. Each little rag of wax becomes electrical by position, acquires two poles, and the positive pole oſ one attracts the negative pole oſ another; and they adhere in a certain determinate position, nearly a tangent to the curve, which was mentioned in § 50. and indicates the law of magnetic actionn. When in this state, if a hot brick be held over the plate till the wax soſten a little, the particles of black wax will adhere to the red coating, and give us a permanent specimen of the action. ELECTRICITY. 59 electricity, will give only a very small spark; and it is found not to be affected at any considerable distance from the point of its surface from which the transſerence was madeThe whole electricity oſ a perfect conduetor is discharged by touching it; but a nonconductor will successively give sparks, iſ touched in many different parts; and it may be seen by a nicè electrometer, that each contact takes away the electricity only ſrom a very small space round it: and it is further highly deserving oſ notice, that some time aſter a spark has been obtained from a particular spot oſ the eleetric, a second spark may he obtained from it, the electricity of the neighbouring part; having heen gradually diffused through it. 76. Third, If an eleetrified condueting body touch any thing communicating with the ground by perfect conduetors, all its electricity must disappear, and none can appear in the body touched by it; for the mass of the earth bears such an unmeasurable proportion to that of the greatest body that we can electrify, that when the redundancy or deficiency is divided between them, it must be impereeptible in both. 77. Hence the necessity of insulation, as it is called, or the surrounding by non-conductors every body which we vould have exhibit electric appearances'. But we must consider, in its proper place, the manner in which the electrie fluid is dissipated by imperfectly insulating substances; a subject intimately connected with the theory. 78. Fourih, Any unelectrified body will be first attracted by an electrified body, ill touch it, and vill then be repellæd. The neutral body is endered eleetrical by induetion. It is, in consequence of this, nitracted, comes near enough to recœive a spark, or even touches it, and is then electrified by communication; and, n consequence of this, it is repelled. . Sece the Article Erecrnic?v.n the Edinburgh Eucyclopædia for morè particular inſormation on this suliect. ELECTRICITY. 6l tions come to an end; and we shall find their number to be the same as beſoree The cause oſ this is also obvious from the theory. We may suppose A to be negative, and C positivee. One oſ them will attract the ball into contact, and will repel it, having put ĩt into an electric state opposite to that of the other conductor. It now becomes a carrier of fluid ſrom the positive to the negative conductor, till it nearly restore both to their primitive state of neutrality. 79. There is frequently a seeming capriciousness in those attractions and repulsions. A pith-ball, or a down feather, hung by silk, will cling to the conductor, or othervise eleetrified body, and vill not fly off again, at least for a long whilee. This only happens when those bodies are so dry as to be almost non-conductorss They acquire a positive and negative pole, like an iron nail adhering to a magnet, and are not repelled till they become almost wholly positive or negative. It never happens with condueting light bodies. 80.Fiſih, It should follow from the theory, that the electric attractions and repulsions will not be prevented by the intervention oſ non-conducting substances in their neutral state. Accordingly, it is a ſact, that the interposition of a thin pane of glass, let it be ever so extensive, does not hinder the electrometer from being afſected. Also, if an insulated electric be covered with a glass bell, an electrometer on the outside will be aſfected. Nay, a metal ball, covered to any thickness with sealing wax, when electriſied, will aſfect an electrometer in the same way as vhen nukedc We cannot see how these facts can be explained by the action oſ electric atmotspheres. It is indeed said, that the atmosphere on one side of the glass produces an atmosphere on the other; but we have no explanation of this production. If the interposed plate be a non-conductor, how does the one atmosphere produce the other? It must produce this effect by acting at a distance on the particles which are to form this atmospheree OF what use, then, is the atmosphere, even if those atmospheres could eſſect the ohserved ELECTRICITY. 8 nection between the particles of the fluid and those of the tangible matter; nor is this explained in any electric theory that ve know: but if we are satisſied with the evidences which we have for the existence of a substance, whose presence or absence is the cause of the electric phenomena, ve must grant that its usual connection with the tangible matter oſ bodies is changed in the act of excitation, by frietion, or hy any other means. In the case of friction producing positive electricity on the surſace of the electrie, ve must suppose that the act of frietion causes one body to emit or absorb the fluid more copiously than the other, or perhaps the one to emit, and the other to absorbbO. Which ever ĩs the case, the adjoining surfaces must be in opposite states, md the one must be as much overcharged as the other is undercharged. When the bodies (Which we may suppose to have the form of plates) are joined, and the one exactly covers the other, the assemblage must be inactive; for a particle of moveable fluid, situated any where on the side of the overcharged plate, will be as much attracted by the undercharged surſace of the remote plate as it is repelled by the overcharged surface of the near plate. The surfaces are equal, and equally electric, and act on either side with equàl intensity; and they are coincident. Thereſore their actions balancee. The action is expressed by the formula of § 43; namely,  m X 72; and 2? is =0, by reason of the equal distances oſ these surfaces from the particle of exterior ſluid. But let the plates be separated. Part, and probably the greatest part, of the redundant fluid on one oſ the rubbed surfaces will fly back to the other, being urged both by the attraction of the redundant matter and the repulsion of its own particless But the electric, being electrie because, and only because, ĩt is a non-conduetor, must retain some, or will remain deprived of some, in a stratum a little within the surfacee. The two plates must thereſore be left in op- ELECTRICITY. 65 very careſul perusal of Becearia's Dissertations on it, comparing the phenomena, in every step, with this theory of £pinus. Much valuable information is also obtained from Mr. Nicholson's observations'. The pinian theory will be ſound to conneet many things, which, to an ordinary reader, must appear solitary and accidental. 53. Seeing that this very simple nypothesis of pinus 50 perſectly coincides in ĩts legitimate consequences with all the general phenomena oſ attraction and repulsion, and not only with those that are simple, but even such as are compounded of many otherwe may listen, without the imputation of levity, to the other evidences which may be offered ſor the materiality and mobility of the cause of those mechanical phenomena. Sueh evidences are very numerous, and very persuasivee We have said, that the transference of electricity is desultory, and that the change made in the electrie state oſ the communicating bodies is always considerable. It appears to keep some settled ratio to the whole electric power of the body. When the form of the parts vhere the communication takes place, and other circumstances, remain the same, the transference increases with the size of the hodies: and all the phenomena are more vivid in proportion. When the conductor is very large, the spark is very bright, and the snap very loud. L. This snap alone indicates some material agent. It is occasioned by a sonorous undulation of the air, or of some elastic fluid, which suddenly expands, and as suddenly collapses again. But such is the rapidity oſ the undulation, that when it is made in close vessels it does not exist long enough, in a very expanded state, to aſfeet the column of vater, supported in a tube by the elasticity of the air, for the purpose of a delicate thermometer or barometer; just æ A ſull account oſ Nicholson's Experiments will be founl in the Phil rans. 1789, p. 265. and n the Epinaurcu EncrcLoræsia, Art. ELecruicrtv, il. viĩi. p. 510 VOL. IV. D ELECTRICITY. 67 chanical character is such as is expressed in Mr. pinuss hypothesis. We proceed, thereſore, to explain the most interesting phenomena of electricity from these principles. 84. We have seen that, in a perfeet conductor, in its natural state, the electric fluid is uniformly distributed, and cannot remain in any other condition. We are particularly interested to know how it is distributed in an overcharged or undercharged body, and how this is affected by the circumambient non-conducting air. It is evident that much depends on this The tendency to escape, and, particularly, the tendency to transſerence from one body to another, must be greatest where the fluid is most constipatedl. We know that it tends remarkably to dissipate from all protuberances, edges, and long bodies, and that it is impossible to æonſine it in a body having very acute ſar-projecting points; and, vhat is more paradoxieal, it is hardly possible to prevent its entering into a body furnished with a sharp point. The smallest reflection must suggest to our imagination, that a perfectly moveable fluid, whose particles mutually rePẽl, even at considerable distances, and which is confined in a vessel from which it cannot escape, must be compressed against the sides of the vessel, and be denser there than in the middle of the vesse. But in what proportion its density vill diminish as we recede from the walls of the vessel, must depend on the change of electrie repulsion by an increase of distancee The intensity varies in the proportion of some function of the distance, and may be expressed by the ordinates of a curve, on whose axis the distances are measuredl. But we are ignorant oſ this funetionn. We must therefore endeavour to discover it, by observing a proper slection of phenomena. Having made some approximation to this discovery, such as shall give rise to a proboble conjecture concerning the function which expresses the mtenity of electrie repulsion, mathematies will then enable ELECTRICITY. 69 two small spheress Whatever be the law of distribution of the particles in a sphere, the general action oſ its particles on the particles of another sphere will follow a law which vill not differ much ſrom the law of action between two particles, if the diameters of the spheres be small in proportion to their distance ſfrom each other. The investigotion was thereſore begun with them. But the subject required an electrometer susceptible of comparison with others, and that could exhibit absolute measures. The one employed was made in the ſollowing manner; and we give iĩt 20 the public as a valuable philosophical instrument. 85. Fig 15. represents the electrometer in ſront. A is a polished brass ball,2 th of an inch in diameter. It is fixed on the point of a needle three inches long, as slender as can be had of that length. The other end oſ the needle passes through a ball of amber or glass, or other ſirm non-condueting substance, about half or three-fourths of an inch in diameter; but the end must not reach quite to the surſace, although the ball is completely perſorated. From this ball rises a slender glass rod FEL, three inches long from F to E, where it bends at right angles, and is continued on to L, immediately over the centre of the hall AA At L is fixæd a piece of amber C, formed into two parallel cheeks, between which hangs the stalk DCB of the electrometer. This is formed by dipping a strong and dry silk thread, or fine cord, in melted sealing wax, and holding it perpendicular till it remain covered vith a thin coating, and be fully penetrated by it. It must be kept extended, that it may be very straight; and it must be rendered smooth, by holding it beſore a clear ſfire. This stalk is fastened into a small cube of amber, perforated on purpose, and having fine holes drilled in two oſ its opposite sides. The cheeks oſ the piece C are wide enough to allow this cube to move freely hetween them, round two fine pins, which are thrust through the holes in the cheeks, and reach ahout half way to the. stalk. The lower part of the stalk is about three inches ELECTRICITY. T repulsive force in contact, or at the distance oſ their centres, æqual to the sum of their radii. Having determined this point, turn the instrument still more toward the vertical positionn. The balls will now separate more and more Let an assistant turn the long index so as to make it parallel to the stalk of the electrometer, by making the one hide the other ſfrom his viev. The mathematical reader vill see that this electrometer has the properties ascribed to it. It vill give absolute measures: for by poizing the stalk, by laying some grains weight on the cork-ball D, till it becomes horizontal and perſectly balanced, and computing for the proportional lengths of BC and DC, we know exactly the number of grains with which the balls must repel each other (when the stalk is in a horizontal position), in order merely lo separate. Then a very simple computation will tell us the grains oſ repulsion when they separate in any oblique position oſ the stalk; and another computation, by the resolution of forces, will shew us the repulsion exerted between them when AL is oblique, and BC makes any given angle with itt. All this is too obvious to need any ſarther explanation. The reason ſor giving the connection between A and C such a circuitous form, vas to avoid all netion between the ſixed and the moveable part of the eletrometer, except vhat is exerted between the two halls A and B. The needle AF, indeed, may act a little, and might have been avoided, by making the horizontal axis FI o join with A: but as it vas vanted to make the instrument of more general use, and ſrequently to connect it with an electrical machine, a battery, or a large body, no mode of connection offered ĩtself which would not have been more ſaulty in this respect. The neatest and most compendious form would have been to attach the axis FI to C, and to make CA and CB stiſf metalline wires, in the same manner as Mr. Brookes's electrometer is madee But as the whole oſ their lengths would have acted, this construction would have been very improper in the investigatiun oſ the lav oſ Z LELECTRICITY. electric repulsionn. As it now stands, ve imagine that it has considerable advantages over Mr. Brookes's construction and also over Mr. De Luc's comparable electrometer, described in his Essays on Meteorology. It has even advantages over Mr. Coulomb's incomparably more delicate electrometer, which is sensible, and con measure repulsions which do not exceeu the 50,000 of a grain; for the instrument which we have described will measure the attructions of the oppositely electrified bodies; a thing which Mr. Coulomb could not do without a great cireuit of experiments For instead of making the ball B ahove A, by inclining the instrument to the right hand, we may incline it to the leſt; and then, by electriſying one of the halls positively, and the other negatively, when at a great distance from each other, their mutual attraction will cause them to approach; CB vill deviate from the vertical toward A; and we can compute the foree by means of this deviation. We must remind the person who would make observations with this instrument, that every part of it must be secured against dissipation as much as possible, by varnishing all ĩts parts, by having all angles, points, and roughnesses removed, and by choosing a dry state oſ the air, and a varm room; and, because it is impussible to prevent dissipation altogether, ve must make a previous course of experiments, in a variety of circumstances, in order to determine the diminution per minute corresponding to the circumstances of the experiments that are to be made with further views. We trust that the reader will accept of this partieular account of an instrument which promises to be oſ considerable service to the eurious naturalist; and we now proceed with an account of the conelusions which have been dravn ſrom observations made uith it. Here we could give a particular narration of some of the experiments, and the computations made from them; but we omit this, because it ĩs really unnecessary. It suſſices to say, that the writer has made many hundreds, vith diiſer- ELECTRICITY. 3 ent instruments, of diſferent sizes, some of them with halls of an inch diameter, and radii oſ 18 inchess. Their còincidence with each other was far heyond his expectation, and he has not one in his uotes which deviate from the medium 7 of the whole force, and but few that have deviated æThe deviations were as frequently in excess as in defect. His custom was to measure all the forces by a linear scale, and express them by straight lines erected as ordinates to a base, on which he set off the distances from a fixed point; he then drew the most regular curve that he could through the summits of these ordinatess. This method shews, in the most palpable manner, the coincidence or irregularity oſ the experiments. 8G6. The result of the whole as, that the mutual repulsion of two spheres, electrified positively or negatively, was very nearly in the inverse proportion oſ the squares of the distances of their centres, or rather in a proportion somewhat l greater, approaching to 77. No diſference was observed although one of the spheres was much larger than the other; and this circumstance enables us to make a considerahle improvement on the electrometer. Let the hall A be made an inch in diameter, while B is hut à of an ineh. This greatly diminishes the proportion of the irregular actions of the rest of the apparatus to the whole force, and also diminishes the dissipation when the general intensity is the snme. 87. When the experiments were repeated vith balls having opposite electricities, and which thereſore attracted each other, the results were not altugether so regular, and a few irregularities amounted to of the vhole; but these anomalies were as oſten un one side of the medium as on the other. This series of experiments gave a result which deviated as little as the former (or rather less) ſrom the inverse duplicate ratio of the distances; but the deviation was in deſect as the other was in excess. ELECTRICITY. mb or oſ hollow spherical shells, will also be diſferent (see Prineipio, I. Prop. 74) 80. Thereſore we may conclude, that the lav of electric attraction and repulsion is similar to that of gravitation, and that each of those forces diminishes in the same proportion that the square of the distance between the particles increases. We have obtained much useſul information from this discovery. We have now ſull conſirmation of the propositions concerning the mutual action of two bodies, each overcharged at one end and undercharged at the other. Their evidence before given amounted only to a reasonable probability; but we now see, that the curve line, hose ordinates represent the forces, is really convex to the abscissa, and that Z +7 is always greater than Z'+2; from which circumstance all the rest follows of course. 90. Let us now inquire into the manner in which the redundant ſluid, or redundant matter, is distributed in bodies; the proportion in which it subsists in bodies communicating with each other; the tendencies to escape; the ſorces which produce a transſerence, &c. &e. In the course oſ this inquiry, a continual reference will be made to the following elementary proposition: 91. Let ABD (fig. 17.) be the base of a cone or pyramid, whose vertex is P, and axis PC; and let a b d be another section of it by a plane parallel to the base; let these two circles, or similar polygons, consist of matter or ſluid of equal and uniform density; and let P be a particle oſ ſluid or matter; the attraction or repulsion oſ this particle for the whole matier or fluid in the figure ABD is equal io its attraction or repulsion for the whole matter or fluid in a b d. For the attraction ſor a particle in ABD is to the attraction for a particle similarly placed in a b d as Pę? to PC?; and the number of particles n ABD is to that oſ those in a b d as PC? to P c75 therefore the whole attraction for ABD is to that for a b d as P c? X PC? to PC: xX P]?, or in the ratio ſ equality. ELECTRICITY. (ſ 3. The adjacent side of E will have a stratum E e ſF, : - EllEl - r f Just suſficient for containing the quantity  atits natural density. This stratum will be entirely exhausted of fluid. 4. The spaces B b c C and F ſg G vill be in their natural state. For a particle oſ fluid in the space B h c C is urged in the direction a d by the ſorce V  91, 3) and in the : : rs u direction d a by the foree ſ , thereſore it is, on the whole, urged in the direction a d with the force s, which will baIance the repulsion of the redundant fluid in the other plate. A particle of fluid in the space F ſ  G is repelled in the r 5 direction h e by a ſorce x by the fluid in G gh H, and ĩt ĩs attracted in the same direction by the redundant matter in E e ſF, vith the ſoree - These make a force r w hich balances the repulsion r of the other plate:. No other disposition ill be permanent; ſor if a particle be taken out from either stratum A a b B or C c d D into the space between them, the repulsion from that stratum which it quitted is lessened, and the repulsion of the opposite stratum, joined to that of the other plate, will drive it back againn. The same thing holds with respect to the fluid in the other plate. 93. Cor. l. If the two plates he equally overeharged, all the redundant ſluid will be erowded on the remote surfaces, and the adjacent surfaces will be in the natural state. 94. In the second place, let the plates be undercharged, and let r be the fluid wanting in A, and s the fluid vanting in E, and lets be greater than r; then, 1. The Strata adjoining to A a and H h will he completely exhausted of ſluid, and the redundant matter in each will be such as would be saturated by i æ nm ELECTRICITY. 2. The stratum C c d D vill contain redundant fluid , erowded close. S. The stratum E e fF will be deprived of ſluid, and the quantity abstracted is ji 4. The spaces B b c C and F ſg G are in the natural state. The demonstration is the same as in the ſormer case. 95. Thirdly, Let A be overcharged, and E undercharged, Acontaining the redundant ſluid r, and E wanting the ſluids; and let r be greater than . Then, 1. The strata A a b B and G gh H contain the rers dundant ſluid lE crowded close. 2. The stratum C c d D contains the quantity NE crowded close. S. The stratum E e ſ F is exhausted, and wants the quantity I 2 4. The rest is in the natural state. 96. Cor. 2. If the redundant fluid in A be just sufficient to saturate the redundant matter in E, the two remote surſaces will be in their natural state, all the redundant fluid in A being crowded into the stratum Cc d D, and all the redundant matter being in E e ſ F. This disposition will be the same, whatever is the distance or thickness oſ the plates, unless the redundant fluid in A be more than can be contained in the whole of E when crowded close. 97. When the two plates are overcharged, the ſluid presses a their remote surſaces with the ſorce and would escape vith that foree iſ a passage were opened. It would enter the remote surfaces of to undercharged plates with the ELECTRICITY. - 9 same ſorce; and, in either case, it would run ſrom the inner surſace of one to the adjacent surface of the other, with the a ſorce oree If one be overcharged and the other undercharged, ſlui vould escape from the remote surface with the force and would run through a canal between them vith the ſorce : r+5 ES ] They repel or attract each other with the foree r+5, according as they are both over or undercharged, or as one is overcharged and the other undercharged. This example of parallel plates, infinitely extended, is the simplest that can be supposed. But it cannot obtain under our observation; and in all cases which we ean observe, the fluid cannot be uniſormly spread in any stratum, but must be denser near the edges, or near the centre, as they are overcharged or undercharged. 98. Let ABD (fig. 19.) represent a sphere of perfectly condueting matter, overcharged with electric fluid, which is perfectly moveable in its pores, but cannot escape from the sphere. Let it be surrounded by conducting matter saturated with moveable fluid. It is required to determine the disposition of the fluid within and without this sphere. Sir Isaac Newton has demonstrated (Princ. I. 70.) that a purticle ꝑ, placed anywhere within this sphere, is not aſfected by any matter that is without the concentric spherical surface p ꝗ r in which itselſ is situated, thereſore not aſfeeted by what is between the surfaces ABD and ꝑ r. He also demonstrates, that the matter within the surface ꝓ  r acts on the particle ꝑ in the same manner as if the whole of it were eollected in the centre C. Hence it ſollows, that the redundant fluid will be all constipated as close as possible within the external surſace oſ the ELECTRICITY. 8l If the sphere be undercharged, the space between ABD and a bd vill be entirely exhausted of ſluid, and there ill be a shell æà of redundant matter surrounding the sphere. All within a b d, and all without æ à), vill be in its natural state It is unmecessary to repeat the steps of the same demonstration. This valuable proposition is by the Hon. Mr. Cavendish. 99. This would be the disposition in and about a glass globe filled and surrounded with an ocean of water, and having redundant ſluid within it, on the supposition that glass is impervious to the electrie fluid. But it would not aſſect an electrometer, even supposing that the movements of the electrometer could be effected under water. Suppose the globe of water to be surrounded with air, and that the fluid is disposed in both in the manner here deseribed; it will be perſectly neutral in its action on any electrometer situated in the air. But, by reason of the almost total immobility oſ the fluid in pure dry air, this state cannot soon obtain; and, till it obtain, the constipated shell within the glass must repel the ſluid in an eleetrometer more than the partially rarefied shell of air, which surrounds the glass, attracts itt By the gradual retiring of the ſluid in the surrounding air from the globe, the attraction of the deserted matter vill come nearer to equality with the repulsion of the constipated shell within the glass, and the globe vill appear to have lost fluidl. Yet it may retain all the redundant fluid which it had at the firstt Therefore we are not to imagine that a body similar to this globe has no redundant eleetric fluid, or only a small quantity, because we observe it inactive, or nearly so. I00. Thus ve see, as we proceed, that the æpinian theoty is adequate to the explanation of the phenomena. But e see it much more remarkably in a very familiar and musing experiment, usually called the ELECTEIGC VELL. iee ELECTRICITY, Encycl. Sect. x. 4. VOL. IV. E n ELECTRICITY. To e it in perſection, make a glass vessæl oſ globular shape, with a narrow mouth, suſficiently wide, however, to admit an electrometer suspended o the end oſ a glass rod of a crooked ſorm, æ that the electrometer can be presented to any part oſ the inside. Smear the outside oſ the globe vith some transparent clammy fluid, such as syrup. Set it on an insulating stand (a wine glass), and electriſy it positively. Hold the electrometer near it, any where without, and it will be strongly affected. Its deviations from the perpendicular (iſ the ball of the electrometer has also been electriſied) will indicate a force inversely as the square oſ the distance from the centre of the globe, pretty exactly, if the thread of the electrometer is of silk. Now let down the electrometer into the inside of the globe. It will not be aſfected in any sensible degree, nor approach or avoid any body that is lying within the globee. The electrometer may be held in all parts of the globe, and vhen brought out again, is perſectly inactive and neutra. But if the balls oſ the electrometer be touched with a wire, while hanging fre vithin the globe, they vill, on withdrawing the wire, repel each other; and when taken out, they vill be found negatively electrifiedl The experiment suceeds as well with a metal globe; nay, even although the mouth be pretty wide; in which case, there is not a perſect balance oſ action in every direction. The electrometer may be made to touch the bottom of the globe, or any where not too near the mouth, vithout acquiring any sensible electricity; but if we touch the outside with the electrometer, it will instantly be eletrified and strongly repelled. Deep cylinders, and all round vessels with narro mouths, exhibit the same ſaintness oſ electricity within, except near the brims, although strongly electric without; and even open metal cups have the interior electricity much diminished. Iol. Reſlecting on this valuable proposition of Mr. Cavendish, we see clearly why an overcharged electric is onl; superſicially 0; and that this will be the case even althougt ELECTRICITY. 83 ve attempt to accumulate a great quantity of eleetricity in it, by melting it in a thin glass globe, and electrifying it vhile liquid, and keeping up the accumulating foree till it hecomes quite eold. The present writer, not having considered the subject with that judicious accuracy that Mr. Cavendish exerted, had hopes of producing a powerful and permanent electric in this way, and was mortified and puzZled by the disappointment, till he sav his mistake on reading Mr. Cavendish's dissertation. These observations also point out a thing which should be attended to in our experiments for discovering the eleetricity excited in the spontaneous operations of nature, as in chemical composition and decomposition, congelation, fusion, evaporation, &e. It has been usual to put the substances into glass, or other non-conducting vessels, or into vessels which conduet very imperſfectly. In this last case especially, the very ſaint electricity which is produced, nstantly forms a compensation to itself in the substance of the vessel, and the apparatus becomes almost neutral, although there may have been a great deal of electricity excited. It vill be proper to consider, whether the nature of the experiment will admit of metalline vessels. In the experiments on metalline solutions, the best method seems to be, to make the vessel itself the substance that is to be dissolved. 102. For similar reasons ve may collect, without a more minute examination, that bodies of all shapes, when overcharged, will have the redundant fluid much denser near the surface than in the interior parts; and denser in all elevations, bumps, projections, angles, and near the ends of oblong bodies; and that, in general, the quantity of redundant fluid or redundant matter, will be much more nearly proportional to the surſaces of bodies than to their quantities of matter. All this is fully proved by experiencee The experiment of the electrified chain is a very beautiſul one. Lay a long metal chain in an insulated metal dish furnished with an electrometer. Let one end be held an inch or two above . : 84 ELECTRICITY. the coil by a silk thread Electriſy the whole, and observe the divergency of the electrometer; then, gradually drawing up the chain from the coil, the electrometer will gradually fall lover, and lowering the chain again will gradually raise it. 103. We now see with hov little reason Lord Mahon concluded that the point of his conductor, observed to be neutral, corresponded with his theory; namely, one oſ the media of a harmonic divisionn. We see no reason for beginning the computation at the extremity of the prime conductor. It certainly should not have been from the extremity. Had the prime conductor been a single globe, iĩt should have begun ſrom the centre of this globe. If it was oſ the usual form, with an outstanding wire, terminated by a large ball, the action of the body of the conductor should certainly have been taken into the account. In short, almost any point of the long conductor might have been accommodated to his Lordship's theory. 104. We might now proceed to investigate the distribution of the electric fluid in bodies exposed to the action of others, and particularly in the oblong conductors made use of in our preparatory propositionss. The problem is determinate, hen the length and diameter of cylindric conducetors are given; but even when the electric employed ſor inducing the electricity is in the form of a globe, we must employ functions of the distances that are pretty complex, and oblige us to have recourse to second fluxionss. The mutual actions of two oblong conductors, of considerable diameters, give a problem that will occupy the first mathematicians; but which is quite improper for this scanty abstract. Nor is a minute knowledge of the disposition of the fluid of very important servic. We may therefore content ourselves vith a general representation of the state of the fluid in the following manner, which will give us a pretty distinct notion how it will act in most cases: . ELECTRICITY. 85 Let A (ſig. 20.) be an overcharged sphere, and BC a conducting cylindric or prismatic body; draw be parallel to BC, and erect perpendiculars BS, Ce, P ꝓ, &e. to represent the equable density oſ the fluid, when the conductor is in its natural state; but let B d, C r, Pi, &e. represent the unequal densities in its different points, while in the vicinity of the overcharged sphere. These ordmates must be bounded by a line d n r, which vill cut the line be in the point n of the perpendicular, drawn from the neutral point N oſ the eonductorr. The whole quantity of fluid in the conductor is represented by the parallelogram BC c b; which must therefore be equal to the space BC r n d: the redundant ſluid in any portion CP or PN is represented by the spaces c r t ꝑ, or t p n; and the redundant matter, or deficient fluid, in any portion BQ, is represented by b d o 4. The action of this body on any body placed near it, depends entirely on the area contained between this curve line and its axis b . The only circumstance that we can ascertain with respect to this curve is, that the variations of curvature in every point are proportional to the forces exerted by the sphere A; and are thereſore inversely as the squares of the distances from A. This property vill be demonstrated by and bye. The place oſ n, and the magnitude oſ the ordinates, ill vary as the diameter of the conduetor varies. We shall consider this a little more particularly in some cases vwhich will occur aſterwardss We may consider the simplest case that can occur; namely, when the conductor is, like a wire, of no sensible diameter, nay, as containing only one row of particles. Let AE (fig. 21.) be such a slender conducting canal; and let Bb, Cc, Ee, &e. represent the density of the fluid vhich occeupies it, being kept in this state of inequable density by the repulsion for some overcharged body. A particle in C is impelled in the direction CE by all the ſluid on the side of A, and in the direction CA by all the fluid on the side of E. The moving force, thereſore, arises from 3 66 ELECTRICITY. the diſference of these repulsions When the diameter of the canal is constant, this arises only ſrom the difference of density. The force oſ the element adjacent to E may thereſore be expressed by the excess oſ D d above Cc, and the action at the distance CD jointly. Thereſore, draving à e: purallel to AE, this force of the element E d;. . vill be expressed bycã æ, repelling the particle in the direction CA. If CF be taken equal to CD, the force of the rZ element at F will be expressed b x, or x, also impelling the particle in the direction CA.. The joint action di 0. of these two elements thereſore is æ5t x. Ifbce were a straight line we should have dà +5 ę always proportional to c); and it might be expressed by m x cà; m being a number expressing what part of c à the sum of dà and f? amounts to (perhaps 4th, or ſ5th, or 4th, &e.). But in the case expressed in the ſigure, dò does not increase so fast as cò, and fo increases ſaster than c 3. However, in the immediate neighbourhood of any point C, we may express the ac;. celerating ſorce tending towards A by 57 æ without any sensible error; that is, by m i that is, by the fluxion of the area oſ a hyperbola HD'G, having CC and CK ſor its assymptotes; and the whole action of the fluid between F and D, on the particle C, will be expressed by the area C CDD'H. Hence it follows, that the action of the smallest conceivable portion of the canal immediately adjoining to C on both sides, or the difference of the actions of the two adjoining elements, is equal to the action of all beyond it. This shews, that the state of compression is hardly aſfected by any thing that is at a sensible distance ſrom C; and that the density of the fluid, in an indefinitely slender canal, is, to all sense, uniform. The geometer will also see, that the secopd fluxion of Dd is proportional to the foreæ ELECTRICITY. Mmm of the distant body. We learn, therefore, 50 much of the nature of the curve b c eſ Coulomb). We are now in a condition to examine the communioation oſ electricity by means of condueting eanals (which is one of the most important articles of the study), having found that the fluid, in a very slender canal, is very nearly oſ uniform density throughout. 106. There can be no doubt but that, if a body B (ig. 22.) be overcharged or undercharged, any other body C, whieh communicates with it by a conducting canal, will also be overcharged or undercharged. It is as evident, that if a body, in any state of eleotricity, be in the neighbourhood of an overcharged or undercharged body A, while it communicates with C by a canal leading from the side most remote ſrom A, ſluid will be driven from B into C, or abstracted from C into B. 107. It is not, however, so clear, that vhen the canal leads ſrom the side nearest to A (as in fig. 23.), ſluid will be driven ſrom B into C. We eonceive the ſluid to be moveable in the body and in this canal, but not to escape from it. Its motion, thereſore, in this case, should, in the opinion oſ Mr. Cavendish, resemble the running of water in a syphon by the pressure of the airr. While the repulsion of the redundant fluid in A allows the bend of the syphon nearest to A to retain fluid, a current should take place from B along the short leg, in consequence of the superior action on the ſluid in the long leg. But if the repulsion of A can drive the fluid out of the bend between B and F, Mr. Cavendish thinks, that it does not appear that ſluid will come up ſrom B in opposition to the repulsion of A, and then run along to D. But ſluid does not move, in either of these cases, on the principle of a syphon; because there is nothing to hinder the fluid from expanding in the part EDF. And ve are rather disposed to think, that it will alvays move ſrom B, over the bend, to C: For even if the fluid can be completely driven out of the bend EF, it must be done by L 88 ELECTRICITY. degrees, and the fluid in the long leg ill, from the very beginning of the action of A, be more moved ſrom its place than that in the short leg; and thereſore will yield to the compression, which acts transversely, and, by thus yielding more toward F than toward E, the ſluid will rush through the contracted part, and go into C We do not say this vith full confidence; but are thus particular, on account of an important use that may be made of the experiment. For if the Body A be undercharged, ſluid will certainly be attracted from C, and pass over the bend into B, however great the action of A may be. Perhaps this may be so contrived, thereſore, as to decide the long agitated question, Whether the electricity of excited glass be plus or minus? If it be found that this apparatus, being presented to the rubber of an electrical machine, diminishes the positive electrity of C, and increases that of B; but that, presenting the same apparatus to the prime conductor, makes little change —ve may conclude, that the electricity of the prime conductor is positivee We have tried the experiment, paying attention to every circumstance that seemed likely to insure success; but we have always found hitherto, that the apparatus was equally aſſected by both electricities. We must now consider the action of electrified bodies on the canals of communication; because this will give us the easiest method of ascertaining the proportion in which the expelling fluid is distributed between them. For when two bodies communicate by a canal, and have attained a permanent state, ve must conceive that their opposite actions on the fluid moveable along this canal are in equilibrio, or are equal. This will generally be a much easier problem than their action on each other, since wve have seen a little ago, that the fluid in a slender canal is of uniform density very nearly. A very few examples of the most important of the simple cases must suſfice. 108. Therefore let AC a (fig. 24.) represent the edge of à thin conducting circular plate, to which the slender canal ELECTRICITY. 69 CP is perpendicular in the centre. It is required to determine the action of the matter or ſluid, uniformly spread over this plate, on the fluid moveable in the canal PC? 109. FirstRequired the action of a particle in A on the fluid in the whole canal? Join AP; and eall CP æ, AP y, and AC r; and let ſ express the intensity of action at the distance I, or the unit of the seale on which the lines are measured. The action of A on P, in the direction AP, h This when estimated in the diretion CD, is reduced to Læ3 7 and is therefore =F E Therefore the fluxion of ſhe action in the direction CP, on the whole canal is f 7 ?= r (because æ: y=: n=rx The variable part of the fluent is  and the complete fluent is fC 7 where C is a constant quantity, accommodated to the nature of the case Now, the action must vanish vhen the canal vanishes, or when x=O0, and y =r. Therol l ſore C =0, and C and the general expression oſ the action s G )=rt; expresing ihe action oſ a purticle in the circumference of the plate on the fluid in the whole canal CP. 2. Required the action of the plate, whose diameter is A q, on the particle P? 110. Let a represent the area of a cirele, whose radius is=I. Then a ſ is the area oſ the plate, and 2 oſ ĩs the fluxon of this area; because r: y =y: 7,  a r? is=2 æ v 5. Thereſore the fluxion of the action of the plate on the 90 ELECTRICITY. particle P is ſ x 2a yꝶ 3 =2 fa x x Fã The fluent l of this has for its variable part 2 fa x x v (for when the Dx particle P is given, æ does not vary). This is =2 fa x 7 To complete this fluent, ve must add a constant quantity, which shall make the fluent =0 when the particle P is at an inſinite distance; and therefore vhen x y. Therefore vzp y Z50,orl 756, or C1l; and the complete fluent for the whole plate is 2 fa (I ). I1l. The meaning of this expression may not occur to the reader: ſor l is evidently an abstract number; s is . Thereſore the expression appears to have no reference to the size of the plate But this agrees with the observation in § 91, where it was shewn, that provided the angle of the cone or pyramid remained the same, the magnitude oſ the base made no change in its attraction or repulsion for a particle in the vertex. It will appear by and bye, that - is a measure or funetion of a certain angle oſ a cone. Cor. If PC be very small in proportion to AG, the action is nearly the same as if the plate were infinite: For when the plate is incinite,- is = O, and the action is I, whatever is the distance (see § 193). Thereſore, when æ is very small in comparison of r, and consequently ofy, 1 is very nearly =l. 112. Third, To find the action of the plate on the whole column? ELECTRICITY. 9l The fluxion of this must be =2 fa x )⸗ 2s or 2 f a x (3); because 7 y The fluent of this has for its variable part 2 fa X (ꝶ). A constant quantity must be added, which shall make it = when the column æ O; that is vhen v =r, and æ =O; that is, Cr =DO, and C r. Therefore the complete fluent is =2'fa ( +r2Q ) 113. Thus have we arrived at a most simple expression of the attraction or repulsion of a plate for such a column, or for portions of such a column. And it is most easily constructed geometrically, so as to give us a sensible image of this action, of easy conception and remembrance. It is as follows: Produce PC till CK æ CA, and about the centre P describe the arch AI, cutting CK in I. Then 2 fa x IK is evidently the geometrical expression oſ the attraction or repulsion. This is plainly a cylinder, whose radius is a unit of the scale, and whose height is twice IK. In like manner, by describing the arch A ĩ round the centre p, ve have 2 fa x i K for the action of the plate on the small column C ꝓ; and 2 fa x Iĩ is the action of the plate on the portion Pꝑ. The general meaning of the expression 2 fa x IK is, that the action of the whole plate on the column PC is the same as if àll the fluid in the cylinder a X 2 IE, were placed at the distance l from the acting particle. From this proposition may be easily deduced some very useſul eorollaries by the help of the geometrical construetion. l14. First, If PC be very great in comparison with AC, the action is nearly the same as if the column were infinitely æxtended; ſor in this case IK is very nearly = CE, the diſference being to the whole nearly as AC to twice AP. 115. Second, If, in addition to this last condition, another colum ꝑ C be very small in comparison of AC, then the / ELECTRICITY. 93 ed round the circumference; for they are as cylinders having the same bases and heights in the ratio of 2 IK to DC, which is nearly the ratio of 2 to I. II8.—2. On the other hand, when the column ꝑ C is very short, the action of the fluid spread uniſormly over the plate is to its action, when crowded round the cireumſerence, nearly in the ratio of 4 AC to p)C. For these actions are in the ratio of 2 fa x i Kto Ifa x d C, oras 2i K tod C, or nearly as 2 ꝑ C to d C, or more nearly as 2 b d to d C. But Cd: bd =bd: bA + Ad, or nearly =bd: 2 CA. Therefore Ca: 2 bd = pC: 4 CA nearly. 119. Hence we see that the action on short columns is much more diminished by the recess of the redundant ſluid toward the circumference than that on long columns. Thereſore, any external electric force which tends to send fluid along this canal, and from thence to spread it over the plate, vill send into the plate a greater quantity of fluid than if the fluid remained ultimately in a state of uniform distribution over its surſace; and the odds will be greater when the canal is short. 120. Lasily, on this subject, if KL be taken equal to AP, or PL be equal to KI, the repulsion which all the fluid in the plate, collected: in K, would exert on the ſluid in the canal CL, is equal to the repulsion which the same ſluid, constipated in the circumference, would exert on the column CP. For ve have seen that the action of a particle in A on the whole column PC, when estimated in the direction PC, is v . and iĩt is well known that the action of a particle in K for the column CL is 5c23D or 3 Thereſore the action of the whole ſluid, collected in the circumference, on the column CP is equal to that of the same fluid, collected in X, on the column CL. I2I. Cor. I. If the column CP is very long in proportion to AC or KC, the actions oſ the ſfluids in these two different ELECTRICITY. 95 these spheres; it ſollows, that the repulsions of the plates ure proportional to those oſ the spheress But because the repulsion of a plate vhose radius is r was shewn to be 2 ę xr + 4, and vhen the column is infinitely extended, r is equal to 5, and 7 - æ4 =r, it ſollows, that the repulsions of the plates are as 2 a X R and 2 a x r, or proportional to their diameterss Therefore the repulsions of the spheres are in the same proportion. 126. Cor. I. I the canals are very long in proportion to the diameters of the plates or spheres, the repulsions are nearly in the same proportion. I27. Cor. 2. But as the lengths of the canals diminish, the repulsions approach to equality; for it was shewn, that when the canal was very small, the repulsion was to that for an infinite column as the length of the canal to the radius of the plate. Thereſore if the radius of the greater plate be (for example) double of that of the smaller, and the little column be th of the radius, ĩt will be ſęth of the radius of the smaller plat. Now 2 th of half the repulsion is equal to ,4th of the double repulsion. Also, in the case of the spheres, the repulsion of a particle at the surſace is as the quantity of fluid directly, and as the square of the radius inversely; but when the density is the same in both shells, the quantity is as the surface, or as the square of the radius. Therefore the repulsions are equal. 125. Cor. 3. Ifthe density oſthe fluid in two spherical shells be inversely as the diameters, the repulsions for an infinitely extended column of ſluid are equal; for each repels as if all the fluid was collected in the centre Thereſore if the density, and consequently the quantity, be varied in any proportion, the repulsion will vary in the same proportion. The repulsions vill now be as CO x co toęo X 5, orin the ratio of equality. 129. Cor. 2. When the quantities of redundant fluid in two spheres are proportional to their diameters, their repul- ELECTRICITY. 97 being the same: for in as far as the escape proceeds from mere electrie repulsion, it must follow this proportion. But there are evident prooſs of the œo-operation of other physical causess. We observe chemical compositions and decompositions accompanying the escape oſ eleetrie fluid, and its influx into bodies: we are ignorant how far, and in what manner, these operations are aſfected by distance. Boscovich shews most convincingly, that the action of a particle (of vhatever order of composition), on external atoms and particles, is surprisingly changed by a change in the distance and arrangement of its component atoms. A constipation, therefore, to a certain determined degree and lineal magnitude, may he necessary for giving occasion to some of those chemical operations that accompany, and perhaps occasion, the escape oſ the electric fluid. If this be the case (and it is demonstrable to be possible, if the operations of Nature be owing  attractions and repulsions), the escape must be desultory. It is actually so; and this confirms the opinion. THE public is indebted to Mr. Cavendish ſor the preceding theorems on the action of spheres and circular plates. He has given them in a more abstract and general ſorm, ap plicable to any law oſ electric action which experience may warrant. We have accommodated them to the inve. se duplicate ratio of the distances, as a point suſficiently established; and we hope that we have rendered them more simple and perspicuous. We have availed ourselves of Mr. Coulomb's demonstration oſ the uniform density in the canal, without which the theorems could not have been demonstrated.The minute quantity oſ the fluid in the canal can have no sensible effect on the disposition or proportion of the fluid in the plates or spheres. It may be thought that the last corollary, respecting the equilibrium of two spheres, is not agreeable to hydrostatical principles, which require the equality oſ the two forees which balance each other at the orifices of the slender eylinvoL. Iv. ? vy ELECTRICITY. IOl wercharged than beſore, and AB vill be more overcharged. But the now increased quantity oſ redundant fluid in AB will act more strongly on the moveable fluid in DF, and drive more out of itt. This will leave more redundant matter in it than before, and this will act as before on the fluid in the canal GC. This will go on, by repeatedly touching LM, iill at last all is in equilibrio Or this ultimate state may be produced at once by allowing LM to communicate vith the ground. And now, in this permanent state of things, HK contains a certain quantity of redundant fluid; AB contains a greater quantity; DF contains redundant matter; and LM contains its natural quantity. The demand of the problem therefore is to determine the proportion of the redundant fluid in HK to that in AB, and the proportion of the redundant fluid in AB to the deficiency of fluid in DF. The dynamical considerations which determine these proportions are, Ist, The repulsion of the redundant ſluid in AB, for the ſluid in the canal EN, must he precisely equal to the attraction of the redundant matter in DF for the same ſluid in the canal; for LM, being saturated, is neutral. 2d, The repulsion of the redundant ſuid in HE, for the whole ſluid in the canal GC, must balance the excess of the repulsion of the redundant fluid in AB above the attraction of the redundant matter in DV for the same. Let the redundant ſluid in AB be æ. the redundant matter in DF /m. the redundant ſluid in HK F. Because HK and AB are equal, there can be no doubt but that the fluid in those plates would he similarly disposed; and it is highly probable, that if AB be very near DVF, the redundant ſluid in AB, and the redundant matter in DF, vill also be disposed nearly in the same manner. This vill appear plainly vhen we consider with attention the forces acting between a very small portion of AB and the corresponding portion of DF. The probability that this is the case is so evident, that we apprehend it unneces- ELECTRICITY. ſ] quently n is a considerable number, ve may take the numn a . ber 3 tr5 vithout any great error. In this case f ia equal to F x 5 very nearly. Suppose CA to be six inches, and CE to be /5th of an inch; this will give n = I20, n 14,400 and = 60F; or, more exactly, ſ/=F X 5T 2259 = 602 F. IV, instead of the plate HE, we employ a globe of the same diameter, ſ will be but half of this quantity, or f =F x 7  I21, 121) 136. It also appears, that when the plates AB and DF are very near to each other, and consequently n a large number, the deficiency in DF is very nearly equal to the redundancy in AB. In the example now given, n = ſf being n.I1 =f x7 137. Yet this great defſicieney in DF does not make it electrical on the side toward LM. It is just so much evacuated, that a particle of fluid at its surface has no tendency to enter or to quit it. Lastly, this great quantity oſ fluid eolleeted in AB does not render it more electrical than HE. In general, things are in the condition treated of in § 29, 28, &e. The attentive reader will readily see, that this account of the apparatus of ſour plates is only an approximation to the condition that really obtains under our observation. Our canals are not of indefinite length, nor occupied by fluid that is distributed ith perfect uniformity; nor is the fluid uniformly spread over the surface of the plates He will also see, that the real state of things, as they occur in our experiments, tends to diminish the great disproportion which this imaginary statement determines. But when the canals are very long in comparison with the diameters of the plates, ELECTRICITY. 1/5 s0mæ oſ its natural fluid toward d; and thus A becomes more disposed to give out, and a to take in, while d is disposed to emit, and D to attract. Thus every circumstance favours the passage of the whole, or almost the whole, redundant ſluid to quit AB at A, to go along a b d, and to enter into DF at D. 140. It is plain, that there must be a strong tendency in the fluid in AB to go into DF, and that the plates must strongly attract each other. A particle of fluid situated between them tends toward DF vith a force, which is to the sole repulsion of AB nearly as twice the redundant fluid in ĩt to what it would contain iſ electrifiod to the same degree vhile standing alone. WirH this particular and remarkable case of induced eleetricity, we shall conclude our explanation of Mr. æpinus' Theory of Electric Attraction and Repulsionn. The reader will recolleet, that we began the consideration of the disposition of the electric fluid in bodies, in order to deduce such legitimate consequences of the hypothetical law of action as we could compare with the phenomena. I41. These comparisons are abundantly supplied by the preceding paragraphs, particularly by § 74, 5, 76; by § 130, and by § 134. Let a smooth metal sphere be electrified positively in any manner whatever, and then touch it with a small one in iĩts natural state. The redundant fluid is divided between them in a proportion which the theory determines with accuracy. By the theory also the redundant fluid in both acts as if collected in the centree Therefore the proportion of the repulsions is determined. These can be examined by our electrometer. But, as this mensuration may be said to depend on the truth oſ the theory, we may examine this independent of it. Let the balls be equal. Then the redundant fluid is divided equally between the bodies, whatever be the law of actionn. Thereſore observe the electrometer, as it is aſ- ELECTRICITY. 107 oſ confronting the hypothetical law with experiment. The argument was no less satisſactory in this case; but the examination required attention to purticulars not vet mentioned, vhich made the proportions between the fluid in HK and AB (ſig. 3.) widely different from those mentioned in the preceding paragraphss These circumstances are among the most curious and important in the wholè study, and will be considered in their place. 145. We rest thereſore with confidence on the truth of the law of electric action, assumed hy us as a principle of explanation and investigation. It is quite needless and unproſitable to give any detail of the numerous experiments in vhich we confronted it with the phenomena. The scrupulous reader vill get ample satisſaction ſrom the excellent experiments oſ Mr. Coulomb with his delicate electrometer. He will find them in the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences of Paris for 1784, 1785, 1786, and 1787. Some of them are of the same kind with those employed by the writer of this article; others are oſ a diſferent kind; and many are directed to another object, extremely curious and important in this study, namely, to discover how the electric fluid is disposed in bodies; and a third set are directed to an examination of the manner in which the electric ſluid is dissipated along imperfect conductors. . But we have already drawn this article to a great length, and must bring it to an end, by explaining some very remarkable phenomena, namely, the operation of the Leyden phial, the operation of the electrophorus, and the dissipation oſ electricity by sharp points and by imperſeet conductors. 146. The ohservations of Mr. Watson on the necessity of connecting the rubher of an electrical machine with the ground, might have suggested to philosophers the doctrine of plus and minus eleetricity, especially after the valuable discoveries of Mr Symmer and Cigna. A serious consideration of these general ſacts would have led to the theory ELECTRICITY. 109 gither account ſor the total inactivity oſ the compound, or which will explain, in the very same manner, the action of the compound itselſ: yet all seem to content themselves vith àa vague and indistinet notion of this preliminary step, and have allowed themselves to speak of electrical atmospheres, and spheres of activity, and such other creatures of the mind, without once taking the trouble of considering vwhether those assumptions afforded any real explanation. Hov different was Newton's conduet. When he discovered that the planets attracted each other in the inverse duplicate ratio oſ the distances, and that terrestrial gravity was an instance of the same force, and that thereſore the deflection of the earth was the effect of the accumulated weight oſ all ĩts parts; he did not rashly aſfirm this of the planets, till he examined what would be the effect of the accumulated attraction in the above mentioned proportion. I47. Mr. æpinus has the honour of first treading in the steps oſ our illustrious countryman; and he has done it vith singular success in the explanation of the phenomena of attraction and repulsion, as we have already seen. In no part of the study has his success been so conspicuous as in the explanation of the curious and important phenomena of the Leyden phial. It only remained ſor him to account ſor the accumulation of such a prodigious quantity of this agent as was competent to the production of effects which seemed to exceed the similar effects in other cases, out of all proportion. Indeed, the disproportion is so great, as to make them appear to be of a different and incomparable naturee. Dr. Wilson's experiments in the pantheon are therefore precious, by shewing that nothing was wanted for the production of all the effects of the Leyden phial but a surface suſficiently extensive ſor containing a vast quantity of fluid, and so perfectly conducting as to admit of its simultaneous and rapid transſerence. Therefore we assert, that one oſ the chief merits of Mr. pinus' theory is the satisſactory explanation of the accumulation of this vast quanti- ELECTRICITY. ] lll shewn to be almost equally deprived of fluid), by connecting the two plates by a small wire. But as it was also shewn in that paragraph, that the foree vith which the accumulated ſluid vas attracted by the redundant matter in the other plate was exceedingly great, and consequently its tendency. to escape was proportionably increased; this aceumulation eannot be obtãained unless we can prevent this spontaneous transſerence. 150. Here the non-conducting power of idio-electrics, without any dimĩution of the action of the electrie fluid on fluid or matter on the other side of them, comes to our aid, and we at once think of interposmg a plate of glass, or vax, or rosin, or any other electric, between our condueting plates. Sueh is the immediate suggestion of a person's mind who entertains the æpinian notion of the electric fluid; and such, we are convinced, is the thought of all who- imagine that they understand the phenomena of the Leyden phial. But those who attempt to explain electrie aetion by means of vhat they call electric atmospheres of variable density or intensity, are not entitled to make any sueh inference, nor to expeet any such phenomena as the Leyden phial exhibits. Eleetricity, they say, acts by the intervention of atmos pheres: Therefore, vhatever allows the propagation of this action (conceive it in any manner whatever), allows the propagation of these agents; and whatever does not conduet electric action, does not conduct the agents. Interposed glass should therefore prevent all aetion on the other plate. This is true, even although it were possible (which we think it is not) to form a clear notion of the free passage oſ this material atmosphere in an instant, and this without any diminution of its quantity, and consequently oſ its aetion, by the displacement of so much of it by the solid matter of the body which it penetrates Vet without this undiminished action of the electrie plate on the fluid, and on the matter, beyond the glass, and on the canal by which its fluid may be driven off into the general massno such accumulation r ELECTRICITY. 118 diſference in the number of turns will give some notion of the expenditure of fluid necessary for electriſying the plate of tinfoil alone This will be found to be very trifling when ahe electricity is in so moderate a degree. It is proper, however, to keep to this moderate degree of electrification, because when it is much higher, the dissipation from the edges of the plate is very great. Replace the wire, and again raise the electrometer to 30. Now bring forward the plate DF, keeping it duly opposite and parallel to AB, and taking care not to touch it. It will produce no sensible change on the position of the electrometer till it come within ſour or three inches oſ the glass pane; and even when we bring it much nearer (iſ a spark do not ſly from the glass pane to DF), the electrometer HG will sink but two or three degrees, and the electrometer at N will be little affected. Now remove the plate DF again to the distance of tvo or three feet, and attach to its ball N a bit of chain, or silver or gold thread, which will trail on the table Again, raise the electrometer to 300, and hring DF gradually forward to AB. The electrometer HG vill gradually fall down, but vill rise to its former height, if DF be withdrawn to its first situation. It is scarcely necessary to shew the conformity of this to the theory contained in § 134, 135, &e. As the plate DF approaches, the redundant fluid in AB acts on the fluid in DF, and drives it to the remote end of the wire EN, as was shewn by the divergency of the balls at N; and then an accumulation begins in AB, and the electrometer HG falls, in the same manner as iſ part of the fluid in the prime conductor were communicated to AB. When DF communicates with the ground, the electrometer at N cannot shew any electricity, but much more fluid is now driven out of DF, in proportion as it is brought nearer o AB. Instead of connecting AB immediately with the prime conductor, let the wire GC have a plate at the end G, of the same dimensions as AB, having an electrometer aitached to the side next to AB. Let this apparatus of tve vOL. Iv. c ELECTRICITY. Il some other idio-electrie. We think that in general it was most remarkable in the coarse kinds of glass, provided they vere uniformly transparent. We found it most remarkable in some common glass which had exſoliated greatly by the woather: but we also found that such glasses were very apt to be burst by the charge. The hardest and best London crown-glass seemed to accumulate less than any other; and a ooloured glass, vhich when viewed by reſlection seemed quite opake, but appeared brown by transmitted light, admitted an accumulation greotly exceeding all that we have tried; but it could not be eharged much higher without the certainty oſ being burst. This diversity in the accumulation, which may be made in diſferent kinds of glass, hinders us from comparing the absolute accumulations assigned by the theory with those which experiment gives us. But though we cannot make this comparison, we can make others which are equally satisſactory. We can discover what proportion there is between the accumulation in glass of the same hind, as it may diſfer in thickness and in extent of surſac.. Using mirror glass, which is oſ uniform and measurable thickness, and very flat plates, which come into accurate or equable eontactve found that the accumulation is inversely as the thickness of the plates; but with this exception, that when two plates were used instead oſ a plate oſ double thickness, the diminution by the inerease of thickneis was not nearly in the proportion of this increase Instead of being reduced to one-half, it was more than twothirds; and in the kind called Dutch plate, the diminution as inconsiderable. 154. The experiments with the Dutch and other double plates, suggested another instruetive and pretty experiment. Observing these plates to cohere with considerable force, it was thought worth while to measure it; which was attempted in this manner: Two very ſlat brass plates AB, DF (Plate II. fig. 5.), furnished with wires and halls, were suspended, about three inches asunder, by silk threads, as reæ ELECTRICITY. mm ed above an ounce weight, hung on the wire EN, to separate the plates from the glass. LI55. The experienced electrician need not be told, that by bringing the two ends of a bent wire in contact with the two plates (first touching DF vith it) discharges the apparatus, and causes the plates to drop off from the pane. But he may ſarther observe, that if there be attached to each end of the discharging vire a downy ſeather, and if he first bring the end near the plate DF, and ubserve the ſeather to be not at all, or but a very little, aſfected, and if he then bend round the other end toward the plate AB, both feathers vill immediately stretch out their fibres to the plates, and cling fast to them, long beſore the discharging spark is seen. This is a fine prooſ oſ the process of discharge, which begins by the induction of electricity on the ends of the discharging wire; first, negative electricity on the end that approaches A, and, in the same instant, opposite electricities al D and the adjoining end of the wire. 156. The following observation of Professor Rlichmann of St. Petersburgh is extremely instruetive and amusing. Let a glass pane be coated on both sides, and furnished with a small electrometer attached to the coatings. It is represented as if seen edgevise in plate II. fig. 6. Let it be charged positively (that is, by redundancy) by the coating AB, vhile DF communicates with the ground. The electrometer Aa will stand out from the plate, and D d will hang down close by its coating, as long as DF communicates with the ground. But as the electricity gradually dissipates by communication to the contiguous air, the ball a will gradually, but very slowly, ſall down. We may judge of the intensity of the remaining electricity by the deviation of the electrometer, and ve may conceive this deviation divided into degrees, indicating, not angles, but intensities, vhich we conceive as proportional to the redundancy or deſiciency hich occasion them. 3 ELECTRICITY. 119 Fcial repulsions then exertedl. We may also suppose, that the action of the redundant fluid, or redundant matter, in either coating, on the external fluid contiguous to iĩt, ĩs to its action on the fluid contiguous to the other coating in the constant proportion of I0 to .. We select this proportion for the simplicity of the computation. Then the difference of these actions is always ſ5th oſ the full action on the fluid contiguous to it. This is also an exact supposition in snme particular case, depending on the breadth oſ the coating and the thickness of the pane. Nov, let the primitive unhalanced repulsion between AB and the contiguous ſluid of the electrometer be 100, while DF communicates with the ground. The ball a will stand at 100; the ball d vill hang touching DF. Then q, by losing th, retains only 90, and would sink to 90°: But as this destroys the equilibrium on the other side, fluid will enter into DF, s0 as to reduce the deficiency ?⸗th- Therefore nine degrees oſ fluid vill enter; and its action on will be the same as if,%ths of 9, or S,1 had been restored 0 AB. Thereſore a vill rise from 90 to 95,1; or it will sink in one minute from 100 to 95, I. But if we have cut oſf the communication of DF with the ground, this quantity of ſluid cannot come into DF; and the quantity which really comes into it from the air will be io that which escapes ſrom A as the attraction on the side of DF to the repulsion on the side of AB. By the diminution oſ the repulsion th, and the want of 9 degrees of fluid in DF © balance it, DF acquires an attraction for fluid, which may be called nine. Therefore, since s5th of the primitive repulsion of AB has dissipated 10 measures of fluid in the minute, the attraction of DF ill cause it to acquire th of ꝗ, or 0,9, ſrom the air in the same minute At the end of the minute, therefore, there remains an unbalanceũ attraction ſor fluid =S8, I; and consequently an unhalanced repulsion between the redundant matter in DF, suũ that in the ball . Thereſore d vill rise  8,1. But ELECTRICITY. 121 unbalanced repulsion of AB is reduced to about one half. For if one halſ of the unbalanced ſluid be really taken out of AB, and if DF can get no supply whatever, it must acquire an attraction corresponding to, ths of this; and if the supply by the air be now opened to it, things vill go on in the way already deseribed, till all is discharged. This account of the process is only an approximation; beeause we have supposed the changes to happen in a desultory manner, as in the popular way oſ explaining the acceleration of gravity. The rise oſ d is not at an end till the attraction of DF ſor fluid is to the repulsion of AB as 19 to 20. But if we interrupt this progress in any period of it, by touching DF, we immediately render it neutral, and d falls quite down, in consequence of receiving a complete supply oſ fluid. But this must change the state of AB, and cause it to rise ths of the desent of . As a and d vere nearly at an equal height before DF was touched, it is plain that a vill rise to nearly twice its present height; aſter which, the same series oſ phenomena will be repeated as soon as the ſinger is removed from DF. Iſ, instead of touching DF, we touch AB, the same things must happen; o must fall down, and d must rise to nearly twice its present height, and all will go on as before, aſter removing the finger. Lastly, if instead of alloving either side to touch the ground alternately, ve only toueh it with a small insulated body, such as the wire with the halls » and u, the ball attached to the side touched sinks, till the electricity is shared between the coating and the wire with balle. The ball attached to the other coating rises,ꝰ ths of the sinking of the ſirst bal. The crooked wire ball is now repelled by the coating which it touched, and the other ball is brought near to the other coating, and must be attracted by it, because the electricities are opposit. This operation evidently tends to transſer the redundant fluid by degrees to the side where it is defieient. It needs no explanation. We ELECTRICITY. 1238 that if a person, when insulated, discharges a glass through his oWvn body, he is not found electriſied: And he infers. as a necessary consequence of this, that a series of any number of jars may be charged by the same turns of a machine, if we make the outside of the first communicate with the inside of the second, and the outside oſ the second with the inside of the third; and so on; and the outside of the last communicate with the ground. Having made the trial, and having ſound that more turns oſ the machine were necessary, he attributes this to dissipation into the air by the communicationn. But our theory teaches us otherwisee We learn from it, that the redundant matter in the plate DF is less than the redundant fluid in AB, in the proportion of nI to n; and thereſore the redundant ſluid in the overcharged side of the next plate is no greaterr. The charge or redundancy in the mth jar of the series vill therefore be nI n the charge of the 10th jar will be nearly 51. Although a coated plate cannot be charged, unless one of the coatings communicate with the ground, it may be electrified as much as one of the coatings can be alone. And this is seen m our attempt to charge it: For as soon as we attempt to electrify one side, the other is electriſied also; for it gives a spark, which no uneleetrified body will do. Also, vhen we discharge a jar by an insulated discharger, we always leave it electrical in the same vay with the body from which it was charged. Ifa man is not found electrified aſter having discharged a jar through his oWn body, it is owing to the great surſace of his body, which reduces the simple electrification of a side of the jar to a very insignificant and insensible quantity. 159. Wilcke (and we believe Franklin before him) maintains. that when the jar has been charged, by connecting one side with the prime conductor and the other with the rubber, it is ncutral and inactive on both sides But this Thus, if n, or the charge oſ the Ist jar, be 60, 124 ELECTRICITY. is not 50; and a slight reſlection might have convinced them that it cannot be so: if it were, the jar could not be discharged. Each side, while connected with the machine, must be in the condition of the part with which it is connected, and in a disposition to take or give. If the trial be careſully made, it will be found to be equally active on both sides; and the discharging rod, having down on its ends, will shew this in an unequivocal manner, and shew that its condition diſfers in this respect from that oſ a jar charged in the ordinary vay. It is in the maximum state of Richmann's plate, deseribed in § 156, when d rises no more. 160. In discharging a jar A, ifinstead of the outside communicating with the inside by a wire, ve make it communicate with the inside of a second jar B, while the outside oſ B is made to communicate vith the inside of A, we shall find B charged by the discharge oſ A; and that the discharge oſ A is not complete, the charge 2: always remaining, whatever may have been the magnitude oſ n 161. We may infer from this experiment, that when a shock is given to a number of persons, a, b, c, &e. we are not to conclude, that the fluid which comes into the deficient side oſ the jar is the same which came out oſ the redundant side The whole, or perhaps only a part, of the moveable ſluid in the person a goes into b, replacing as much as has passed from b into c, &c. Indeed, where the canal is a slender wire, we may grant that great part of the individual particles of fluid which were accumulated on the inside oſ the jar have gone into the outsidee. Perhaps the quantity transſerred, even in vhat we call a very great discharge, may be but a small proportion of what naturally belongs to a body. This may be the reason why a charge will not melt more than a certain length of wire. Mr. Cavendish aseribes this to the greater obstruction in a longer wire; but this does not appear so probable A greater obstruction would occasion a longer delay oſ the transſerencæ: and thereſore the action of the same quantity would be longer continued- ELECTRICITY. 195 He proves, that a metal wire conducts many hundred times ſaster than water; yet, when water is dissipated by a discharge, it is found to have actually conducted a much grealer proportion of the whole charge. We ascribe it chieſly to this, that, in a short wire, the quantity transſerred exceeds the whole quantity belonging to the wire. 162. It is surely needless to prove that the theory oſ the Leyden phial is the same vith that oſ the coated pane. The only difference is, that we are not so able to tell the disposition of the accumulated fluid, and the evacuated matter, in every figure When the phial is of a globular form, and of uniform thickness, with an exceedingly small neck, we then know the disposition more accurately than in a plat. The redundant fluid is then uniformly distributed. If we could insure the uniformity of thickness, such a phial would be an excellent uxIT for measuring all other charges by; but we can neĩther nsure this (by the manner of working glass), nor measure its want of uniſormity: vhereas we can have mirror plate made of precisely equal thickness, and measure it This, therefore, must be taken as our unit. 168. And here we remark, that this gives us the most perfect oſ all methods for comparing our theory with experiment. We must take two plates, of the same glass and the same thickness, but of diſferent dimensions of coated surfaco. We must charge both by very long condueting wires on both sides, aud then measure how oſten the charge of the one is contained in the other. Mr. Cavendish has given an unexceptionable method of doing this independent of all theory. As it applies equally to jars, however irregular, we shall take it altogether. When a jar is charged, observe the electrometer conneeted vith it, and immediately communicate the charge to another equal jar (the perfect equality being previously ascertained by the methods, which will appear immediately). Again note the electrometer. This vill give the elevation, which indicates one- half, independent of all theory. Now ELECTRICITY. 1231 164. It was chieſly by this method that the writer of this article, having rend Mr Cavendish's paper, compared the measures given by experiment with those which result from an action in the inverse duplieate ratio of the distancee When the charges were moderate, the coincidence was perfect; when the charges were great, the large plates contained a little more. This is plainly owing to their being less disposed to dissipate from the edges I65. We may now ſollow with some conſidence the practical maxims deducible from the theory for the construction of this accumulating apparatus. The theory prescribes a very conduoſing eoating, in close and uninterrupted contact: It preseribes an extensive surface, and a thin plate oſ idioelectrie substance. Accordingly all these are in fact attended by a more powerful effeet. Metal is found to be far preferable to water, which was first employed, having been suggested by the original experiments of Gray, Kleist, and Cunæus. A eontinuous plating is preseribed, in preſerence to some methods commonly practised; such as filling the jar vith brass dust, or gold leaf, or covering its surface with ſilings stuck on with gum ater, or coating the inside with an amalgam of mercury and tin. This last appears, hy refleetion from the outside, to give a very continuous coating; but ĩ& we hold the jar between the eye and the light, we may pereœive that iĩt is only like the covering with a cobweb. Yet there are cases where these imperſeet coatings only are practicable, and some rare ones where they are preſerable In the medieal exhibition of electricity, where the purpose intended is supposed to require the transfusion of a great quanTity oſ the electric fluid, any thing that can diminish the irritating smartness of the spark is desirablee. This is greatly eſſected by those imperfect coatings. Small shocks, which convey the same quantity of fluid with the sharp pungent and alarming spark from a large surſace, are quite soft and inoffensive, greatly resembling the spasmodic quivering, sometimes felt in the lip or eye- lid, and vill not alarm the most fearful patient. 128 ELECTRICITY. 166. Close contact of the metallic coating is observed io increase the effect of the charge But it is also found, that it greatly increases the risk oſ bursting the glass by spontaneous discharge through its substance. An experienced electrician (ve think it is Mr. Brookes oſ Norwich) says, that since he has employed paper covered with tinſoil, with the paper next the glass, instead of the ſoil itself, he has never had a jar burst; whereas the accident has been very ſrequent beſoree The theory justiſies this observationn. Paper is an imperfect conductor, even when soaked with flour paste; and the transfusion, though rapid, is not instantaneous nor desultory, but begins ſaintly, and svells to a maximum. It operates on the glass, like gradual warming instead of the sudden application of great heat. 167. Mr. Cuthbertson, an excellent artist in all electrical apparatus, and inventor of the best air-pump, has made a curious observation on this subjeett. He says that he has uniformly observed, that jars take a much greater charge (nearly one third), if the inside he considerably damped, by blowing into it with a tube reaching to the bottom  Nicholsos Journal, March 1799).We must acknowledge, that we can ſorm no distinct conception of vhat Mr. Cuthbertson calls an undulation of the elustic atmosphere We do not know whether he means that the atmosphere is actually undulating as vater, or as air in the production of sound, its parts being in æ reciprocating motion; or whether he only means that this atmosphere consists of quiescent strata, alternately denser and rarer. Nor can ve form any notion how either of these undulations contributes to the explosion, or prevents itt. We are really but very imperſectly acquained vith that part oſ the science which should determine the precise accumulation that produces the desultory transſerence. We mentioned one necessary consequence of the action inversely as the square of the distance, which has some relation to this question, æiz. that a particle, making part of a spherical surſace, is twice as much repelled when it has ELECTRICITY. 129 just quitted the surface as when it made part of it, provided its place be immediately supplied. And another circumstance has been frequently mentioned, viæ. that a greater, and perhaps much greater, ſoree is necessary, ſor enabling a particle of fluid to quit the last series oſ particles of the solid matter than for producing almost any constipation. But we are not certain that these circumstances are of suſficient inſluence to explain the whole of the event. Valeant quantum valere possint. Yet we are of opinion that Mr. Cuthbertson has assigned the true cause, namely, the imperſeet coating oſ the inside of the glass. When we come to the explanation of the escape of electricity along imperfect conductors, we hope that it will appear, that the disposition to escape must be greatly diminished by a charge, which disposes the ſluid so, that in no place the constipation is remarkably greater than in another part very near it, and the density changes everyvhere slowly. 168. With respect to the form oſ the coated glass, the theory prescribes that which will occasion such a distribution of the electric fluid as shall make its repulsion for the fluid in the canal which connects it with the prime conduetor as little as possible In this respeet, it would seem that a plate is the best, and a globe the worst: but if both are very thin, the difference eannot be considerable. Our experience, however, seems to indicate the opposite maxim as the most proper. We have uniformly found a globe to be far preferable to a plate oſ the same thickness, and that a plate was generally the weakest form. It must be owned, that we have not yet been able to ascertain by the theory what is the exact distribution of the redundant ſluid in a plate. In a sphere, it must be uniſormly spread over the surfacee. We must also rseribe part oſ the inſeriority oſ the plate to its greater tendency to dissipation from the edges. It a plate be coated in a star-like ſorm, vith slender projecting points, we shall observe them luminous in the dark, almost at the beginning oſ the accumulation; and the plate will discharge voL. 1v. I 130 ELECTRICITY. itself by these points, over the uncoated part, before it has attained any considerable strength. Those forms are least exposed to this deterioration which have the least circumſerence to the same quantity of surſace. We have always found, that a square eoating ill not receive a more poverſul charge vithout exploding than a circular one oſ the same breadth, although it contains a ſourth more surſace; and this although any visible escape from the angles be prevented by covering the outline with sealing wax. Oſ all ſorms, therefore, a globe, vith a very narrow, but long neck, is the most retentive. But it is very diſficult to coat the inside of such a vessel The balloons used in chemical distillations make excellent jurs, and can be easily coated internally vhen the neck will admit the handc. The thinnest of tinſoil may be used, by first pasting it on paper, and then applying it either with the foil or the paper next the glass It should be cut into gussets, as in the covering of terrestrial globes; and they should be put on overlapping about half an inch. The middle of the bottom is then coated with a cireular piece:. The great bottles for holding the mineral acids are also good jars, but inferior to the balloons, because they are very thick in the bottom, and for some distance from it. A box of balloons contains more effective surſace than an equal box of jars of the same diameter and height of coating. 169. The most compendious battery may be made in the following manner: Choose some very ſlat and thin panes of the best crown glass, coat a cirele (a b e d), Plate II. fig. 7.) in the middle oſ hoth surfaces, so as to leave a suſficient border uncoated for preventing a spontaneous discharge; let each of them have a narrow slip of tinſoil a reaching from the coating to the edge on one side, and a similar slip c leading to the opposite edge on the other sidee Lay them on each other so that the slips of two adjoining plates may coincide. Connect all the ends of these slips on one side together by a slip of the same ſoil, or a wire which touches them all. Then, connecting one of these collecting slips with the prime con- ELECTRICITY. 131 ductor, and the other with the ground, we may charge and discharge the whole together. If the panes be round, or exact squares, ve may employ as few of them together as ve please, by setting the whole in an open frame, like an oldfashioned plate- varmer; and then turning the set which we would employ together at right angles to the rest. This evidently detaches the two parcels ſfrom each other. This battery may be varied in many ways; and if the whole is always to be employed together, ve may make it extremely retentive, by eovering the uncoated border of the plate with melted pitch, and, while it is soſt, pressing down its neighbour on it till the metallic coatings toueh. For greater variability this may be done in parcels of the whole. 170. On the same principle, a most compendious hattery may be made by alternate layers of tinfoil and hard varnish, or by coating plates of very clear and dry Muscovy glass. But these must be used with caution, lest they be burst by a spontaneous discharge; in which case we cannot discover vhere the flaw has happened. They make a surprising accumulation, without shewing any vivid electricity. 171. We have made a very ſine electrie phial for carrying about, by forming tin-plate (iron plate tinned) into somevhat of a phial shape, with a long neck. We then covered this with a coating of fine sealing wax, about 4th of an inch thick, quite to the end of the neck, and coated the sealing wax, all but the neck, with tinfoil. It is plain that the sealing wax is the coated idio-electric, and that the tin-plate phial serves for an inner coating and wiree The dissipation is almost nothing if the neck be very small; and it only requires a little caution to avoid bursting by too high a charge. Even this may be prevented by coating the sealing vax so near to the end of the neck, that a spontaneous discharge must happen before the accumulation is too great. 172. It is well known that the discharge happens when the discharging balls are at a considerable distance from each other; therefore only as much is discharged as corresponds 9 1392 ELECTRICITY. to that distance. This is one cause of the residuum of a discharge which sometimes is pretty considerablee Some experiments require the very utmost force of the charge. It is thereſore proper to make the discharge as close and abrupt as possiblee But the most rapid approach that we can make of the discharger is nothing in comparison with the velocity with which the fluid seems to ſly off, and vill therefore have but smill influence in making a more instantaneous and complete discharge Theory points out the following method: Let a very thick plate of glass (half an ineh), of several inches diameter, be put between the discharging halls, which should, in this case, be small, and let these balls be strongly pressed against it by a springg While the charge is going on, a very small part of the glass plate, round the points of contact, will receive a weak and useless charge; but this will not hinder the hattery from acquiring the same intensity of charge. When this is completed, let the intervening glass plate be briskly withdravnn. The discharge will begin with an intensity which is unattainable in the ordinary manner of proceeding. 178. Mueh has been said of the lateral explosion. It appears, that in some of the prodigious transſerences of electrieity that have taken place in the discharge of great surfaces through wires barely suſficient to conduct them, flashes of light are thrown oſf laterally; but the most delicate electrometer, it is said, is not affectedl. The ſact is not accnrately narrated; we have always observed a very delicate eleetrometer to be afſectedlc The passage of such a quantity oſ fluid is almost equivalent to the co-existence of it in any given section of the wire; but it remains there for so short a time, that, acting as an accelerating ſorce, it cannot produce a very sensible motion. It is like the discharging a pistol ball through a sheet of paper hanging loosely. It goes through it without very sensibly agitating it. I74. It has sumelimes appeared to us probable that, by means of this lateral explosion, the direction of the current may ELECTRICITY. i 133 he discovered. Let the jar a b (Plate II. ſig. 8.) be discharged by a vire a cd e b, interrupted at c d by the coating of a very thin plate of tale; let the coating also be very thin. There must be some obstruetion to the motion, which must cause the fluid to press on the sides or surſaces oſ the coating, just as the obstruction to the motion of water in a pipe (arising from ſriction, or even from material obstacles in the pipe) causes the water to press on the sides oſ the pipe. Thereſore if a wire æ connect the other coating with the ground, we should expect that ſluid will be expelled along this ire, and a charge be given to the platę of tale. Now whether the course in this apparatus be from b to a, or ſrom a to b, iſ any charge he acquired by c q, it will probubly be positive in c d, and negative in æ3; for it ĩs eleetrie fluid that is supposed to pass: therefore we should always have one species of electricity, whether  has been charged by glass or by sealing wax; and this species will indicate which is positive. We have said  probably for it is not impossible that it may be otherwise. If the abstraction at d be supposed more poverſul than the supplying force at c, the same obstruction may perhaps keep the plate c d in an absorbing state, just as water descending in a vertical pipe, into which iĩt is pressed by a very small head of water in the cistern, instead of pressing the sides of the pipe, rather draws them inwards, as is well known. This seems, at any rate, an interesting experiment; for ve must acknovledge, that there still hangs a mysterious curtain before a theory which deduces 50 much ſrom the presence of a substance which we have never been able to exhibit alone, and where we do not know when it abounds and vhen it is deficient. It is like the phlogiston of Stahl, or the ealoric of Lavoisie. Tt will be proper to use the thinnest plate of tale to be charged, and o connect it with another coated plate of halſ the diameter, or less, in order to increase the accumulation. It seems by no means a desperate case. j ELECTRICITY. 135 For if a glass be coated only on one side, and be electrified on that side, we obtain a strong spark from the other side by bringing the knuckle near it; and this may be obtained for some time from one spot of that surface; and aſter this ve get no more from that spot, but get sparks, with the same vivacity, and in the same number, from any other spot that is opposite to the coating on the other sidee In this manner we can obtain a succession of sparks from every inch oſ surſace opposite to the coating, and from no other part. But what puts this question beyond all doubt is, that if we now lay a metal coating on the surface from vhich the sparks have been drawn in this manner, and make a communication between the two metallic coatings, by means oſ a bent wire, we obtain a perfeet discharge. To complete the prooſ, ve need only observe that this experiment succeeds vhether the glass has been electrified by excited glass or by excited sealing-wax. Therefore the coated surface may receive the electrie fluid by the coating, as we see plainly that it is abstracted by the coating The use of the coatings may be nothing more than to act as conduetors to every part of the surſace of the electric. None of these thoughts eseaped the penetrating and sagacious mind of Dr. Franklin. He immediately put it to the test of experiment; and laying a moveable metallic conting on both surfaces, he ſound the glass charge perſectly well. He liſted off the coatings: which operation was accompanied by flashes of light between the metallic coverings and the glass from which he separated them. Having removed the coatings, he applied others, completed the circle, and obtained a perſect discharge, not distinguishable from what he would have obtained from the first coatings. 177. Thus it was demonstrated, that the glass plate itselſ acquired by charging a redundant stratum on one side, and a deficient stratum on the other side; and we now see, at once, the reason why the accumulation turns out greater than what is determined by the theory. The distance be- ELECTRICITY. 157 ant ſluid to be lodged in bã 3 d, and e: ę7 to hold all the redundant matter, and the two coatings to be in their natural slate, a particle ꝓ, placed in the middle oſ the surface b d, vill be nearly as much attracted by :e ſ ę as it is repelled by bà dd (exactly so if the plates were infinitely extended); and if the coating be removed, keeping parallel and opposite to the surface that it quits, there will be very litile, if any, tendeney to fly ſrom the glass to the coating; there will rather be some disposition in the fluid to quit the coating and fly to the glass; because the repulsion oſb à à d is more diminished than the attraction of . e ? ſ. (542.) But the diſſference vill be very small indeed. V. B. The result would be very diſſerent iſ eleetric action ſollowed a different lav. l VWere it as T⸗ the coating would be much overcharged; l and were it as, it would be very much undercharged.) Now the ſact is, that when the coating is careſully removed, it is possessed of very litile electricity, not more than may reasonably be supposed to run into it by bringing avay one part before another. It ĩs impossible to keep it mathematically parallel Hence we may conclude that the greatest part of the redundant fluid is lodged in the glass iſ the plates be thin, and the redundant ſluid bear but a small proportion to the natural quantity. Similar reasoning shews that the greatest part oſ the deſicieney is in the other side of the glass; and that ihereſore the coatings are very nearly in their natural state, and merely serve the purpose of condueting. We havæe employed coatings of considerable thickness, having holes through them, opposite to which was some gold leaſ of the heaviest sort, and almost ſree of erackss We ave examined the state oſ the bottom of those pits in Mr. Coulomb's manner, and always ſound them void of electririt y. 185 ELECTRICITY. 179. Thus we leasn that glass, and probably all other clectrics, acquire redundant and deficient strata as well as the most perſect conductors, at the same time that they may be impervious to the fluid; and we get some mode of conceiving how the rupture happens by a strong charge. This may very probably happen when the strata have formed, in alternate order, 50 deep in the glass, that a stratum, in vhich the fluid is crowded close together, may become contiguous to one deprived altogether of fluidc. We cannot, however, sny vith confidence, what should be the effect of this state of things; or oſ one constipated stratum coming in contact with another. This view of the condition of charged glass explains (ve think) several phenomena which seem not well understood by electricians. 180. The residuum of a discharge is ſrequently owing to a charge extending beyond the coating, where the action is considerably irregular, or different from what it would be if the plates were infinitely extended. This outline charge is taken up by the coated part aſter a very little while, and may again be discharged. But it also frequently arises from another stratum (much thinner, as it will always be) than the exterior one, coming to the surſace some time aſter the ſirst discharge, and being now in a condition for being dischurged. It explains the sparkling that is perceived in sucession between the parts of a jar that is coated in spots, during the charge, and the verv sensible residuum oſ the charge of such a vessel. It explains the phenomena of Becarin's Electricitas Vindex (se ELECTR ICITY, Encycl.) and the great difference that may be found in the diſferent kinds of glass in this respect. It explains the great diſference hetween the sensation occasioned by a spark from a perſeetly conducting surface of considerable extent, and that oconsioned by a shock, which conveys the same quantity of ſluid accumulated in a small surface of glass. The discharge oſ the ſirst is almost instantaneous, while that of the last n ELECTRICITY. 186 requires a small moment of time, and is thereſore less desultory and abrupt. The one is pungent and startling; but the other is soſter in the first instant, and swells to a maximum. Therefore, in the medical employment of eleetricity, vhen the purpose is to be effected by the transfusion of a great quantity of electric fluid, ve should recommend very small shocks ſfrom a very large surſace oſ coated glass, very ſaintly electrified, in place oſ strong sparks. Patients oſ irritable constitutions are frequently alarmed by the quickness and pungency of strong sparks: but if the balls of Lane's shock-measurer be set so close as to give four or five shocks in each turn of a seven inch cylinder, the shocks are not even disagreeablee The balls should be made oſ fine cupelled silver: in which case, the surface ill never be hurt by the greatest discharge; whereas the discharge of four square feet of coated glass will raise such a roughness on the surface of brass as vill cause it to sputter, and destroy entirely the regularity of the expenditure of fluid. The same consideration should make us prefer a jar conted internally vith amalgam. This cobweb coating gives a greater soſtness to the shock. Lastly, we see why a poverſul and permanent electricity was not produced in the tube filled with melted sealing wax, and treated as mentioned in § 101. The redundancy and deficiency intended to be produced could only be superficia. And because the wax cooled by degrees from the surſace to the axis; and the wax is a conduetor while liquid, it must have taken a charge at last; and thereſore must appear but ſaintly electrical. I81. This aceount of the state of charged glass promises us some assistance in our attempts to conceive what passe⸗ in the excitation oſ glass by ſrictionn. It appears from Beearia's experiments, that the redundant fluid ĩs lodged in he same manner in both cases; ſor by rubbing one side oſ glass tumbler, hile points were presented to the opposite urſace, and were connected with a wire that communieated ith the ground, he gave it a poerſul charge. ELECTRICITY. 4 not come ſrom the extremity of it to the point of discharge through the glass, but through the coating And when alternate strata of redundant fluid and redundant matter are ſormed, the particles in each shiſt their places very little, moving perpendicularly to the stratum. IS1. Even this degree of obstruction has been denied by ome very active eleetricians, vho have multiplied experiments to prove that the ſluid passes freely through glass, and that the theory of coated electries is totally different from what Franklin imaginess. Mr. Lyons oſ Dover has published a numerous list of singular experiments, which he has made with this view, with much trouble, and no small expence. They may all be reduced to this: A wire is brought from the outside oſ a phial, charged by the knob, and terminates in a sharp point at a small distance from a thin glass plate ſit is commonly introduced into a glass tube, having æ ball at the end, and the point of the wire reaches to the centre of the ball); and another wire is connected with the discharging rod, and also comes very near (and frequently close) to the other side of the glass, opposite to the pointed wiree. With this apparatus he obtains a discharge; and therefore says, that the glass is permeable to eleetricity. But he does not narrate all the circumstances of the experiment. We have repeated all of them that have any real difference (for most of them are the same fact in diſferent forms), and we have obtained discharges: But they were all very incomplete, except when the glass was perforated, which happened very ſrequently. The discharge was never made with a full, bright, undivided spark, and loud snap; but with sputtering, and trains of sparks, continued ſor a very sensible time; and the phial was never deprived of a considerable part oſ its charge; and (which Mr. Lyons has taken no notice of) the glass is ſound to be charged, negalive on the side conneeted vith the positive side of the phial, nd positive on the other. This charge was communieated D the glass over a pretty considerable surſace round the ELECTRICITY. 14 Richmann's experiment in § 156. But we must content ourselves with a general, popular view of these particulars, vhich may be sufficient for making us understand what will be the kind, and somewhat of the intensty, of the action of its difſerent parts. The electrophorus consists of three parts. The chief part is the cake ABCD (Plate II. fig. 10.) of some eleetric; such as gum lac, sealing wax, pitch, or other resinous composition. This is melted on some condueting plate, DCFE, and allowed to eongeal; in which state it is found to be negatively eleetrie. Another conducting plate GHBA is laid on it, and may he raised up by silk lines, or any insulating handlee. We shall aull ABCD the carE, DCFE the s0LE, and GHBA the COVEB. The genoral appearances not having been so scientiſically classed in the article ELECTRICI?Y as could be wished, we shall here narmte them, very brieſly, in a way more suited to our purpose. In comparing the theory with observation, it will be proper to make all the three parts of considerable thickness, and oſ no great breadth. Although this diminishes greatly the most remarkable of the actions, it leaves them suſficiently vivid, and it greatly increases the smaller changes which are instructive in the comparison. The general ſocts are, l. If the sole has been insulated during the congelation of the eleetric, till all is cold and hard, the whole is found negatively electric, and the ſinger draws a spark ſrom any part oſ it, especially from the solee. If allowed to remain in this situation, its electricity grows gradually weaker, and at last disappears: but it may be excited again by rubbing the cake with dry warm ſlannel, or, which is the hest, with dry and warm eat or hare fur. If the cover he now set on the take by its insulating handle, but without touching the cover, ud again separated from the cake, no electricity whatever s observed in the cover. ELECTRICITY. 145 I0. Aſter touching both cover and sole, if the cover be raised and again set down, without touching it while aloft, the whole is again inactive. 1l. If both cover and sole be made inactive when joined, they shew opposite electricities when separated, the sole having the electricity of the cake. 12. If both cover and sole hbe made inactive when seporate, they both shew the opposite to the electricity of the cake when joined. 187. Let us now attend to the disposition of the eleetrical fluid in the difſerent parts of the instrument in their various situations, and to the forces which operate mutually between them. N. B. Experiments for examining this instrument are best made by setting the three plates vertically, supported on glass stalks, with leaden feet to steady them. A very small electrometer may be attached to the outer surfaces oſ the cover and sole. IF the extent of the plates were incomparably greater than their thickness, ve may infer from § 92, &e. that the redundant ſluid and matter would be disposed in parallel strata, and that the actions vould be the same at all distances. But since this is not the case, the disposition of the fluid ill be somewhat different; and whatever it is, the action of any stratum vill be diminished by an increase of distance. The ſollowing deseription cannot be very diſferent from the truth: 1588. I. The cake grows negative by cooling; and iſ it were alone, it would have a negative superficial stratum on both sides, oſ greater thickness near the edges; and the ſluid would probably grow denser by degrees to the middle, where it would have its natural density. This disposition may be inſerred from § 92, 93, and 95. But it cools in conjunction with the sole, and the attraction of the redundant matter in the cake fſor the moveable fluid in the sole disturbs its uniform diffusion in the sole, and eauses it to approach the cake. And because this, in all probability, happens while the cake is still a conductor, the disposition of its ſluid vill vOL. 1V. x ELECTRICITY. 147 cake The redundant fluid which has come into the remote side of the sole is less than vhat would saturate the redundant matter of the cake, because it only balances the excess of the remote action oſ this matter above the nearer action of the compressed fluid in the sole; and this smaller quantity of redundant fluid acts on  at a greater distance than that of the redundant matter in the cake. On the whole, thereſore, the particle æ, lying immediately within the surſace GH, is attracted; therefore some vill move tovard the eake, and its natural state of uniform diffusion through the cover vill be changed into a violent state, in which it will be compressed on the surface AB, being abstracted ſrom the surſace GH. It will now have a stratum G g » H, containing redundant matter, and another 2» BA, containing redundant fluidc. But this ill disturb, the arraugement which had taken place in the sole, and had rendered it neutral on the under surfacee We do not attend to the ſluid in the cake, but consider it as immoveable, ſor any motion which it can get will be 50 small, that the variations of its action will be altogether insignificant. The particle 5, situated in that surface, will be more repelled by the compressed fluid in the stratum g» BA than it is attracted by the equivalent, but more remote redundant matter in GH . Fluid is thereſore disposed to quit the surſace EF, and the sole appears positively electric; very little indeed, if the cover be thinn. All this may be observed by attaching a small Canton's electrometer to the lower surface of the sole, or by touching the sole vwith the electrometer of fig. 8, and then trying its electricity by rubbed wax or glass. 191.IV. A particle of fluid æ, placed immediately withont the surface GH, vill be more attracted by the deficient stratum GH ꝑ g and by AB b a than it is repelled by the mdundant strata beyond them, and the cover must be sensibly negative This is the common state of the whole initrument aſter setting on the cover. It is slightly posi. ELECTRICITY. 49 tinue in this state for any length of time without any diminution of its capability of preducing the other phenomena, provided only that no fluid pass from the cover to the cake. We do not fully understand what prevents this communication, nor indeed what prevents the rapid escape from an overcharged body into the air. This cause, whatever it be, operates here; and the best way oſ preventing the dissipation, or the absorption by the cake, is to keep the electrophorus vith its cover on. It will come into this neutral state by dissipation from the sole, and absorption by the cover, in no very long time; and aſter this, will remain neutral, retaining its power with great obstinacy, especially iſ the cake and plates are very thin. 194VI. If the cover be now removed to a distance, both parts of the apparatus will shew strong marks of eleetricity. The cover contains much redundant fluid, and must appear strongly positive, and vill give a bright spark, which may be employed for any purpose. It may be employed for charging a jar positively by the knob, if we just touch the cover with the knob. The sole vill attract fluid, or be negative, although it contain more than its natural quantity of fluid, and it will take a spark. The sole therefore, in the absence oſ the cover, may be employed to charge a jar negatively by the knob. By touching it with the finger, or with the knob of a jar held in the hand, it is reduced to the common state deseribed in No II.; and now all the former experiments may be repeateddc We may call this the acTIVE or the CHARGING state This state of the apparatus has caused it to get the name Electrophorus. Volta, its undoubted inventor, called it Electroforo perpetuo; for it appears, as has been already observed, to contain a magazine of electricity. The cover, when removed, will charge a jar held in the hand positively; and having done this service, it will charge a jar negatively when again set on the cakee. The sole, in the absence of the cover, vill charge a third jar negatively; and then, when the 3: ELECTRICITY. 153 cumulation or deſieiency oſ electric fluid so slight that it vill not affect the most delicate electrometer; and it produus (at least in the opinion of Mr. Volta) this eſſect, by employing ſor the sole of an electrophorus a body which is an imperfect conduetor, such as a plate of vell dried marble, or well dried, but not baked, wood; or even a conducting body, covered with a bit of dry taſfety or other silk. Mr. Volta, Cavallo, and others, ho have written a great deal on the subject, have attempted to shew how these substances are preſerable (and they certainly are preſerable in a high degree) to more perſfect insulators: but not having taken pains to ſorm precise notions of the disposition and action oſ the electrie fluid in the situations afforded by the instrument, theit reasonings have not been very clea We think that u adequate conception of the essentials oſ the proposed instrument may be acquired by means of the following considerations: 200. Furnish the cover of an clectrophorus with a graduated electrometer, which indicates the proportional degrees of electricity; electrify it positively to any degree, suppose six, while held in the hand, at some distance, right over a metal plate lying on a wine glass as an insulating stand, but communicating with the ground by a wire. Bring it gradually down toward the plate. Theory teaches, and we know it by experiment, that the electrometer will gradually subside, and perhaps will reach to 20 before the electricity ĩs communicated in a spark. Stop it hefore this happens. In this state the attraction of the lying plate produces a compensation of four degrees of the mutual repulsion oſ the parts of the cover, by constipating the fluid on its under surface, and forming a deficient stratum above. This needs no farther explanation after vhat has been said on the charging of coated glass plates. Now we can suppose that the escape of the fluid from this body into the air begins as soon as electrified to the degree 6, and that it will fly to the lying plate with the degree 2, if brought nearer. If we can pre 156 ELECTRICITY. hardest varnish, of a kind not apt to crack, and highly coercive. This requires experiment to discover it Spirit varnishes are the most coercive; but by their difference of contraction by cold ſrom that oſ metals, they soon appear frosty, and when viewed through a lens, they appear all shivered: They are then uselesss Oil varnishes have the requisite toughness, but are much inferior in coercionn. We have found amber varnish inferior to copal varnish in this respect, contrary to our expectation. On the whole, we should preſer the finest coach-painters varnish, new ſrom the shop, into which a pencil has never heen dipped: and we must be particularly careful to clear our pencils of moisture and all condueting matter, which never ſails to taint the varnis. We scarcely need remark, that the coat of varnish on these small condensers should be very thin, otheruise we lose all the advantage of their smallness. 201. Mr. Cavallo has ingeniously improved Volta's condenser by connecting the moveable plate, aſter removal, with a smaller condenser. The efſect of this is evident from § 130. But the same thing would have been generally obtained by using the small condenser at first, or by using a still thinner coat of varnish. 202. It will readily occur to the reader, that this instrument is not instantaneous in its operation, and that the application must be continued for some time, in order to collect the minute elecetricity which may be excited in the operations of nature He vill also be careful that the experiment be so conducted that no useless aceumulation is made anywhere else When we expeet electricity from any chemical mixture, it never should be made in a glass vessel, for this will take a charge, and thus may absorb the whole excited electricity, accumulating it in a neutral or insensible state. Let the mixture he made in vessels of a conduceting substance, insulated ith as little contact as possible with the insulating support; ſor here will also be ELECTRICITY. 157 smnething like a charge Suspend it by silk threads, or let it rest on the tops oſ three glass rods, &e. 203. Aſter this account of the Leyden phial, electrophorus, and condenser, ĩt is surely unnecessary to employ any time in explaining Mr. Bennets most ingenious and useful instrument called the doubler of electricily. The explanation oſfers itself spontaneously to any person vho understands what has been said already. Mr. Cavallo has with industry searched out all its imperſections, and has done something to remove them, by several very ingenious constructions, minutely described in his Treatise on Electricit. Mr. Bennet's original instrument may be ſreed, we imagine, as far as seems possible, by using a plate of air as the intermedium between the three plates oſ the doubler. Stick on one of the plates three very small spherules made ſrom a capillary tube of glass, or from a thread of sealing wax. The other plate being laid on them, rests on mere points, and can scarcely receive any friction which will disturb the experiment. Mr. Nicholsons beautiful mechanism for expediting the multiplication has the inconveniency of bringing the plates towards each other edgewise, which will bring on a spark or communication sooner than may be desired: but this is no inconvenience vhatever in any philosophical research; because, before this happens, the electricity has become very distinguishable as to its kind, and the degree of multiplication ĩs little more than an amusement. The spark may even serve to give an indication of the original intensity, by means of the number of turns necessarv ſor producing itt. IF the fine wires, which form the alternate conmections in so ingenious a manner, could be tipped with little balls to prevent the dissipation, it would be a great improvement indeed. An alternate motion, like that of a pump- handle, might be adopted vith advantage. This would allow the plates to approach each other face to face, aud admit a greater multiplication, if thought necessary. 158 ELECTRICITY. 204. One of the most remarkable ſacts in electricity n the rapid dissipation by sharp points, and the impossibility of making any considerable accumulation in a body which has any such, projecting beyond other parts of its surface. The dissipation is attended with many remarkable circumstances, which have greatly the appearance of the actual eeape of some material substance. A stream oſ wind blows from such a point, and quickly electriſies the air of a romm to such a degree, that an electrometer in the farthest corner oſ the room is aſfected by itt. This dissipation in a dark place is, in many instances, accompanied by a bright train of light diverging ſrom the point like a firevork. Dr. Franklin therefore was very anxious to reconcile this æpearance with his theory of plus and minus electricity, but does not express himself well satisſied with any explanation vhich had occurred to himm From the begiuning, he sa that he could not consider the stream of wind as a prooſ oſ the escape of the electric fluid, because the same stream is observed to issue from a sharp negative point; which, according to his theory, is not dispersing, but absorbing it Mr. Cavendish has, in our opinion, given the ſirst satisfactory account of this phenomena. 205. To see this in its ſull ſorce, the phenomenon itself must be carefully observedc The stream of wind is plainly produced by the escape of something from the point itself, whieh hurries the air along with it; and this draws along uith it a great deal of the surrounding air, especially from behind, in the same manner as the very slender thread oſ air from a blow- pipe hurries along with it the surrounding air and flame from a considerable surſace on all sides. It is in this manner that it gathers the whole of a large flame into one mass, and, at last into a very point. If the smoke of a little rosin thrown on a hit of live coal be made to rise quietly round a point projecting from an electrified body, continually supplied from an electrical machine, thæ vortices oſ this smoke may be observed to eurl in ſrom all ELECTRIGITY. 159 sides, along the wire, ſorming a current of which the wire is the axis, and it goes off completely hy the point. But if the wire be made to pass through a cork fixed in the bottom of a wide glass tube, and iſ its point project not beyondl the mouth oſ the tube, the aſilux of the aiv from behind is prevented, and ve have no stream; hut iſf the cork be removed, and the vire still ocoupy the axis oſ the tube, but without touching the sides, we have the stream very distinctly ; and smoke which rises round the ſar end of the tube is drawn into it, and goes off at the point of the wire Nov it is oſ importance to observe, that whatever prevents the formation of this stream of wind prevents the dissipation of electricity (for we shall not say escape oſ eleotric ſluid) from the point. Iſ the point project a quarter of an inch beyond the tube, or if the tube be open behind, the stream is strong, 'and the dissipation 30 rapid, that even a very good machine is not able to raise a Henley's electrometer, standing on the conductor, a very few degrees. If the tube be slipped forvard, so that the point is just even with its mouth, the dissipation of electricity is next to nothing, and does not exceed what might hbe produced by such air as can be collected by a superficial point. If the tube be made to advance half an inch beyond the point which it surrounds, the dissipation becomes insensiblee. All these facts put it beyond a doubt that the air is the cause, or, at least, the occasion of the dissipation, and carries the eleetricity off ith it, in this manner rendering eleotrical the vhole air of a room. The problem is reduced to explain how the air contiguous to a sharp electriſied point is electrified and thrown offIt was demonstrated in § 130, that two spheres, connectæd by an infinitely extended, but slender conducting canal, are in electrical equilibrium, if their surſaces contain fluid in the proportion of their diameterss. In this case, the superficial density of the fluid and its tendency to escape are inversely as the diameters (§ 130) Now if, in imagination, we gradually diminish the dumeter of one of the spheres 160 ELECTEICITY. the tendeney to escape will increase in a greater proportion than any that ve can name We know, that when the prime conduetor of a powerful table-machine has a wire oſ a few inches in length projecting from its end, and terminating in a ball of halſ an inch in diameter, we cannot eletrify it beyond a certain degree; for when arrived at this degree, the electricity flies off in successive bursts from this bal. Being much more overcharged than any other part of the body, the air surrounding the ball becomes more overcharged by communication, and is repelled, and its place supplied by other air, not so much overcharged, which surrounded the other parts of the body, and is pressed forvards into this space by the general repulsion of the conductor and the confining pressure oſ the atmosphere; otherwise, being also overcharged, it would have no tendency to come to this placee Half a turn of the cylinder is sufficient to accumulate to a degree suſficient for producing one of these explosions, and we have two oſ them for every tum of the cylinder. A point may be compared to an incomparably smaller bal. The constipation of the fluid, and its tendeney to eseape, must be greater in the same unmeasurable proportionn. This density and mutual repulsion cannot be diminished, and must even be increased, by the matter of the wire forming a cone, of which the point is the apex; thereſore, if there were no other cause, we must see that it is almost impossible to confine a eollection of particles, mutually repelling, and constipated, as these are in a ſine point. 206. But the chieſ cause seems to be a eertain chemical union which takes place between the electric fluid and a eorresponding ingredient of the air. In this state oſ constipation, almost completely surrounded by the air, the little mass of fluid must attract and be attracted with very great ſorce, and more readily overcome the force which keeps the eletrified fluid attached to the last series oſ particles of the wire. It unites with the air, rendering it eleetrie in the ELECTRICITY. 161 highest degree of redundancy. It is thereſore strongly repelled by the mass of constipated fluid which succeeds it vithin the point. Thus is the electrified air continually thron off, in a state of electrifiention, that must rapidly diminish the electricity of the conductor. Hence the uninterrupted flow, without noise or much light, when the point is made very fine. When the point is blunt, a little aceumulation is necessary before it attains the degree necessary for even this minute explosion; but this is soon done, and these little explosions succeed each other rapidly, accompanied by a sputtering noise, and trains oſ bright sparks. The noise is undoubtedly owing to the atoms of the highly electrified fluidc. These are, in all probability, rareſied of a sudden, in the act of electrification, and immediately collapse again in the act of chemical union, which causes a sonorous agitation of the air. This electrified air is thus thrown off, and its place is immediately supplied by air from behind, not yet electrified, and therefore strongly drawn forward to the point, from which it is thrown off in its turn. This rapid expansion and subsequent collapsing of the air is verified by the experiments of Mr. Kinnersly, related by Dr. Franklin, and is seen in numberless experiments made vith other views in later times, and not attended to. Perhaps it is produced by the great heat which accompanies, or is generated in the transſerence oſ electricity, and it is of the same kind with what occasions the bursting of stones, splitting of trees, exploding oſ metals, &c. by electricity. The expansion is either inconsiderable, or it is successively produced in very small portions of the substance expanded; ſor vhen metal is exploded in close vessels, or under vater, there is but a minute portion of gazeous matter produced; and in the dissipation by a very fine point, suſficiently great to give full employment to a poverful machine, the stream of wind is but very ſaint, and nine- tenths oſ this has been dragged along by the really electrified thread of wind in the middle. VOL. IV. L 162 ELECTRICITY. From a collation oſ all the appearances oſ electricity, we must ſorm the same conception of the forces which operate round a point that is negatively electrified, not dispersing, but draving in electric fluid. It is more completely undercharged than any other part of a body, and attracts the fluid in the surrounding air, and the air in which it is retained, with incomparably greater force. It therefore deprives the contiguous air of its fluid, and then repels it, and then produes a stream like the overcharged point. 207. If a conducting body be brought near to any part of an overcharged body, the fronting part of the first is rendered undercharged; and this increases the charge oſ the opposite part of the overcharged body. It becomes more overcharged in that part, and sooner attains that degree oſ constipation that enables the fluid to quit the superſicial series of particles, and to electriſy strongly the contiguous air. The explosion is thereſore made in this part in preference to any other; and the air thus exploded is strongly attracted by the fronting part of the other body, and must ſly thither in preſerence to any other point. If, moreover, the fronting part of A be prominent or pointed, this effect will be produced in a superior degree; and the current of electrified air, which will begin very early, vill increase this disposition to transſerence in this way by rareſying the air; a change which the whole course of eleetric phenomena shews to be highly favourable to this transſerence, although we cannot perhaps form any very adequate notion how it contributes to this effectt. This seems to be the reason why a great explosion and snap, with a copious transſerence oſ electricity, is generally preceded by a hissing noise like the rushing of wind, which svells to a maximum in the loud 5.53 itselſ. 208. If two prominences, precisely similar, and electrified in the contrary way to the same degree, are presented to each other, we cannot say ſrom which the current should take its commencement, or whether it should not equally ELEGYRICITY. 168 begin from both, and a general dispersion of air laterally be the eſfect; but such a situation is barely possible, and must be infinitely rare The current will begin from the side vhich has some superiority of propelling force We are disposed to think that this current oſ material electrified substance must suffer great change during its passage, by mixing with the current in an opposite electrical state coming from the other body. Any little mass of the one current must strongly attract a contiguous mass of the other, and certain changes should surely arise from this mixture. These may, in their turn, make a great change in the mechanical motions of the air; and, instead of producing a quaqua versum dispersion of air from between the bodies, as should result ſfrom the meeting of opposite streams, it may even produce a collapsing of the air by the mutual strong attractions of the little masses. Many valuable experiments offer themselves to the curious inquirer. Two little balls may be thus presented to each other, and a smoke may be made with rosin to occupy the interval between them. Motions may be observed which have certain analogies that would afford useful information to the mechanical inquirer. There must be something of this mixture of currents in all such transferences, and the most minute diſferences in the condition of a little parcel of the air may greatly affect the future motions. The most promising form of such experiment would be to use two points of the same substance, shape, and size, and electrified to the same degree in opposite senses. 209. After all care has been taken to insure similarity, there remains one essential difference, that the one current is redundant in electric fluid, and the other deficient. This circumstance must produce characteristic differences of appeurance. And are there not such differences ? Is not the pencil and the star of light a characteristic difſerence ? and does not this well supported fact greatly corroborate the opinion oſ Dr. Franklin, that the electric phenomena result from ELECTRICITY. 165 ed equal on both handss. We imagine that it was really a imultaneous snap, in the whole extent of the spark, but of different strength in different places; different portions of the sonorous agitation were propagated to the ear in succession by the sonorous undulationsoſ air, causing it to seem a Iengthened sound. Buch would be the appearance to a person standing at one end of a long line of soldiers who diseharge their firelocks at one instant. It will seem a running fire, of different strength in different parts of the line, if the muskets have been unequally loaded. It is inconceivable that this long Zigæag spark can mark the track of an individual mass of electrified air. The velocity and momentum vould be enormous, and would sweep off every thing in its way, and its path could not be angular. The same must be asserted of the strenms of light in our experiments. The velocity is so unmeasurable that we eannot tell its directionn. There may be very little local motion, just as in the propagation of sound, or of a wave on the surſaee of vater. That particular change of mutual situation among the adjoining atoms which occasions chemical solution or precipitation may be produced in an instant, over a great extent, as we know that a parcel of iron filings, lying at random on the surſace of quicksilver, will, in one instant, be arranged in a certain manner by the mere neighbourhood of a magnet. Is not this like the simultaneous precipitation of water along the whole path of a discharge? But still there must be some cause which gives these simultaneous coruscations a situation with respeet to each other, that has a certain regularit Now the luminous truins (for they are not uniform lines of light) of almost continuous sparks whieh are arranged between a positive and a negative point, seem to us to indicate emanation from the positive, and reception by the negative point. The general Iine has a considerable resemblance to the path of a hody projected from the positive point, repelled by it, and attractgd by the negative point. This will appear to the mecha- ELECTRICITY. I69 2l5. It must be kept in mind, that the law of dissipation ascertained by these experiments, relates to one given state of the air, and that it does not follow that in another state, containing perhaps the same quantity of water, the dissipation shall be the same. The air is such a heterogeneous and variable compound that it may have very diſferent aſfinities with the electrie fluid. Mr. Coulomb thought that he should inſer from his numerous experiments, that the dissipation did not increase in the ratio of the cube of the water dissolved in the air, unless it was nearly as much as it could dissolve in that temperature. This indeed is conformable to general ohservation: for air is thought dry when it dries quickly any thing exposed to it; that is, vhen not nearly sturated with moisturee. Now it is well known, that what is thought dry air is favourable to eleetricity*. 216. The dissipation along imperfect insulators is brought sbout in a way somevhat different ſrom the manner of its eseaping by electrifying the contiguous air and going oſf vith it. It seems to be chieſly, if not solely, along the surface of the insulating support that the electricity is diffused, and that the diffusion is produced there chiefly by the moisture which adheres to it. It is not very easy to form a clear notion of the manner, but Mr. Coulomb's explanation seems as satisſactory as any we have seen. Water adheres to all bodies, sticking to their surfaces. This adhesion prevents it from going oſf when electrified; and it is therefore susceptible of a higher degree of electrification. If we suppose that the particles oſ moisture are uniformly disposed along the surface, leaving spaces between them, the electricity communicated to one particle must attain a certain density before it can fly across the insulating interval to the nex. Therefore, when such an imperſect conductor is electrified at one end, the electricity, in passing * The fſuilest account of these valuable experiments of Coulomb that has Biven in our language, vill be foundĩ in the Eninsvacu Excycroræia, vol, VOL ꝑ. 21419. ELECTRICITY. m mal d E, and fe perpendicular to P à. Let AC be r, AP =a, Pd =5. Then Pp  2, and d e =—3. We have seen, that the only sensible action on the particle of fluid in P is  ( § 105), when the action of the redundant ſluid in the globe on the particle having the density y, is repreC : sented by Bꝶ Therefore we have v =R, the coercive power of the thread. This is supposed to be constant. Therefore Pa x de i P; is equal to some constant line R. But Pp, orfe: de=Pd: PE. Thereſore the subnormal PE is a constant line. But this is the property of the parabola alone; and the curve of density D d B is a parabola, of which the parameter is 2 PE, or 2 R. 218.Cor. I. The densities in diſferent points of an imperſect insulator are as the square roots oſ their distance from the point of complete insulation: For P I': AD? BP: BA 219.2. The length of canal required for insulating diſferent densities of electricity are as the squares of the densities. For AB ; and PE has been shown to be a constant quantity. Indeed we see in the demonstration, that BP would insulate a hall, vhose electric density is P d, and BA: EP AD: P àl. 220./3. The length necessary for insulation is inversely as the coercive force oſ the eanal, and may be represented generally 5 For AB =ꝶæx Mr. Coulomb has veriſied these conclusions by a very satisſactory series of experiments, by the assistance of his delicate electrometer, which is admirably suited for this trial The subject is so interesting to every zealous student of elec- 172 ELECTRICITY. tricity, that Mr. Canton, Dr. B. Wilson, Mr. Waitz, Wilcke, and others, have made experiments for establishing some measure of the condueting powers of different substances. It was one of the first things that made the writer of this article suppose that electric action was in he inverse duplicate ratio oſ the distances: for, as early as 1763, he had found, that the lengths of capillary tubes necessary ſor insulation were as the squares of the repulsions of the ball which they insulated. The mode of reasoning offers of itselſ, and the fluxionary expression oſ the insulating poer, ri⸗. ad led immediately to a force proportional to Numeæ rous experiments vere made, which we do not give here, because the public are already possessed of those of Mr. Coulomb. This discussion explains, in a satisſactory manner, the operation of the condenser, as described by Mr. Voltaa. The weak degrees oſ electricity, which are rendered sufficiently sensible by the insulation of the plate of dry marble, are completely insulated by the perhaps thin stratum that has heen suſficiently dried, while the rest conducts with an eſfieacy sufficient ſor permitting the accumulation. 221. When ve reſlect on the theory now delivered, we see that the formulae determine the distribution of the fluid along an imperſect conductor in a certain manner, on the supposition that a certain determinate dose has been imparted to the ball: Because this dose, by diffusing itself from particle to particle of the conducting matter, will diffuse itselſ all the way to B, in such a manner that the repulsion shall everywhere be in equilibrio with the maximum of the coercive force of the insulating interval. But it must be farther noticed, that this resistance is not active, but coercitive, and ve may compare it to frietion or viscidity. Any repulsion of electric fluid, hich falls short of this, will not disturb the stability of the fluid spread along the canal, according to any lav whatever. So ELECTRICITY. 178 that if AD represent the electric density of the globe, and remain constant, any curve of density vill ansver, if dd be x everywhere less than R. It is therefore an indeterminate problem to assign, in general, the disposition of fluid in the canal. The density is as the ordinates of a parabola only on the supposition that the maximum of R is everywhere the same. And, in this case, the distance AB is a minimum: for, in other cases of density, ve must have dd less than R. x If; thereſore, we vary a single element of the curve D d B, in order that the stability of the fluid may not be disturbed, having d constant, we must necessarily have æ larger, that da may still be less than R; that is, ve must lengthen the ſ axis. We see also, that to ascertain the distribution in a conduceting canal is a determinate problem; whereas, in imperfeet conductors, it is indeterminate, but limited by the state oſ the fluid, when it is so disposed that in every point the action of the fluid is in equilibrio with the maximum of resistance. This consideration vill be applied to a valuable purpose in the article MAGNETISM. 2”22. This doctrine gives, in our opinion, a very satisfactory explanation of the curious observations of Mr. Brookes and Mr. Cuthbertson, mentioned in § 167, namely, that damping the inside of a coated jar diminishes the risk of explosion, and enables it to hold a higher charge. We learmn here, that there is no density sogreat but that the least imperfect conductor will insulate it, if long enough; and that the coercive quality oſ an imperfect conduetor may be conceived 50 constituted from A towards B, that the densities shall diminish in any ratio that we please, so that the variation oſ density (the cause of motion) may everywhere, even to the insulating point B, be very small. However great the constipation at the edge oſ the metallic coating may be, an imperſect con- 174 ELECTRICITY. duetor may be continued outvard from that edge, and may be soconstituted, that the constipation shall diminish by such genile gradations, that an explosion shall be impossible. An uniform damphess vill not do this, but it will diminish the abruptness of the variation of density. The state oſ density beyond the edge of the coating of a charged jar, very clean and dry, may be represented by the parabolic arch D ia This may be changed by damping, or properly dirtying (to use Mr. Brookes' phrase), to D  B; which is evidently preferable. We think it by no means diſficult to contrive such a continuation of imperſectly conducting coating. Thus, if gold leaf can be ground to an impalpable powder, it may be mixed with an oil varnish in various proportions Zones of this gold varnish may be drawn parallel to the edge of the coating, decreasing in metal as they recede from the edge By such contrivances it may be possible to increase the retentive pover to a great degree. 223. This doetrine farther teaches us, that many precautions must be taken when we are making experiments from which measures are to be deduced; and it points them out to the mathematician. In particular, when bodies, supported by insulators, are electrified to a high degree, the supports may receive a quantity of fluid, which may greatly disturb the results; and this quantity, by exerting but a weak action on the parts of the canal, may continue for a very long time, and not be removed but with great diſficulty. In such cases, it will be necessary to use new supports in every experiment. From not knowing, or not attending to this circumstance, many erroneous opinions have been formed in some delicate departments of electrical research. Mr. Coulomb's experiments on this subject are chiefly valuable for having stated the relation between the intensity oſ the electricity, or, as he expresses it, the electrie density, and the lengths oſ support necessary for the complete insulationn. But, as the absolute intensities have all heen measured by his electrometer, and he has not given its particu- ELECTRICITY. 15 lar scale, we cannot make much use of them till this be done by some eleetrician. 24. Mr. Coulomb found, that a thread of gum lac was the most perfect of all insulators, and is not less than ten times better than a silk thread as dry as it can be made, if we measure its excellence by its shortness. In a considerable number of experiments, he found that a thread of gum lac, of 1,5 inches long, insulated as well as a fine silk thread of 15 inchess When the thread of silk was dipped in fine sealing wax, it was equal to the pure lac, if six inches long, or four times its length. If we measure their excellence by the intensities with which they insulate, lac is three times better than the dry thread, and twice as good as the thread dipped in sealing wax: so that a fibre of silk, even when included in the lac, diminishes its insulating power. We also learn, that the dissipation along these substances is not entirely owing to moisture condensed or adherent on their surſaces, but to a small degree of conducting pover. We have repeated many oſ these experiments, and find that the conducting power of silk thread depends greatly on its colour. When of a brilliant white, or if black, its condueting power seems to be the greatest, and a high golden yellow, or a nut brown, seemed to be the best insulators; doubtless the dyeing drug is as much concerned as the fibre. Glass, even in its dryest state, and in situations where moisture could have no access to it, viæ. in vessels containing caustic alkali dried by red heat, or holding fresh made quicklime, appeared in our experiments to be considerably better than silk; and where drawn into a slender thread, and covered with gum lac (melted), insulated when three times the length of a thread of lac; but we found at the same time, that extreme fineness was necessary, and that it dissipated in proportion the square of its diameter. It was remarkably hurt by having a bore, hòwever fine, unless the bore could also be coated vith lac. Human hair, when completely ſreed from every thing that water could wash out oſ it, ELECTRICITY. 177 and then small shocks taken across the trachea. These could not he tolerated by the patient. The surgeon vished to give a shock to the ;sophagus without aſſecting the trachea. We recommended a leaden pistol bullet at the end of a strong vire, the whole dipped in melted sealing vax. This was introduced a little way, we think not more than three inches, into the gullet, which the palsy permittedl. A very slight charge was given to it in a few seconds; and the first shock produced a convulsion in the muscle, and the second removel the disorder completely. Here the ball ſformed the inner, mnd the gullet the outer, coating of the little Leyden phial Notwithstanding the flattering testimony given by the great conformity of this doctrine with the phenomena, ve still choose to present it under the tiile oſ a hypothesis. We have never seen the clectric fluid in a separate state; nor have we been able to say in what cases it abounds, or vhen it is deficient. After what we have seen in the late experiments of that philanthropic philosopher Count Rumſord on the production of heat by frietion, we think that we cannot be too cautious on what grounds ve. admit invisible agents o perſorm the operations of Naturee We think that all must acknowledge that those experiments tend very much to stagger our belief in the existence of a ſluid sui generis, a ſire, heat, calorie, or what we please to call it; and all vill acknovledge, that no better proofs can be urged ſur the existence of an electric fluid. 225. Accordingly, many acute and ingenious persons have rejected the notion of the existence of an electric ſluid, and have attempted to shew that the phenomena proceed not from the presence oſ a peculiar substance, but from peculiar modes; as ve know that sound, and some concomitant motions and other mechanical appearances, are the results of the elastic undulations oſ air; and as Lord Bacon and others have explained the efſects of fire by elastic undulations oſ the integrant particles oſ tangible matter. voL. 1v, u ELECTRICITY. 178 both with each other and vith the other particles of tangible matter. IF ve except Mr. Prevost, in his Essai sur les Forces Mugnetiques et Elect riques, ve do not recollect an author who has ventured to subject his system to striet examination, by pointing out to us the laws of action according to which he conceives the particles influence each other. We shall have a proper opportunity, in the article MAõNETISM, to give this authors theory the attention it really merits. We venture to say, that all the chemical theories of electricity labour under these inconveniences, and have acquired their influence merely from the inattention of their partisans to the laws of mechanical motion, and require, in order to reconcile them with thosæ laws, the adoption of poWers similar to pinus's attractions and repulsions. Slight resemblanceò to phenomena, vhieh stand equally in need of explanation, have contented the partisans of such Iheories, and figurative language and metaphorieal conceptions have taken place of prècise discussion. It would be endles to exaniue them all. 227. The most specious of any hat e Xno as publiely read in the university of Edinburgh by the late Mr. James Russel, Professor of natural philosophy; a person of the most acute discernment, and an excellent reasoner. It was delivered to his pupils, not as a ſheory, but as a conjecture, founded on Lord Kamess theory of spontaneous evaporation, which had obtained a very general reception; a conjecture, said the Professor, founded on such resemblances as made a similarity of operation very probable, and was an incitement and direction to the philosopher to a proper train of experimental discussion. We say this on the authority oſ his pupils in the years 1767, 1768, and 1769, and of some notes in his own hand writing now in our posession. Mr. Russel considered the electrieal phenomena as the results of the action of a substance which may be ealled the electrical stuid, which is connected ith bodies by attractive 180 ELECTRICITY. and repulsive ſorces acting at a distance, and diminishing as the distance increases. Mr. Russel speaks of the electric fluid as a compound of several others;: and, particularly, as containing elementary fire, and deriving ſrom it a great elasticity, or mutual repulsion of its particles. This, however, is difſerent from the elasticity, or mutual repulsion of the particles of air, because it acts at a distance; whereas the particles of air act only on the adjoining particles. By this constitution, bodies containing more electric fluid than the spaces around them repel each other. The particles of this electrie fluia attract the particles oſ other bodies with a force which diminishes by distance. The characteristic ingredient of this fluid is ELECTRICITY properly so calledlc. This is united with the elastic fluid by chemical aſfinity, vhich Mr. Russel calls elective attraction, a term introduced into chemistry by Dr. Cullen and Dr. Black This extends to all distances, but not precisely by the same law as the mutual repulsion of the particles of the other ſluid, und in general, it represses the repulsions of that fluid while in this state of compositionn This electricity, moreover, attracts the particles of other bodies, but with certain elections. Non-electric or condueting bodies are attracted by it at all distances; but electrics act on it only at very small and insensible distances. At such distances its particles also attract each other. By this constitution, the compound electric fluid repels its own particles at all considerable distances, but attracts at very small distances. It attracts condueting bodies at all distances, but non-conductors, only at very small distances. The phenomena of light and heat are considered as marks oſ partial decomposition, and as prooſs of the presence oſ elementary fire in the compound: the smell peculiar to eleetricity, and the effect on the organ of taste, are proofs of decomposition and of the complex nature of the ſluid. ELECTRICITY. 181 Bodies (conductors) containing electrie fluid, repel each other at considerable distances, but, if forced very near, attract each other. Electries can contain it only in consequence of the electricity in the compound. Part of this electricity must be attached to the surſace in a non-elastic state; hecause when it is brought so near as to be attracted, its particles are within the spheres of each other's action, and this redoubled attraction overcomes the repulsion occasioned by its union with the other ingredient; and the electric fluid is partly decomposed, and the electricity, properly so called, ulheres to the surface of the electric, as the ater of damp air odheres to a cold pane of glass in our windows. Also, by this constitution, electric fluid may appear in two states; elastic, like air, when entire; and unelastic, like water, when partly decomposed by the attraction of electrics. Electricity may be forced into this unelastic union by vaIious means; by friction, which forces the electric fluid conined in the air into close contact, and thus occasions this decomposi ſion of the fluid and the union of its electricity with the surface. This operation is compared by Mr. Russel to the forcible wetting of some powders, such as lycoperdon, vwhich cannot be wetted without some diſficulty and mechanical compression; after which it adheres to water strongly. It may be thus united in some natural operations, as is observed in the melting and freezing of some substances m contact with electries; and it may be thus forced into union by means of metallic coatings, into which the electrie fluid is forced by an artful employment of its mutual repulsionss This operation is compared to condensation of the moisture of damp air by a cold pane of the window; and the evacuation of the other side oſ the coated pane is compred to the evaporation of the moisture from the other side i the window pane, in consequence of the heat which must merge ſrom the condensed vapour. We find in the Prossr's notes above-mentioned, many such partial analogies, mployed to shew the students that such things are seen in 152 ELECTRICITY.. the operations of Nature, and that his conjecture merits attenition. The intelligent —— vill see that the general. results of this constitution of the electrio fluid will tally pretty well vith the ordinary electrical phenomena; and, aceordingly; this conjecture was received with great satisſaction. We remember the being much pleased vith it, as we heard it applied by Mr. Russel's pupils, many of whom will recollẽet vhat is here put on record. But the attentive reader will also see, that all this intricate combination of different kinds oſ attraction and repulsion is nothing hut mere accomuiodations oſ hypothetical ſorces to the phenomena. How incomparably more beautiful is the simple hypothesis of æ pinus, which, without any such accommodations, tallies s precisely with all the phenomena that have yet been obsred? Here no distinction of action is necessary, and all the varieties are consequences of a circumstance perſectly ogreeable to general laws; namely, that the internal strueture of some substances may be such as ohstructs the motion of the electric fluid siuough the poreNothing is more likely. 228. Several years aſter the death of the Scoteh Proſess0T in 1773, a theory very much resembling this acquired great authority, being proposed to the philosophers by the celebrated naturalist Mr. de Luee. This gentleman having long cultivated the study of meteorology with unwearied assiduity and great success, and having been so familiarly conversant with expansive fluids, and the affinities oſ their compounds, was disposed to see their operations in almost dll the changes on the surface of this globe. Electricity was too busy an actor in our atmosphere to escape his particular notice. While the mechanical philosophers endeavoured to explain its effects by accelerating forces attracting and repelling, Mr. de Luc endeavoured to explain them by means oſ the expansive properties oſ aeriform fluids and gases, and by their chemical aſfinities, compositions, and de- ELECTRICITY. 188 compositions. He had formed to himself a peculiar opinion concerning the constitution of our atmosphere, and had explained the condensation oſ moisture, vhether oſ steam or of damp aeriform ſluids, in a vay much more reſined than the simple theory of Dr. Hooke, vir. solution in airr. He considers the compound of air and fire as the carrier of the water held in solution in damp air, and the fire as the general carrier of both the air and the moisture Even fire is considered by him as a vapour, of which light is the corrier. When this damp air or steam is applied to a cold surface, such as that of a glass pane, it is decomposed. The water is attracted by the pane by chemical aſſinity, and attaches itsel? to the surſace. The fire, thus set at liberty, acts on the pane in another way, producing the equilibrium of temperature, and the expansion of the pane. Aeting in the same manner on the moisture which chances to adhere to the other side, in a proportion suited to its temperature, it destroys their union, enters into chemical combination with the moisture, and fits it for uniting with the air on the other side, or carries it o Having read Mr. Volta's theory of electric influences, by which that philosopher was enabled to give a scientiſic narration and arrangement of the phenomena of the eleetraphorus newly invented by himself, and which is called an explanation of those phenomena, Mr. de Lue imagined that he saw a close analogy between those insluencts on the plates of the electrophorus and the hygroseopic phenomena of the condensation and evaporation of moisture. In short, he was struck with the resemblance between the condensation oſ moisture on one side oſ a glass pane, and its evaporation from the other; and the accumulation of eleetrie fluid on one side of a coated pane, and the abstraction of it from the othe. Subsequent examination pointed out to him the same analogy between all other hygroscopic and electric phenomena. He therefore immediately formed a similar opinion concerning the electric operations. It may be expressed brieſly as follows: ELECTRICITY. 185 bodies, depositing on them the electric matter which it carried, but diſferently, according to their natures. 5. As fire and uater, while composing vapour, retain their tendencies and affinities by which they produce the hygroscopic phenomena: so the ingredients of the electric sluid, even in their state of union, retain their tendencies and affinities, which produce the greatest part oſ the electric phenomena. 6. In particular, the electric matter retains its tendencies and affinities; and ſarther, the electric affinities are, like the hygroscopic, without any choice. Here, however, there is a ſarther distinetionn. The aſfinities of water respeet only hygroscopic substances; but those of electric matter respect all substances, and thereſore respect the common atmospheric fluids. T7. When fire quits the water of vapour, to form the equilibrium of temperature, it remains in the place where vapour most abounds, but is partly latent, not exerting its powers; 50 in the restoration of the equilibrium of the electric deferent among neighbouring bodies, those which have proportionally most electric matter also retain most deferent ſtuid, but in o latent state. 8. As two masses of vrapour may be in expansive equilibrium (which others call balancing each others elasticity) although the vapours contain very different proportions of fire and water; so two masses of electric ſiuid may be in exponsive equilibrium, although one contains much more electri matter in the same bulk, provided that the electric deferent be also more copious. The chief distinetion that mingles with these analogies is, that the affinity of waler to hygroscopic substances operates only in contact, whereas electric matter tends to distant bodies; and these distances are very difſerent in regard to different bodies. Such is the resemblance which has appeared so strong to Mr. de Luc. It is evidently the same which furnished the conjecture to Mr. Russel, and which he considered mecha- 186 ELECIRICITV. nically, in order to explain the phenomena oſ electrie motions to students of mechanical philosophy. The only resemblance seems to us to appear in the condensation of moisture contained in damp airrn. Mr. de Lue, led by the habits of his former studies; altempis to explain every thing by the relations which were most familiar to him, affinities and expunsive forces. Let us attend a litile to the manner in which he explains one or two of the most general ſacts. 230.First, The conditions of conductors and non-conductors. This distinetion depends on the differences. in the tenden-  to distant bodies: there are great differences in these distances according to the nature of the bodies; and from this arise great differences oſ phenomena, independent of insulation or non-insulation, which are only the sensible distinetions oſ these classes of bodiess Electric mutter tends to conductors at great distances; but having reached them, it does not adhere, and remains free to move round them, being dragged by the deſerent ſluid; but its tendency to non-conductors is only at small and insensible distances; and having come into contact, it adheres, and can no longer be dragged by the deferent fluid. Hence the operation oſ conductors and non-conductors; and there is no other foundation for the notion of ĩdio-electrics and non-electrics, or electries by communicationn. A part of a non-conductor takes as much electric matter as it can from the substance furnishing it; but cannot communicate ĩt to another part, except very slowly; therefore, to communicate it to the whole surſace, ve must cover it with a conductor. (Surely this is a distinetion in the body, independent of the distance of mutual tendency !) Hence, too, the property of non-conductors by which the electric fluid is benumbed ( engourdi) or eramped; therefore we can accumulate a great deal in them; and it will remain long being benumbed; and iſ it be determined to quit them ELECTRICITY. - 1857 at once, the current will be much more dense than when quitting an equal conducting surſace. Since conductors do not fix the electric fluid, it must circulate round them. It is urged to this motion by its expansive pouer, by whioh it would disperse ſfrom a body ith inconceivable velocity, and perhaps the rapidity of its motion would decompose it, and cause some light to emerge; but it is at the same time impelled by its tendency to bodies. Thus, by these two forces, it runs to a conducting body, and must circulate round iĩt as the planets do round the sun. In this eirculation, if it come to any great projection, ĩt cannot follow the outline, because so abrupt; it thereſore ſlies off at all points and protuberances. It will be the more diſficult 10 keep to an abrupt outline as the stratum in circulation is more copious or deeper, because a greater mass is with diſficulty turned round a sharp angle. It is more inelined escape if another body be near, and it immediately becomes a satellite to that body. Thus all bodies get a share of eleetric ſluid, cireulating round conductors, and benumbed or cramped in non-conductors. Bodies of this last class receive their portion by the air as hygroscopic substances receive their water by the fire. All the differences in the tendencies to bodies proceed from the electric motter. The deferent fluid follows other laws; namely, I. Its tendency to all substances is greater than that of the electric matter to any onee. 2 The tendency (and also that of the electrie motter) is always from the body which contains most of it, to that which contains least. 3. The body which contains most of ihe one also contains most of the other. 4. The deferent ftuid has a particular affinity (chemical) with the electric matter. 5. All these tendencies are lessened by an increase of distance. 6. The electric maiter, hen composing electric fluid, has more or less expansive force as it is united to more or less deferent fluid. 158 ELECTRICITY. Explanation of Charged Plates. 231. Mr. de Lue says (5 286), that his SYysTEM wassuggested by Volta's Theory of electric Influences. These (says he) had been pretty well generalised before, but with little improvement to the science, till Mr. Volta discovered a circumstance which, in his opinion, connected by a general theory many phenomena which had formerly no observed reIation to any thing. This was, that when a body electrified positively brings a neighbouring body communicating with the ground into the negative stute, its own positive electricily is eakened while it remains in that neighbourhood, but is recovered when the other body is removed.  Such is the distinguishing lav of Mr. Volta's theory, which brings all the phenomena of electric influences under his theory, beginning vith those oſ coated glass, which were ſormerly so obscure, because they were not referred to their true cause, &e.  My SysTEM (Mr. de Lue says) concerning the nature of the electric fluid explains the laws of Mr. Volta's theory; and of consequence explains, like it, all the phenomena which it comprehends: but it reaches much farther, seeing that more general laws comprehend a greater number of phenomena. e In the phenomena of coated glass, I plainly saw one of the procedures oſ watery vapour. Suppose a glass pane, moistened on both sides, and having the temperature of the surrounding bodiess. Suppose that warmer vapour comes to one side. It is condensed on the surſace; that is, it is decomposed, the water adheres to the surſace, and the fire penetrates the glass, heats it, and increases the evaporation from the other side, by entering into combination with the uater, and carrying it off with it. More vapour is condensed on the side A; more fire reaches the side B, and carries off more water. But as this happens only because the fire also raises the temperature of the pane, it is evident that the condensation on the side A, and the evaporation ſrom B, ELECTRICITY. 189 must gradually slacken, and the maximum of accumulation in A, and of evaporation from B, vill take place when the temperature oſ the pane is the same vith that oſ the hot rapour.  The electrical phenomena of coated glass are perſectly similar. The electric fluid reaches the side A, is decomposed, and the electric matter is there benumbed and fixed The deferent siuid penetrates the pane, and earries off the electric matter from the side B. This goes on, but slackens; and the maximum of accumulation and evacuation obtains wvhen the side A has acquired the same intensity oſ eleotricity with the charging machinee More is accumulated in A than is abstracted from B; because B is farther ſrom the source (he might have added, that part oſ the fire is expended in raising the temperature of the pane): but the accumulation is inactive, because the electric matter is benumbed and fixedc Though the electric maiter is much diminished in B, yet the electric fiuid in its coating has as much expansive force as that of the ground; because it has a surplus of deferent fluid. The aboslute quantity of electric matter in both sides is somewhat augmented. 232. This explanation of the Leyden phial comprehends the whole of Mr. de Luc's theory; and the constitution oſ the eleetrie ſluid, and its various aſinities, expansive powers and tendencies, are all assigned to it in subserviency to this explanation, or deduced from those phenomena. As the author, in all his writings, claims some superiority over other naturalists for more general and comprehensive views, and for more scrupulous attention to precision and measurement, and particularly ſor more solicitude that no natural agent be omitted that has any share in the proceedure,he surely will not be offended, although we should state such difficulties and objections as occur to us in the consideration of this SysTEM (as he chooses to call it) of electricity. We wish that it had been expressed in the plain and precise language of meehanical and chemical science; ſor he reasons entirely ſrom the nature of expansive forces, tenden- 190 ELECTRICITY. cies, and aſfinities. His language will appear to some rea ders, as it does to us, rather to express the conduet of intelligent beings, acting with choice, and for a purpose, than the laws of lifeless matter. His account would have been less agreeable, it is true, but more instruetive, and less apt to be mistaken. Metaphorical language is seldom used without the risk of metaphorical conceptions; and the reader is very apt to think that he has acquired a notion of the subject, while he is really thinking of a thing of a different næture We apprehend that a great deal of this happens in this instance, and that when the narration is stripped oſ its figurative language, it will be found without that conneotidn and analogy which it sèems to possess: We also wish that the explanation had been derived rom some vell-established principle The whole of it is professedly fouuded on a resemblance between the phenomena of electricity and some things said of watery vapour; but these are not the phenomena of watery vapour, but Mr. de Lue's hypothesis (he will pardon us the term, which we pre fer to system) concerning watery vapours. We do not think it philosophical to explain one hypothesis by another. Our illustrious countrymen Bacon and Newton, disapproved of this practice; and their rules of philosophising have stũl currency among philosophers. Explanation, in our opinion, is the pointing out some acknovwledged general fact in nature, and shewing that the particular phenomenon is an example of itt. We do not see this in Mr. de Luc's explanation; because we do not see the facts in the case of watery vapours to which the phenomena of electricity are said o have a resemblancee The phenomena we mean are chieſly the motions, and the transſerences of the powers prod ucing such motions; we do not speak of the light, and some orher phenomena, because Mr. de Lue does not speak of them in this explanationn. We shall even admit the transference a a phenomenon, although we do not see any substance trans ſerred: but we see a power of producing cœrtain motions ELECTRICITY. 191 vhere that power did not formerly appear; and the appearance of this power is all the authority adduced, even by Mr. de Luc, ſor the transſerencee We must now add, that the electric phenomena, which Mr. de Luc calls like the phenomena of watery vapour, are all suppositions; and that therefore the explanation is a system of suppositions, ſromei 9 as to be like the system of watery vapour. For Mr. de Lue vill grant, that on the one hand, we see nothing like the water in the electric phenomena; and, on the other hand, there is nothing in watery vapour like the motions of the electrometers, which are the only PuENOMENA from vhich Mr. de Luc proſesses to reason. We also fear that the very curious xperimimis of Count Rumſford on the melting of ice, and the propagation of heat through liquids, vill oblige Mr. de Luc to change the tasks of the ingredients, both of vapour and of electric fluid. Water; and not fire, seems lo be the corrier or deferent siuid; and we think that Franklin and æpinus have made it highly probable that electricity, and not air, is the carrier. We have also great diſficulty in conceiving (indeed we cannot conceive) how the deferent fluid, from which the electric matter has been detached by its superior afjinity with the side A, can overcome the same superior affinity of the electric matter with the side B (), and carry it off; how the deferent fluid penetrates the non-conducting pane, in order to carry off the electric mutter in the form of fluid; and how it cannot do this, exeept by means of a conducting canal, into which it is expressly said that it does not penetrate. It must not be said that it runs along the surface of this canal: for the smallest wire will be a suſficient conductor, covered a foot thick with sealing wax. This indeed, according to Mr. de Lue, allows the deferent fuid to pass; but it must also, nccording to him, strain it pretty clear of all electric matter.  We may here ask, How comes Ihere to he such a quaatily of electric matter already lodged in B?/Is it benumbed? or in what state is it? 109 ELECTRICITY. For we cannot help thinking, that the process (although purely ideal) has a closer resemblance to what we should observe in a stream of muddy water poured on a strainer, both sides oſ which are previously foul. IF we were diposed to amuse ourselves with a figurative hypothesis, we could give one on the prineiple of filtration that is very pretty, and pat to the purpose, of glass coated, and chargeſ, and discharged by conducting canals. With respect to the suggestion oſ this theory by Volta theory oſ electrie influences, and the ignorance of naturalisis before that time of the true state of things, ve must ohserve, that Mr. Russel proposed the same analogy Io the consideration oſ his hearers many years before; and it was very generally knovn. The electric influences had been ſully detailed by æpinus and Wileke in 1759, and applied with peculiar address and foree of evidence by Mr. Cavendish hefore 1771; and they vere described nearly in the same vay by Lane, Lichtenberg, and others. And vith respect to Mr. Volta's general principle, whic Mr. de Lue prizes so highly, and by which he explains every thing, we must observe, that it is not true as a phenomenon in electricity; but, on the eontrary, the positive siate of a body is rendered stronger, or more remarkable, by inducing the negotive state on a neighbouring body. See J 52. and 66. Mr. Volta was misled by the appearances of the electrophorus, which had engaged all his attention, and modelled all his notions on these subjects. His observations had been confined to disks; and though these are excellent instruments for producing very sensible effeets, they are quite unſit ſor examining the general nature oſ electric influencess. Even vithout much knowledge oſ dynamics, a person must perceive that the action of their diſferent parts on the electrometer may be very diſſerent, by reason oſ their diſferent positions and distances from it. Besides, the electrometers oſ the apparatus described by Mr. de Lue in sect. 440, &e did not indicate the real condition of the disks to vhich they ' ' ELECTRICITY 199 per attached, but the condition of the remote ends of overtharged conduetors of considerable length. Thereſore, although all the electrometers fell lower when the other group of disks was brought near, the positive state of the nearest disk was greatly augmentedc. The most unexceptionable apparatus for this purpose would be a row oſ polished balls on insulating stands, placed in contaet, the whole eharged positive; and when another such group, or a long body, is brought near, let the balls be separated at once, and examined apart by a very small electrometer, made in the form o our figure . We presume to say that, if the other group is properly managed, and made to communicate thoroughly vith the ground, the positive electricity of the balls nearest L it will be found greatly augmented, and that every one of them will be found in that precise state of electrifieation that is pointed out by the æpinian theory. Mr. de Lue has made and narrated the experiments with the disks, and the curious figures observed by Lichtenbergh, with great judgment and fidelity; and they are classical and valuable experiments for the examination of the theory We may here mention a very neat way of executing the apparatus of balls, which was practised by a young friend, who was so kind as to make the experiments ſor us, vhen our thoughts were tumed to Mr. de Luc's theory Each ball was mounted on a slender glass rod varnished. The lower end of the stalk was fixed in a little block of wood which haã a square hole through it, by which it ⸗lided steadily along a horizontal bar of mahogany, supported at the ends about an inch from the table The balls were made to separate at once, and equally, from each other, by a chequer-jointed frame, such as is seen in the toyshops, carrying a company of foot soldiers, who open and close their ranks and files by pulling or pushing the ends of the frame. Taking out the pins of the middle joints of this chequered frame-vork, and widenng the holes for receiving the glass stalks, iĩt is plain that ul the balls will separate at once, in the very state of eleevOoL. IV. y 194 ELECTRICITY. tricity in which they were when in the neighbourhood of the non-insulated group.. This apparatus consisted of six balls We found the ball next the other group much mom strongly positive than beſore bringing that group near; and it was generally the third ball which seemed equally electrio in both situations. We added nine halls more, connecting the whole by a similar contrivance; and found it a most instructive apparatus ſor the theory of the distribution of the clectric fluidc. We wish that it had occurred to us when the ꝗ 62, &e. were under consideration. With respect to the condition in which the electrie matter is said to be lodged in the side A of the coated pane, vhere Mr. de Luc says that it is fixed, engourdi in the nonconducting surface (which condition Mr. de Luc considers as characteristic of such substances), ve must say that the description of its state is by no means agreeable to what we have observedlc The powers oſ this electric matter are no more benumbed or enervated (it is a very unphilosophical phrase), that if it were in a conducting body at the same distance from the opposite coating If coatings be applied to a block of glass of two or three inches in thickness, and iſ the electrification be s0 moderate that it would not ſly from the one coating to the other when the glass is removedno sensible difference will be found between the electricity oſ the two coatings with or without the glasss. The electrie matte: in the side A has not its powers engourdi; they are balanced by the power- of tho æido BBut how will Mr. de Luc explain the charging a pane ne gatively ? How will he bring off a quantity oſ elctric matier, greater (according to his own account) than what will be benumbed on the other side? Nay, we must ask, where does he find it ? Is there a quantity already benumbed there? What is to revive it? Let us now consider a little the constitution of the ingre dients oſ this electric ſluid, by which all these things a hrought about. And in doing this, let us banish, vhen ꝑ& ELECTRICITY. 195 sible, all figurative language; and, in the precise and dry phraseology of dynamies, let us spea of the motion of single particles of the electric fluid, deſerent sluid, and electric maiter. By expansive power, must certainly be meant such a power as that by which air, gases, inflamed gunpo wder, steam, and the like, enlarge their bulk, and which is clearly maniſested as a mechanical pressure, by bursting vessels, impelling bullets or pistons, &e. as well as by the actual enlargement oſf the bulk of the fluidc. We have no other indications oſ its being a ſoree; and thereſore our notions of its mode of acting must be derived solely from what we understand of this power in air or the other fluids. Newton's Principia are our authority for saying, that all that ve know of it is, that ĩt acts as a number of corpuscles would aet, which repel each other with a force inversely proportional to their distances; this action not extending beyond the adjoining corpuscle, not even to the secondc. We know a good deal oſ the propagation of pressure and progressive motion through such a ſluid, when it is confined in a vessel, or system oſ vessels, of any form, and some few simple circumstances which take place in the elastic undulations vhich may be excited and propagated through itt. We have but a very indistinct notion of the motions which one mass of such a fluid will moduce in another mass, when hoth are at liberty to expand. But we are certain that it will be like the motion of tvo masses oſ air blown or driven against eah other. Now these electric fluide, by their expansive powers, must act like those others with which we are more familiarly acquaintedl. And here ve venture to say, that the appearances in electricity are so ſar ſrom being like these, that we cannot imagine any thing more remarkably different. We shall mention but one thing. Every mark that we have for the presence of electric ſluid obliges us to grant, that in m overcharged hody it is crowded into the external surface,  that the quantity has little or no relation to the quantity f matter in any body but merely to its surfacee. This is ELECTRICITY. 197 let it go off; it is deflected from its rectilineal course by its tendency to some eonducting body, which it reaches, but cannot, or does not, enter; and therefore must continually circulate round it, as the planets circulate round the sun, following its outline, if not too abrupt, but ſlying oſf from all points in the direction of the axis of the point, &c. Here we ãare at home; ſor this is a plain dynamical problem of central forces. All that we shall say on this head is, that Mr. de Lue has certainly not considered the planetary motions with altention, vhen he hazarded this very comprehensive propositionn If he ill take the trouble to do this, he will see that every part oſ it is inconsistent with the acknowledged laws of mechanism, and that the motions are absolutely impossiblee Besides, ve know that it will not fly off from a hundred points placed together, which is a still more abrupt outline, if they do not projeet beyond the brim oſ a pit in which they stand; yet this pit only makes the outline more abrupt. We farther believe, that no person can form to himselſ any distinet notion of such cireulations round every conducting body; they will be more numerous, aud infinitely more conſused and jarring, than all the vortices of Des Cartes. How can such motions take place round a bunch of brass wire buried in sealing wax? Yet he must grant that they really happen there; or what prevents the electric ſluid from being strained clear of all slletric matter in passing through the air? We would also ask, why the tendency is always from lie body containing most of the fluid to that containing least ? It is not enough to say that it is so; this would only be contriving a thing to suit a purpose; a reason should be given if ve pretend to explain. Now the tendency to a distant body is to the matter in that body, without any relation to the fluid in it, or in the body from which it came. On the whole, we cannot think this theory is any thing but telling a story of ideal beings, in very figurative language, which gives it some animation and interest. The ELECTRICITY. 1998. APPENDIX; CONTAINING AN ABSTRACT OF ME. COULOMB'S EXPERIMENTS. 234. Mæ. CouLomB in the Mem. de ſAcad. de Paris for 1756, relates several experiments made for ascertaining the disposition or distribution of the electric fluid in an over charged body. Their general results were, 1. That the ſluid is distributed among bodies according to their figure, without any elective aſinity to any kind of substance. For when a ball, or body of conducting matter, and of any shape, ĩs electrified to any particular degree, as indicated by his electrometer, if it be touched by another equal and similar body, similarly situated in respect of the touching points, the electricity is always reduced to 3. 2. In an overcharged conducting body, the fluid diſfuses itself entirely along the surface, without penetrating into the interior parts. The conducting body AB (Plate II. fig. 13.) had pits o, b, &c. made in various parts of its surface. Thæy were half an inch in diameter, and some of them 4th, õthers &ths, others æths, &c. in depth. c represents the edge of a small circle of gilt paper, Fth of an inch in diameter, fixed perpendicularly on the end of a fine thread of gum lac. The body was electrified and touched with this little electroscope, by setting ĩt ſlat down on the surface. The circle c was then pregented to an electrometer which moved 90 degrees by a foree mot exeeeding 75%⸗th of a French grain. When this contaũt was made with the even surface of the conductor, it was =rongly electrified, and particularly when it touched any 200 ELECTRICITY. eminence, or the ends of long eylinders, &e. The paper being exceedingly thin, and placed in full contaet, it may be supposed to bring off with it the quantity of fluid corresponding to that part of the surſace, or rather a greater quantity. But when it vas made to touch the bottom, even of the shallowest oſ these pits, it did not aſſect the electrometer in the least. He demonstrates the ſollowing elementary theorem: The attraction or repulsion being supposed to be proportional to the inverse of any power m of the distance; that is, being as EE if m be greater than 3, the action of all the masses of ſluid which are at a ſinite distance is nothing in comparison with the action in contact; and thereore the fluid must be uniformly diſſused, in the same way as if each particle acted only on the adjoining particles. But if m be less than S, for example if m be 2, as seems to be the case in electricity, the action of all the masses at a finite distance is not infinitely small in comparison with the action in contaet, and the redundant fluid must go toward the surface, and no redundant ſluid will be retained in the interior parts The demonstration is to this effecet. Let A a BF (Plate II. fig. 14) be a perſectly condueting body of any shape, and let d a e be a thin slice separated ſfrom the rest by the plane à æ; let d c e be precisely equal and similæ tn d a e, and let a b  be perpendicular to the separating plane; then the actiun oſ all the particles in the thin slice  a e (When estimated in the direction a b) on the purticle b, must halance the action of all the rest oſ the fluid in the body; for b is supposed to be at res. Nov, as the lav of continuity will be observed in any distribution of the fluid, through the whole body, it is plaim that, by taking a b suſficiently small, the diſference of density at a and at c may be infinitely small; thereſore the action of the fluid in d a vill be infinitely near to an equilibruim with the action oſ dc æ; and the action of the ſuid in the rest oſ the body on ELECTRICITY. Eſ the particle b ill be infinitely small. This cannot be, when the action of a mass oſ fluid at a finite distance is not inſinitely small in comparison with the action in contact, unless we suppose that the quantity of fluid at a finite distance is also infinitely small, or nothing; that is, unless the whole redundant fluid is constipated on the surface, and the interior parts are merely saturated. The preceding propositions are quite analogous to propositions in Mr. Cavendish's dissertation in the Philosophical Transactions ſor 177l. 235. In the Memoirs of the same Academy for 1787, Mr. Coulomb endeavours to ascertain the density of the fluid in different bodies which toueh each other. When the bodies do not differ extremely in magnitude, he determines this by the immediate application of them to the electrometer; but when one is extremely small in comparison with the other, he first determines the force oſ the large body, and then touches it 20 or 40 times with the small one, till the ſorce of the large body is reduced to à, 3, 3, &e. The general result was, that when the surfaces of the spheres had the proportion expressed in the ſirst column of the ſollowing table, then the density in the small one had the proportion expressed by the numbers of the second column, and never uttained the magnitude 2. l - - - - l. 4 - - - - 1,08. ’s:?118 64 -  - -1IG. Infinite -2382 This is extremely diſferent ſrom the proportions which obtain when the two spheres communicate by very long slender canals, vhich he found exactly conſormable to the determinations of the theory: but in Mr. Coulomb's experiments the spheres touched each other, and had no other communication. ELECTRICITY. |o03 in two such globes are very nearly as the diameters, and the densities inversely as the diameters, as Mr. Cavendish demonstrated, on the supposition that the fluid in the canal is incompressible. He found that a small globe, placed between two equally large ones, shewed electricities of the same kind with that of the other two, when the radius oſ the great one 7as not more than five times that of the middle one, but shewed no electricity when the disproportion was greater. ill 237. When thres equal globes were in eontact, the density oſfluid in the middle globe vas 7|7 I of that of the other two. A small globe being removed to a very small distance ſrom m overcharged great one, after having been in contact, shewed opposite electricity in the fronting point; when a Etile farther off, it was neutral; ; und beyond this, it was overcharged. The diameters being 1l and 8, the fronting point oſ the smll one was negative till the distance was I; here it was neutral, and when it was removed ſarther, ĩt was positive. When the diameters were I1 and 4, the small globe was negative till their distanoe vas 2, vhere it was neutral. When thiè diameters vere I1 and , the distance which rendered the small globe neutral in the fronting point was œ3. All these fuets are perfectly conformable to a mathematical deduction, from the supposition that the redundant fluid is spread over the surface, and that the interior points are neutral. If any sort of doubt should remain in the minds of those who are not conversant in such discussions, it must be greatly removed by the fact, that it is quite indiſferent vhether one or both globes be solid, or be an extremely thin shell. When an electriſied body is touched with a long wire, mã by another of equal diameter and length, coated to any ihickness vith lac or sealing wax, the two wires take off predisely the same quantity oſ. electricity. This was demon- MAGNETISM. 238. Tur knowledge which the antient naturalists possessed of this subject was extremely imperfeet, and affords the strongest proof of their ignorance of the true method of philosophising; for there can hardly be named any object of physical research that is more curious in itself, or more likely to engage attention, than the apparent life and activity of a piece of rude unorganised matter. This had attracted notice in very early times; for Thales attributed the characteristic phenomenon, the attraction oſ a piece of iron, to the agency oſ a mind or soul residing in the magnet. Philosophers seem to have been contented vith this lazy notice of a slight suggestion, unbecoming an inquirer, and rather such as might be expected from the most incurious peasant. Even Aristotle has collected no information that is of any importancee We know that the general imperfection of ancient physies has been aseribed to the little importance that was attached to the knowledge oſ the material world by the 206 MAGNETISM. philosophers of Greece and Rome, who thought human nture, the active pursuits of men, and the science of public affairs, the only objects deserving their attentionn. Most of the great philosophers of antiquity were also great actors on the stage of human life, and despised acquisitions which did not tend to accomplish them for this dignified employment: but they have not given this reason themselves, though none was more likely to be uppermost in their mind. Socrates dissuades from the study of material nature, not becaus it was unvorthy oſ the attention of his pupils, but because it was too difficult, and that certainty was not attainable in it Nothing can more distinctly prove their ignorance of what is really attainable in science, namely, the knowledge of the laus of nature, and their ignorance of the only method of acquiring this knowledge, viz. observation and experiment. They had entertained the hopes of discovering the couses of things, and had formed their philosophical language, and their mode of research, in conformity with this hopeless project. Making little advances in the discovery of the causes of the phenomena of material nature, they deserted this study for the study of the conduct of man; not hecause the discovery oſ causes was more easy and ſrequent here, but because the study itself was more immediately interesting, and because any thing like superior knowledge in it puts the possessor in the desirable situation of an adviser, a man of superior wisdom; and as this study was closely connected with morals, the character oſ the philosopher acquired an eminence and dignity which was highly ſlattering to human vanity. Their procedure in the moral and intelleetual sciences is strongly marked vith the same ignorance oſ the true method of philosophising; for we mrely find them forming general propositions on copious nduetions of facts in the conduct of men. They always proceæd in the synthetic method, as if they were fully onversant in the ſirst principles of human nature, and had nothing to do but to make the application, according to the estahlished forms of i MAGNETISM. 207 Wihile we admire, thereſore, the sagacity, the penetration, the candid observatiun, and the happy illustration, to be found in the works of the ancient moralists and writers on jurisprudence and politics, we cannot but lament that such great men, frequently engaged in public affairs, and therefore having the finest opportunities for deducing general laws, have done so little in this vay; and that their writings, however engaging and precious, cannot he considered as any thing more refined than the observations of judicious and worthy men, vith all the diffuseness and repetition of ordinary conversation. All this has arisen from the want of a just notion of what is attainable in this department of science, namely, the laws of intellectual and moral nature; and of the only possible method of attaining this Enovledge, viz. observation and experiment, and the formation of general laws by the induetion of particular facts. 239. We have been led into these reſlections by the inattention of the ancients to the ourious phenomena of magnetism; which must have occurred in considerable and entertaining variety to any person who had taken to the experimental method. And we have hazarded these free remarks, expecting the acquiescence of our readers, because the superior knowledge which we, in these later days, have acquired of the magnetical phenomena, were the first ſruits oſ the true method of philosophising This was poited out to the learned vorld in 1590 by our celebrated countryman Chancellor Bacon, in his two great works, the Novum Orgonum Scientiarum, and De Argumentis Scientiarum. Dr. Gilbert of Colchester, a philosopher of eminence in many respects, but chieſly because he had the same just views of philosophy with his noble countryman, published about the same time his Physiologia Nova, seu Tractutus de Magnete et Corporibus magneticis. In the introduetion, he recounts all the knowledige of the antients on the subject, and their supine inattention to vhat was so entirely in their hands; and the impostihility of ever adding to the stogk of useful knowledge. r, ’IO MAGNETISM. the general cause. But, ſarther, we obtain by this method a true theory of all the subordinate phenomena. For a just theory is only the pointing out the general ſact of which the phenomenon under consideration is a particular instance Beginning thereſore with the phenomenon which comprehends all the particular cases, ve explain those cases in shewing in what manner they are included in the general phenomenon, and thus we shall be able to predict what vill be the result oſ putting the hody under consideration into any particular situation And perhaps ve may find, in them all, coincidences which will enable us to shew that they are all modifications of a fact still more general. Iſ we gain this point, we shall have established a complete theory of them, having discovered the general ſact in which they are all comprehended. Should we for ever remain ignorant oſ the cause oſ this general ſact, we have nevertheless rendered this a complete branch of mechanical theory. Nay, we may perhaps discover such circumstances of resemblauce between this general ſact and others, with which we are better acoquainted, that we shall, vith great probability at least, be able to assign the æause of the general fact itself, by shewing the law of which it is a particular inStance. We shall attempt this method on the present ocœasion 242. The leading ſacts in magnetism are the two following: l. If any oblong piece of iron, such às a bar, rod, or wire, be so fitted, that it can assume any direction, it vill arrange itselſ in a certain determinate direetion ith respect to the axis of the earth. Thus, if, in any part of Britain, an iron or steel wire be thrust through a piece of cork, as ræQæ sented in Plate III. fig. I. s as that the whole may swim level in water, and if it be laid in the water nearly northwest and south-east, it will slowly change its position, and finally settle in a direction, making an angle of about 2i degrees with the meridian. MAGNETISM. 2ll This experiment, which we owe to Dr. Gilbert (sææ B. I. ch. 11.), is delicate, and requires attention to many circumstances. The force with which the iron tends toward this final position is extremely weak, and vill be balanced by very minute and otherwise insensible resistances; but we have never found it fail vhen executed as here directed. An iron vire of the size of an ordinary quill, and about eight or ten inches long, is very ſit for the purpose. It should be thrust through the cork at right angles to its uxis; and so adjusted, by repeated trials, as to swim level or parallel to the horizon. The experiment must also be made at a great distance from all iron; thereſore in a bason of some other metal or earthen ware. It may sometimes require a very long while before the motion begin; and if the wire has been placed at right angles to the direction vhich we have mentioned as final, it will never change its position; thereſore we have directed it to be laid in a direction not too remote, yet very sensibly diſferent from the But this is not the true position aſfected by the iron rod. Ifit be thrust through a piece of wood or cork perfectly spherical, in such a mauner that ĩt passes through its centre, and if the centre of gravity coincide with this centre, and the whole be of such weight as to remain in any part of the water, without either ascending or descending, then iĩt will finally settle in a plane inclined to the meridian about 250, and the north end vill be depressed about 730 below the horizon. All this is equivalent with saying, that if any oblong Fiece oſ iron or steel be very nicely poised on its centre of gravity, and at perſect liberty to turn round that centre in overy direction, it vill finally take the position now mentioned- We have ſarther to observe with regard to this experiment, that ĩt is indiſferent which end of the rodbe placed toward the north in the begining of the experiment. That 2 2l1 MAGNETISM. end will ſirally settle toward the north; and if the experiment be repeated with the same rod, but with the other end north, it will finally settle in this new attitude. It is, however, not alvays that we ſind pieces oſ iron thus perſectly indifferent. Very ſrequently one end afſects the northerly position, and we cannot make the other end assume its place: the causes oſ this difference will be clearly seen by and bye. 248. The position thus affected by a rod of iron ĩs ealled by Dr. Gilbert the MAGNETICAL POSITION Or DIRECTION. It is not the same, nor parallel, in all parts oſ the earth, as will Le more particularly noticed aftervards. 2442. The other leading ſact is this: When a piece of iron, lying in the magnetical position, or nearly so, and at perfect liberty to move in every direetion, is approached by another oblong piece of iron, held nearly in the same position, it is attracted by it; that is, the moveable piece of iron will gradually approach to the one that is presented to it, and vill at last come into contact with it, and may then be slovly drawn along by it. This phenomenon, although not so delicate as the former, is still very nice, because the attraction is so weak that it is balanced by almost insensible obstructions But the experiment will scarcely ſail if conducted as ſollows: Let a strong iron wire be made to ſloat on water by means of a piece of cork, in the manner already deseribed, having one end under water. See Plate III. fig. I. B. When it is nearly in the magnetical position, bring the end of a preity big iron rod, such às the point of a nev poker, within a quarter oſ an ineh of its southern end (holòing the poker in a position not very diſferent from the magnetical position), and hold ĩt there ſor some ſime, not exactly southward from it, but a little to one side The floating iron vill be observed to turn owards it with an accelerated motion; vill touch it, and may then be drawn by it through the water in any direction We shall have the same result MAGNETISM. 23 by approaching the northern extremity of the floating iron vith the upper end oſ the poker. The same phenomena may be observed by suspending the first piece of iron by its middle by a long and slender hair or threadlc The suspension must be long, othervise 1he stiſſness oſ the hair or thread may be suſficient for balancing the very small fore with which thepieces of iron tend toward each other. The phenomenon may also be observed in a piece of iron which turns ſreely on a fine point, like the needle of the mariners compass. In this, as in the former experiment, the ends of the pieces oſ iron are observed, in general, to be indifferent; that is, either end of the one vill attract either end of the other. It oſten happens, hovever, that the ends are not thus indifſorent, and that the end of the moveable piece of iron, instead of approaching the other, ill be observed to recede from it, and appear to avoid it. We shall soon learn the cause of this difference in the states of iron. 245. It is scarcely necessary to remark, that ve must infer from these experiments, that the action is mutual between ihe two pieces oſ iron. Either of them may be the moveable piece which approaches the other, manifesting the attraction of that other. This reciprocity of action will be abundantly verified and explained in its proper place. 246. These two facts were long thought to be peculiar to loadstones and artificial magnets, that is, pieces of iron which have acquired this property by certain treatment with loadstones; but they were discovered by Dr. Gilbert to he inherent in all iron in its metallic state; and were thought by him to be necessary consequences of a general principle in the constitution oſ this globe. These phenomena are indeed much more conspicuous in loadstones and magnets; and it is therefore with such that experiments are best made for learning their various modifications. 247. But there is another circumstance, hesides the degree of vivacity, in which the magnetism of common iron and 3 MAGNETISM. 25 But if we bring that end of a magnet A which turns to the north near to the similar end of another magnet B, these ends vill not attract each other, but, on the contrary, will repel. Iſ the two magnets are made to ſloat on pieces of vood, and have their north poles fronting each other, the magnets vill retire from each other; and in doing so, they generally turn round their axes, till the north pole of one front the south pole oſ the other, and then they run tgether. This is a very notable distinetion between the magnetism of magnets and that of common ĩron; and whenever ve see a piece oſ iron shew ihis permanent distinotion of it ends, we must consider it as a magnet, and conelude that b has met with ome peculiar trentment. It is not, however, strietly true, tliat the poles of loadstones or magnets are so ſixed n partieũlar parts of their ubstance, nor that the poles of the same name so constantly repel each other; ſor if a small or veak magnet A have its pole brought near the similar pole of a large or strong magnet B, they are oſten ſound to attraet when almost uching, although at more considerable distances they repel each other. But this is not an exception to the generãl proposition; for when the north pole of A is thus attracted by the north pole of B, it vill be found, by other trials, to have all the qualities of a south pole, while thus in the neighbourhood of the north pole of B. 29. The magnetic properties and phenomena are conveniently distinguished into those of rorcE and oſ roLARY. Those of the first class only vere known to the ancients, and even of them their knovledge vas extremely seanty and imperfectC. They may all be classed under the ſollowing general propositions. 250I. The similar poles oſ tvo magnets 1epel each other vwith a forœ decreasing as the distances increase2. The dissimilar poles oſ two magnets attract each oh-nith a ſorce decreasing as the distances increase. 216 MACKETISN. S. Magnets arrange themselves in a certain determinate position with respect to each other. 251. The first objeet of research in our ſarther examination of these properties is the relation which is observed i ſorce oſ actionn This has accordingly occupied much aitention of the philosophers, and numberless experiments have been made in order to ascertain the lav of variation, both of the attraction and the repulsion. It is obvious, from the nature of the thing, that the determination is very diſficult, and the investigation very complieatedl We can only observe the simultaneous motion of the whole magnet; yet we know that there are four separate actions c-existing and contributing in diſferent directions, and vith diſferent forces, to the sensible eſfectt The force which we measure, in any way whatever, is compounded of ſour diſferent ſorces, vhich we canmot separate and measure apart; for the north pole of A repels the north pole oſ B, and attracts iĩts south pole, while the south pole of A exerts the opposite forces on the same poles of B. The attraction which we ohserve is the excess of two unequal attractions above tvo unequal repulsionss. The same might be said of an observed repulsion. Nay, the matter is imcomparably more complicated than this; because, for any thing ſhat we know, every particle of A acts on every particle of B, and is acted on by it; and the intensity of those actions may be diſferent at the same distances, and is certainly diſferent when the distances are 50. Thus there is a combmation of an unknown number oſ actions, each of which is unknown individually, both in direction and intensity. The precise determination is thereſore, in all probability, impossible. By precise determination, ve mean the law oſ mutual action between two magnetic particles, or that precise funetion of the distance vhich defines the intensity of the force; so that measuring the distance of the acting particles on the axis of a eurve, MAGNETISM. an the ordinates oſ the curve may have the proportions of the attractions and repulsions. It is almost neędiess to attempt any deduction of the lav of variation from the numerous experiments which have been published by diſferent philosopherss An ample collection of them may be seen in Scarellas treatise. Mr. Muschenbroek has made a prodigious number; but all are so anomalous, and exhibit such diſferent laws of diminution by an increase of distance, that we may be certain that the experiments have been injudiciouss. Attention has not been paid to the proper objects Magnets of most improper shapes have been employed, and of most diffuse polarity. No notice has been taken of a circumstance which, one should think, ought to have occupied the chief attention; namely, the joint action of four poles, of which the experiment exhibits only the complex resultt. A very slight reflection might have made the inquirer perceive, that the attracſions or repulsions are not the most proper phenomena forideclaring the precise law of vãriation; because what ve observe is nnly the excess of a smull difference of attractions and repulsions above another small difference. Mr. Hawksbee and Dr. Brook Taylor employed a much better method, by observing the deviations ſrom the meridian which a magnet occasioned in a compass needle at different distances. This is occasioned by the difference of the two sums of the same forces; and this difference may be mãade æ hundred times greater than the othe. But they employed magnets of most improper shapes *.  The true law of Magnetie action was deduced ſrom these experiments so Iong ago as 1750, by Mr. Michæll, m his work entitled * A Treatise oſ Artiſicięl Ma guets. uf There have been, ' he observes, some who have imagined that the decrease of the magnetic attraction and repulsion is iuversely as the cubes of the distanes ; others as the squares, and others that it follows no certain ratio at all, hut that it is much quicker at great distances than at small ones, and that it is dĩffe rent in different stones; among these last, is Dr. Brook Taylor and M uschenbroek, who seem to have been pretty accurate in their experiments, Scæe Pnil. Trans. No. 368 and 90.) The conclusions of these Gentlomen were 218 MAGNETISM. 252. We must except from this eriticism the experiments of Mr. Lambert, recorded in the Memoirs of the Academy of Berlin for 1756, published in 1758. This most sagacious philosopher (ſor he highly meritls that name) placed a mariner's needle at various distances ſrom a magnet, in the direction of its axis, and observed the declination from the magnetic meridian produced by the magnet, and the obliquity of the magnet to the axis of the needle Thus, vas the action oſ the magnet set in opposition and equilibrium vith the natural polarity of the needle. But the diſficulty was to discover in what proportion each of those forces was changed by their obliquity of action on this little lever. No man excelled Mr. Lambert in address in devising methods of mathematical investigationn. He observed, that vhen the obliquity of the magnet to the axis of the needle was 309, it caused it to decline 15. When the obliquity was 75, the distance being the same, it declined 30. Call the obliquity o, and the declination d, and let f be that function of the angle which is proportionable to the actionn. Also let » be the natural polarity of the needle, and m the force of the magnet. It is evident that P }ſ, 15m x ſ, 830 And p: mæ f, 30: f, 15; ſoc the same reason p: nrf, 75: ſ, 830 Thereſore ſ, 15: F30 r, 80: ſ, T5°. But it is well known that Sine 15: Sine 30  Sine 30: Sine 75. Hence Mr. Lambert was led to conjecture, that the sine was that function of the angle which was proportional to the aetion of magnetism on a lever. But one experiment was insuſficient for determining this pointt. He made a similar eomparison of several other obliquities and declinations with dravn ſrom their experiments, without their hęing aware oſ the third property oſ magnets just mentioned, which, if they had made proper allowances ſor, together with the increase and diminution oſ pover in the maguets they tried thæir experiments with, all the irregularities they complained oſ, (as far as appear rom their relutions oſ them) might very well be acecunted for, and hæ wholæ of iheir experiments coincide with ihe squares of ihe distances nsuriy. P.19, Note—En. MAGNETISM. ].n the same distances oſ the magnet, and also with other distances; and he put it past all dispute, that his conjecture was just. Had Mr. Lambert's experiments terminated here, it must be granted that he has made a notable diseovery in the theory of the intimate nature of magnetism. It completely refutes all the theories whieh pretend 1o explain the action of a magnet by the impulsion of a stream of ſluid, or by pressure arising ſrom the motion of such a atream; for in this case the pressure on the needle must have diminished in the duplicate ratio of the sine. The directive power vith the angle 90 must be 4 times greater than with the angle 30°; whereas it was observed to be only twice as great. Magnetism does not act therefore by the impulsion or pressure oſ a stream oſ fluid, but in the manner of a simple incitement, as ve conceive attraction or repulsion to act. Having ascertained the effect of obliquity, Mr. Lambert proceeded to examine the effect of distance; and, by a most ingenious analysis of his observations, he discovered, that if we represent the force of the magnet by ſ, and the distance oſ the nearest pole of the magnet from the centre oſ the needle by à, and if a be a constant quantity, nearly equal to two-thirds of the length of the needle, we have ſ proportional to7i—. Mr. Lambert found this hold with very great exactness with magnets ten limes larger, and needles twice as short. But he acknowledges, that it gives a very singular resuli, as if the action of a magnet were exerted from a centre beyond itself. He attributes this to its true cause, the still great complication of the result, arising from the action oſ the remote pole of the magnet. He thereſore takes another method of examination, which we shall understand by and by, when we consider the directive power of a magnet. We have mentioned this imperſect attempt chieſly on account of the unquestionable manner in which he has ascertained the eſfect of obliquity, and the importange of this determinaton. 220 MAGNETISM. We have attempted this investigation in a very simple mannerr. We got some magnets made, consisting of tvo balls connected by a slender rod. By a very particular mode of impregnation, we gave them a pretty good magnetism; and the force of each pole seemed to reside almost in the centre of the bal. This was our ohject in giving them this shape. It reduced the examination hoth oſ the attmetive and of the directive power to a very easy computation. The result was, that the force oſ each pole varied in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance The error of this hypothesis in no case amounted to -th of the whole. In computing for the phenomena of the directive power, the irregularities and deviations from this ratio were much smaller. The previous knowledge oſ this funetion would greatly expedite and facilitate our farther investigation: but we must content ourselves with a very imperfect approximation, and vith arriving at the desired determination by degrees, and by a very circuitous route. 253. It is a matter of experience, that when two magnets are taken, each of whith is as nearly equal as possible in the strength of both poles, then, if they are place? ith their axes in one straight line, and the north pole of am ſronting the south pole of the other, they attract each aſær with a foree which diminishes as the distance increases : and this variation of foree is regular, that is, without as7 sudden changes of intensity, till it becomes insensible No instance has occurred of its breaking suddenly off when oſ any sensible force, but it appears to diminish continually like gravity. No instance occurs in which attraction is changed int⸗ repulsion. -] But it is, moreover, to be particularly remarked, that, having made this observation with the north pole of A fronting the south pole of B, if the experiment be repeated with the south pole oſ A fronting the north pole of B, the results vill be precisely the same. And, lastly, it is a matter of u- MAGNETISH. /21 excepted experience, that the sensible aetion of A on B, measured by the force which is necessary for preventing the farther approach of B, is precisely equal to the action of B on AA This is the case, however unequal the force of the two magnets may be; that is, although A may support ten pounds oſ iron, and B only ten ounces. Nov, the simplest view we can take of this experiment is; by supposing the whole action of one end or pole ofa magnet to be exerted at one point of itt. This vill give us four actions of A on B, accompanied by as many equal and opposite actions of B on A. It is plain that ve may content ourselves with the investigation of one only of these sets of actions. What we observe is the excess of the attractions of the poles oſ A for the dissimilar poles of B above the repulsions of the same poles of A ſor the similar poles of B. At all distances there is such an excesss The sum of the attractions exceeds the sum of the repulsions competent to every distance. Now this ill really happen, if we suppose that the poles of a magnet are of equal strength, and that, however these different magnets diſfer in strength, they have the same law of diminution by an increase of distance. The first circumstance is a very possible thing, and the last is demonstrated by the observed equality of action and reaction. Every thing will now appear very plain, by representing (Plate III.) the intensities oſ attraction and repulsion by the ordinates of a curve, of which the abscissæ represent the distances oſ the acting poles. Thereſfore let A and B (Plate III. fig. 2.) represent the two magnets, placed with their four poles S, N, s, n, in æ straight Iine. In the straight line O q take O m, Op, O n, O 4, respectively equal to Ns, Nu, S 5, Sn; and let MPNQ be a curve line, having Oq for its axis and assymptote; and let the curve, in every part, be convex towards its axis. Then drav the ordinates m M, 2 P, n N, Q, to the curve. a1x[x MAGNETISM. that it can turn round it, it is very plain that it wũl retam ihe position in which it is drawn in the figuree For its south pole æ being more attracted by N than it is repelled by S, is on the whole, attracted by the magnet A; and, by this attraction, it would vibrate like a pendulum that is supported at the centre B. In like manner, its north pole æ is more repelled by N than it is attracted by S, and is, on the whole, repelledl. The part B n would thereſore also vibrate like a pendulum round B. Thus each halſ oſ it is urged into the very positioĩ which it now has; and if this position be deranged a little, the attraction of s B toward A, and the repulsion of n B ſrom it, would impel it toward the position B æ This will be very evident, i we put the magnet B into the position /Bu, at right angles to the line AB. The pole s and the pole  are urged in opposite, and thereſore conspiring, directions, with equal forces, very nearly at right angles to æ, if the magnet B be small. In any oblique position, the ſorces will be somewhat unequal, and account must be had of the obliquity oſ the actions, in order to know the precise rotative momentum of each. Dr. Gilbert has given to this modiſication oſ the action oſ A on B, the name of vis nisPpoNENS; which we may translate by nIRECTIVE POWER Or PORCE. Also, that modification of the tendency of B to or ſrom A is called by him the vERTICITAS Of B. We might call it the vERTICITY O B; but we think that the name PoLARITY is suſficiently expre sive of the phenomenon; and as it has come into general use, ve shall abide by it. 259. It is not so easy to give a general, and at the same time precise, measure oſ the directive power of A and polrity of B.The magnet B must be considered as a lever; and then the ſorce tending to bring it into its ultimate posi tion æ s depends both on the distancæ of its poles from N and S, and also on the angle which the axis o B make MAGNETISM. 220 vith the line AB. When the axis of B coincides with AB, the ſorce acting on ĩts poles, tending to eep them in that situation, is evidently m  p n+q and thereſore may be represented by M I (in Plate III fig. 2.), or by tvice EL, or by four times CH. If B has the position  B ⸗, perpendicular to AB, let the ordinates E eand F feut the curve in and X: and drav L parallel to the axis (our figure causes this line almost to eoineide with FI, and in all important cases it will be nearly the same). In this case IL vill express one halſ of this foreee Either of these estimations of this modification of the mutual action of the magnets, will be sufficient for the objects we have in view. 260. The directive power of A, and the polarity of B, are inereased, I. By increasing the strength of one or both of the magnets. This is evident, 2. By diminishing the distance of the magnets. For this, by increasing the sum of M m and P ꝓ more than the sum of N n and Q q, must increase EL or M. S. By increasing the length of A. For this, by removing n and q farther from m and ꝑ, must depress the points L and I, and increase EL, or IL, or M L 4. By diminishing the length oſ B, while the distance Ns between the magnets remains the same. For this, by bringing p and q nearer to m and n, must inerease M m + P ꝓ more than N n + Q . Or, by bringing E e and F f nearer to M m and N n, it must increase EL and M I If the distance N n, between the pole of A and the remote pole of B remain the same, the directive foree of A, and polarity of B, are diminished by diminishing the length of B, as is easily seen ſrom what has been just now said. It is also diminished, but in a very small degree, by diminishing the length of B, when the distance between the centres of A and B remain the same. TFor, in this case, the ordinates Ie and K ⸗ retain their places; but the points m and P approach to e; and this brings the intersection E of the 230 MAGNETISM. ordinate and chord nearer to I, and diminishes EL, because the point L is not 50 much depressed by the approach of F to K as E is depressed. 261. But in all cases, the ratio of the direetive power of A to its attractive force, or of the polarity of B to its tendency to A, is increased by diminishing the length of B. For it is plain, that by diminishing m ꝓ and æ q, while Ie and Xf keep their places, the point o is raised, and the point L is depressed; and thereſore the ratio of EL to E o, or of M, to M1, is increasedl. We even see that, by diminishing the length of B continually and without end, the ratio of M I to M ? may be made to exceed any ratio that can be assigned. 262. No, since diminishing the length oſ B increases the ratio of the directive power of A to its attractive power, while increasing the length of A increases both, and also increases the ratio of EL to E o (as is very easily seen), and since this increase may be as great as we please, it necessarily ſollows, that iſ the same very small magnet B be placed at such distances from a large and strong magnet A, and from a smuller and less vigorous one C, as to have equal polarities to both, its tendency to A will be less than its tendency to C It may even be less in any ratio we please, by suſſiciently diminishing the length of B. Dr. Gilbert observed this; and he expresses his observation by saying, that the directive power extends to greater distances than the attracting pover. We must just conclude, that the last becomes insensible at smaller distances than the first. This will be found a very important observation. It may be of use to keep in mind, that the directive power oſ a magnet A on another magnet B, is the ꝗiſference of the sums of the actions oſ each pole of A on both poles of B; and the attractive power oſ A ſor another magnet B, is the difference oſ the differences oſ these actions. It may be also remarked just nov, that the directive ſorc: of A always exceeds its attractive foree by the quantit MAGNETISM 231 2 (7q). For their difſerence may be expressed by t, vhich is equal to twice o L. Now, e is equal to Pꝑ, or to p; and; L is equal to PpF f, orio P p—Q—VFPF, or toPpQ o: Therefore o L=Ppq, andt Im/2 trQq,=2rq By inspecting this figure with attention, we obtain indications of many interesting particularss. If the lengths of the magnets A and B are the same, the point n in the axis of the curve vill coincide with J. As the length of A increases, the part n q is removed fſarther ſrom the part m ). The line P t becomes less inclined to the axis, and is ultimately parallel to it, vhen æ is infinitely remotee. At this time L falls on e; so that the ultimate ratio of the attraction to the polarity is that of E. o E e, vhen the magnet A is infinitely long. It is then the ratio oſ the diſference of the astions of the nearest pole of A on the two poles of B to the sum of these actions. Hence it follows, that when A is very great and B very small, the polarity oſ B is vastly greater than its tendency to A. It may have a great polarity when its tendency is insensible. The ratio of the polarity to the attraction also increases by increasing the distance of the magnets while their dimensions continue the same. This ill appear, by remarking that the chords MP and NQ must interseet in some point u; and that when the four points m, ꝑ, n, and q, move off ſrom O, keeping the same distances from ench other, E o vill diminish faster than EL, and the rutio of EL to Eo vill continually increase. Therefore when a small magnet B is placed at such a distance from a great magnet A, and from a smaller one C, as to have equal polarity to both, its tendency to C vill exceed its tendency to A. For the polarities being equal, it must be ſarther from the great magnet; in which ease the ratio of its polarity to its attraction is increased. And this will also obtain iſ the magnets diſfer also in rength. For, to have equal polarities, B must be still farher ſrom the great and powerful magnet. 232 MAGNETISM. For all these reasons, a large and powerful magnet may exert a strong directive power, while its attractive pover is insensible. 263. We have hitherto supposed the magnet B to be placæd in the direction oſ the axis oſ A, and only at liberty to turnround its centre B. Rut let its centre be placed on the centre of A, as in Plate III. ſig. à. it must evidently take a position which may be called sub-contrary to that of A, the north pole oſf B turning toward the south pole oſ A, and its south pole turning toward the north pole of A The same thing must happen when the centre oſ B is placed in B, any where in the line AE perpendicular o NS. S attracts n with a ſorcæ n b, while N repels n with a ſorce n c, somewhai smaller than n  These two compose the ſorce n . In like manner, the two ſorces s e and s f, exerted by N and S on the pole s, compose the ſor; s g2 Now if the axis oſ the magnet B be parallel to NS, but the poles in a contrary position, and if each magnet be equally vigorous in both poles, the magnet B will retain this position; because the forces n b and s e are equal, as also the forees nc and s ,. These must compose two ſorces n d and s g, vhich are equal, and equally inclined to n 5; and they vill therefore be in equilibrio on this lever. Let us now place the centre oſ the small magnet in C, neither in the axis oſ the other, nor in the perpendicula AE. Let its north pole n point toward the centre of A. It cannot remain in this position; ſor N repels n with a fore nc, while S attracts ĩt with a force æ b (emaller than æc, because the distance is greater)) These two compose a foræ n d considerably different ſrom the direction Cæ of ĩts axis. In Ike manner, the south pole s oſ the small magnet is acted on by tuo ſorces s e and s ſ, exerted by the two poles of A, which compose a ſorce s ꝗ nearly equal and parallel to n d, but in a nearly opposite direction. It is plain that thes forees must turn the small magnet round its centre C, and that ĩit cannot rest but in a position nearly parullel to æ d o n : MAGNETISM. 285 3 8 Iis posititon is better represented by Plate III. fig. 4 vith its south pole turned toward the north pole oſ the other magnet, and its north pole in the opposite direction. What the precise position will be, depends on that function of the distance which is always proportional to the intensity oſ the action; on the ſorce of each oſ the poles of A, and on the length of the magnot B. Nay, even when ve know this function, the problem is still very intricate. 264. There are methods by which we may approximate to the function with success. If the magnet B be indefinitely small, so that we may consider the actions on its two poles as equal, the investigation is greatly simpliſied. For, in this case, each pole of the small magnet B (Plate III. fig. 5) may be conceived as coinciding with its eentre Then, drawing NB, SB, and taking B b toward N, to represent the force with which N attracts the south pole of B, and taking B c, in SB produced, to represent the foree with which S repels the same pole, the compound force acting on this pole is B d, the diagonal of a parallelogram B b d c. In like manner, ve must take B e, in Nb produced, and equal to B b, to represent the repulsion of N for the north ple of B, and B ſ equal to B⸗, to represent the attraction of S for this polee. The compound force will be B g, equal and opposite to B d. It ſollows evidently from this investigation, that the small magnet vill not rest in any position but d 52. In this supposition, thereſore, of extreme minuteness of the magnet B, one of the parallelograms is suſficient. We may farther remark, that we have this approximation secure against any error arising ſrom the supposition that all the action of each pole of B is exerted by one point. Although we suppose it diffused over a considerable portion of the magnet, still the extreme minuteness oſ the whole makes the action, even on its extreme points, very nearly equal. 265. Hence may be derived a construetion for ascertaining the position oſ the needle, when the function m of the MAGNETISM. 235 vhich ve may conceive the polar aetivity concentrated in to points; and ve may, on the other hand, make use of the observed positions oſ such a needle and magnet for disSESBn covering the value of m. For, since NE NB7- it is plain that SSE ; tion which the writer of this article made on a very small needle, and a magnet having globular poles, and  inches between their oentres, he found SB æ28, NB æ5;, SK 11,49, and NK æ 3,37. This gives m =2,02, which diſſers very little from 2 Finding it so very near the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance, a circle VUZ was derihed, the circumſerence oſ which is the locus of SB: BN =6: 5,353. When the centre of the needle was placed any where in the circumſerence oſ this circle, it scarcely deviated ſfrom the point K, except when so ſur removed from the magnet that its natural polarity prevailed over the directive power of the magnet, or 50 near its middle that the action oſ the cylindrical part became very sensible. It is plain that the length of the needle must occasion some deviation from the magnetic direction, by destroying the perſect equality of action on its two poless. He therefore employed three needles of , 3, and  of an inch in length; and by noticing the difſerences of direction, he inferred what would be the direction, if the forces on each pole were precisely equal. He had the pleasure of seeing that the deviation ſrom the iuverse duplicate ratio of the distances was scarcely perceptible. Mr. Lamberts experiments on the directive power of the magnet, narrated in his second dissertation in the 22d volume of the Memoirs of the Academy of Berlin, are the most valuable of all that are on record; and the ingenious address with which they are conducted, and the inferences e dra wn, vould have done credit to Newton himself. We earnestly recommend the careſul perusal oſ that Essay, as —1I. Thus, in an observa- 236 MAGNETISM. the most instructive of any that we have readc The writœ oſ this found himself obliged to repeat all his former experiments, mentioned above, in Mr. Lamberts manner, and vith his precaution of keeping the needle in its natural position; a cireumstance to which he had not suſficiently attended before. The new results were sſill more conformable o his conjecture as to the law of variation. Mr. Lambert closes his dissertation with an hypothesis, * that the force of each tranverse element of a magnet is as ĩts distance from the centre, and its action on a particle of another magnet is inversely as the square of the distance On this supposition, he calculates the position of a very small needle, and draws three of the curves to which ĩt should be the tangent. These are very exactly coincident with some that he observedd We tried this with several magnetic bars, and found it very conformable to observation in some magnets; but deviating so ſar in the case of other magnets, that we are convinced that there is no rule for the force of each transverse element ofa magnet, and that the magnetism is differently disposed in difſferent magnets. It was chiefly this which induced us to form the magnets employed in this research of two balls united by a slender rod. Lichtenberg, in his notes on Erxleben's Natural Philosophy, says, that there is a MS. oſ the celebrated Tobias Mayer in the library of the Academy of Gottingen, in which he assumes the hypothesis above mentioned, and gives a construetion of the magnetic curves founded on it, making them a kind of catenaria The interior curves do indeed resemble the catenaria, but the exterior are totally unlike. But there is no oceasion for much argument to convince us, that the first part of this hypothesis is not only gratuitous, but unwarranted by any general phenomena. We know that a magnetical bar may have its magnetism very differently disposed; for it may have more than two poles, and the intermediate poles cannot have this disposition of the magnetism. Such a disposition is perhaps possible; but is by no means general, or even frequent. We MAGNETISM. a37 nre disposed to think, that permanent magnetism niust have its intensity diminishing in the very extremity of the bar. The reader may guess at our reasons ſfrom what is said in ELECTRICITY, § 222. 266. The following very curious and instructive phenomenon was the first thing which greatly excited the curiosity of the writer of this article, and long puæzled him to explain it. Indeed it wvas his endeavours ſo explain it which gradually opened up to him the theory oſ the mutusl action of magnets contained in these paragraphs, and first gave him occasion to admire the sagacity of Dr. Gilbert, and to see the connecting principle of the vast variety oſ observations and experiments which that philosopher had made. It seems owing to the want of this connecting principle, that a book so rich in facts should be so little read, and that so many of Dr. Gilberts observations have been published by others as new discoveries. Amusing himselſ in the summer 1758 with magnetic experiments, two large and strong magnets A and B (Plate IIL fig. 6.), were placed with their dissimilar poles fronting each other, and ahout three inches apart. A small needle, supported on a point, vas placed between them at D, and it arranged itselſ in the same manner as the great magnets. Happening to set iĩt oſf to a good distance on the table, as at F, he was surprised to see it immediately turn round on its pivot, and arrange itself nearly inthe opposite direction. Bringing it back to D restored it to its former position. Carrying it gradually out along DF, perpendicular to NS, he observed it to become sensibly more feeble, vibrating more slowly; and when in a certain point E, it had no polarity whatever wards A and B, but retained any position that was given it. Carrying it farther out, it again acquired polarity to A and B, but in the opposite direction; for it now arranged itsel? in a position that was parallel to NS, but its north pole was next to N, and its south pole to S. 208 MAGNETISM. This singular appearaneæ naturally excited his attention. The line on which the magnets A and B were placed had been marked on the table, as also the line DF perpendicular to the former. The point E was now marked as an inportant one. The experiments were interrupted by a ſriend coming in, to vhom such things were no entertainment. Next day, wishing to repeat them to some ſriends, the magnets A and B were again laid on the line on which they had been placed the day beſore, and the needle was placed at E, expecting it to be neutra. But it was found to have a considerable verticity, turning its north pole toward the magnet B; and it required to be taken farther out, toward F, beſore it became neutra. While standing there, something chanced to joggle the magnets A and B, and they instantly rushed together. At the same instant, the little magnet or needle turned itself briskly, and arranged itslf, as it had done the day before, at F, quivering very briskly, and thus shewing great verticity. This naturally surprised the beholders; and we now found that, by gradually withdrawing the magnets A and B from each other, the needle became veakerthen became neutraland then turned round on its pivot, and took the contrary position. It was very amusing to ohserve how the simply separating the magnets A and B, or bringing them together, made the needle assume such a variety of positions and degrees of vivacity in each. The needle was now put in various situations, in respect to the two great magnets: namely, off at a side, and not in the perpendicular DF. In these situations, it took an inconceivable variety oſ positions which could not be reduced to any rule: and in most of them, it required only a motion of one of the grent magnets for an inch or two, to make the needle turn briskly round ou its pivot, and assume a position nearly opposite to what it had before. But all this was very purzſing, and it was no till after several months, that the writer of this article having concœĩived the notion of the magnetic curves, was in a condition to exl. MAGNETISM. ”89 phin the phenomona. With this assistance, however, they are very clear, and very instructive. Nothing hinders us from supposing the magnets A and B perſectly equal in every respect. Let NHM, NEL, be two magnetic curves belonging to A; that is, such that the needle arranges itself along the tangent of the curve. Then the magnet P has two curves SGK, SEI, perfectly equal, and similar to the other tvo. Let the curves NHM and SGX intersect in C and F. Let the curves NEL and SEI touch each other in E. The needle being placed at C, would arrange itselfin the tangent of the curve KGS, by the action oſ B alone, having its north pole turned toward the south pole S of B. But, by the action of A alone, it would be a tangent to the curve NHM, having its north pole turned avay from N. Therefore, by the combined action of both magnets, it will take neither of these positions, but an intermediate one, nearly bisecting the angle formed by the two curves, having its north pole tumod toward B. But remove the needle to F. Then, by the action of the magnet A, it would be a tangent to the curve FM, having its north pole toward M. By the action of B, it would be a tangent to the curve KFG, having its north pole in the angle MFG, or turned toward AA BY their joint action, it takes a position nearly bisecting the angle GFM, vith its north pole toward A. Let the needle be placed in E Then, by the action of the magnet A, it would be a tangent to the curvæ NEL, vith ĩts north pole pointing to F. But, by the action of B, it will be a tangent to SEI, with its north pole pointing to D. These actions being supposed equal and opposite, it will have no verticity, or will be neutral, and retain any position that is given to it. The curve SEI intersects the curve NHM in P and Q. The same reasoning shews, that vhen the needle is placed at P, ĩt vill arrange itsclf vith its north pole in the angle !40 MAGNETISM SPH: but, when taken to Q, it will stand with its noritpole in the angle EQM. l From these ſacts and reasonings we must infer, that, ſor every distance of the magnets A and B, there vill be a series of curves, to which the indefinitely short needle will always be a tangent. They will rise from the adjoining poles on both sides, crossing diagonally the lozenges formedby the PRIMARY OF SIMPLE curves, as in Plate III. ſig. 6. These may be called coMPouND Or sECONIARY magnetic curves. Moreover, these secondary curves vill be oſ two kinds, aceording as they pass through the first or second intersections of the primary curves, and the needle will have opposite positions when placed on them. These two sets of curves vill be separated by a curve GEH, in the circumference oſ which the needle vill be neutral. This curve passes through the ponts vhere the primary curves touch each otherr. We may call this the line of neutrality or inactivity. We now see distinetly the effect of bringing the magnets A and B nearer together, or separating them farther from each other. By bringing them nearer to each other, the point E, which is now a point of neutrality, may be found in the second intersection (such as F) oſ to magnetic curves, and the needle will take a subcontrary position. By drawing them farther from each other, E may be in the first intersection of two magnetic curves, and the needle vill take a position similar to that of C. If the magnets A and B are not placed so as to form a straight line with their ſour poles, but have their axes making an angle with each other, the contacts and intersections of their attending curves may be very different from those noW represented; and the positions of the needle vill differ accordingly. But it is ain from what has been said, that if we knew the lav of action, and consequently the form of the primary curves, ve should always be able io say what vill be the position of the needlee Indeed, the consideration of the simple curves, although it was the mean of sug- MAGNETISM. 24l gesting to the writer of this article the explanation of those more complicated phenomena, is by no means necessary for this purposee Having the law of magnetic action, ve must know each of the eight forces by which the needle is affected, both in respect of direction and intensity; and are therefore able to ascertain the single force arising from their composition. Whahen the similar poles of A and B are opposed to each other, it is easy to see, that the position of the needle must be extremely different from what we have been deseribing. When placed anywhere in the line DF, between two magnets, whose north poles front each other in N and S, its north pole will always point away from the middle point D. There vill be no neutral point EIf the needle be placed at P or Q, its north pole vill be within the angle EPH, or FQI. This position of the magnets gives another set of secondary curves, which also cross the primary curves, passing diagonally through the lozenges ſormed by their intersection. But it is the other diagonal of each lozenge which is a chord to those secondary curvess. They vill, thereſore, have a form totally diſferent from the former species. 267. The consideration of this compounded magnetism is important in the science, both for explaining complex phenomena, and for advancing our knovledge oſ the great desideratum, the law of magnetic actionn. It serves this purpose remarkably. By employing a very small needle, the points of neutrality ascertain very nearly where the magnetic curves have a common tangent, and shews the position of this tangent. By placing the two magnets so as to form various angles with each other, we can, by means of these neutral points, know the position of the tangent in every point of the curve, and thus can ascertain the form of the curve, and the law of action with considerable accuracy. The vriter of this article took this method; and the result confirmed him in the opinion, that it was in the inverse duplicate ratio oſ the distances. The chief (perhaps the only) VOL. IV. q 242 MAGNETISN. ground of error ieemæũ i1o be the difficulty oſ procuring large magnets, having the action of each pole very much concentrate Large magnets must be employedc He attempted 10 make such, consisting oſ tWo sphercal balls, joined by a slender rodd But he could not give a strong magnetism to magnets oſ this ſorm, and was ſorced to make use of common hars, the poles of which are considerably diffused. This diſffusion oſ the pole renders it very diſſicult to select vith propriety the points from which the distances are to be etimated, in the investigation oſ the relation between the ſorces and distances. He tried another method ſor ascertaining this so much desired law, which had also the same result. Having made a needle consisting oſ two balls joined by a slender rod, and having touched it with great care, so that the whole strength of its poles seemed very little removed from the centres oſ the balls, he counted the number of horizontal vibrations vhich it made in a given time by the force of terrestrial magnetism. He then placed it on the middle of a very fine and large magnet, placed vith its poles in the magnetic meridian, the north pole pointing south. In this situation he counted the vibrations made in a given time. He then raised it up above the centre oſ the large magnet, till the distanee oſ its poles from those oſ the great magnet were changed in a certain proportion. In this situation its vibrations were again counted. It was tried in the same way in a third stuation, considerably more remote from the great magnet. Then, having made the proper reduction of the forces corresponding to the obliquity of their action, the force of the poles oſ the great magnet was computed from the number oſ vibrationss. To state here the cireumstances of the experiment, the necessary reductions, and the whole computations, would occupy several pages, and to an intelligent reader would ansver little purpose Mr. Lambert's excellent dissertation in the 22d vol. of the Mem. de I Acad. à Berlin, ill shew the prolixity and intricacy of this investi MAGNETISM. : PUu3 gation. Suſfice it to say, that these experiments were the most consistent with each other of any made by the writer of this article, with the view of ascertaining the law of magnetic action; and it is chiefly from their result that he thinks himself authorised to say, with some confidence, that it is inversely as the square of the distance These experiments vere first made in a rough way in 1769 and 1770. In 1775, observing that Mr. pinus seemed to think the action inversely as the distance (see his Tentam. Theor. Electr. et Magn. § 301. &e.), they were repeated with very great care; and to these were added another set of experiments, made with the same magnet and the same needle, placed not above the magnet, but at one side (but always in the line through the centre, perpendicular to the axis, so that the actions of the two poles might be equal). This disposition evidently simplifies the process exceedingly. The result oſ the whole was still more satisfactory. This conclusion is also confirmed by the experiments of Mr. Coulomb in the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences at Paris for 1786 and 1787. It would seem therefore to be pretty well established. Another method, which seems susceptible of considerable accuracy, still remains to be tried. It will be mentioned in due time. Sueh then are the general laws observed in the mutual action of magnetss We think it scarcely necessary to enter into a farther detail of their consequences, corresponding to the innumerable varieties of positions in which they may be placed with respect to each other. We are confident, that the sensible actions will always be found agreeable to the legitimate consequences of the general propositions which ve have established in the preceding paragraphss We proceed therefore to consider some physical facts not yet taken notice of, which have great influence on the phenomena, and greatly assist us in our endeavours to understand something oſ their remote cause. 204 MAGNETISM. 268. Magnetism, in all its modifications of attraction, repulsion, and direction, is, in general, of a temporary or perishing nature The best loadstones and magnets, unless kept with care, and with attention to certain cireumstances, are observed to diminish in their power. Natural loadstones, and magnets made oſ steel, tempered as hard as possible, retain their virtue with the greatest obstinacy, and seldom lose it altogether, unless in situations which our knovledge oſ magnetism teaches us to be unfavourable to its durability. Magnets oſ tempered steel, sueh as is used for watch-springs, are much sooner weakened, part with a greater proportion of their force by simple keeping, and finally retain little or none. Soſt steel and iron lose their magnetism almost as soon as its producing cause is removed, and cannot be made to retain any sensible portion of it, unless their metallie state suffer some change. I. Nothing tends so much to impair the pover of a magnet as the keeping it in an improper position. If its axis be placed in the magnetic direction, but in a contrary position, that is, with the north pole oſ it where the south pole tends to settle, it will grow weaker ſrom day to day; and unless it be a natural loadstone, or be of hard tempered steel, it will, aſter no very long time, lose its pover altogether. 2. This dissipation of a strong magnetic pover is greatly promoted by heatt. Even the heat of boiling water aſſects it sensibly: and if the magnet be made red hot, its power is entirely destroyed. This last ſact has long been known. Dr. Gilbert tried it with many degrees of violent heat, and found the consequences as now stated; but having no thermometers in that dawn of science, he could not say any thing precis. He ouly observes, that it is destroyed by a heat not suſficient to make it visible in a dark room. Mr. Canton found even boiling water to weaken it; but on cooling again the greatest part was recovered*.  M. Gay Lussac observed the same ſact with regard to nickel; and he found also that both nickel and iron cease to be attracted by the magnet when they ure made red hot. En. MAGNETISM. 45 3. What is more remarkable, magnetism is impaired by any rough usagee Dr. Gilbert found, that a magnet whieh he had impregnated very strongly, was very much impaired by a single fall on the floor; and it has been observed since his time, that falling on stones, or receiving any concussion which causes the magnet to ring or sound, hurts it much more than beating it with any thing soſt and yielding, Grinding a natural loadstone with coarse powders, to bring it into shape, weakens it much; and loadstones should thereſore be reduced into a shape as little different from their natural form as possible; and this should be done briskly, cutting them with the thin disks of the lapidarys wheel, cutting off only what is necessary for leaving their most active parts or poles as near their extremities as we can. All these causes of the diminution of magnetism are more operative if the magnet be all the while in an improper position. 4. Lastly, magnetism is impaired and destroyed by placing the magnet near another magnet, with their similar poles fronting each othe. We have had occasion to remark this already, vhen mentioning the experiments made with magnets in this position, ſor ascertaining the general laws or variations of their repulsionn. We there observed, that magnets so situated always weakened each other, and that a powerſul magnet oſten changed the species of the nearest pole of one less powerful. This change is recovered, in part at least, vhen it has taken place in a loadstone or a magnet of hard steel; but in spring tempered steel the change is generally permanent, and almost to the full extent of its condition while the magnets are together. It is to be remarked, that this change is gradual; and is expedited by any of the other causes, particularly by heat or by knocking. 269. On the other hand, magnetism is acquired by the same means, vhen some other circumstances are attended to. 1. A bar of iron, which has long stood in the magnetic airection, or nearly so, vill gradually acquire magnetism, and the ends vill acquire the polarity corresponding to their 246 MAGNETISM. situationn. In this country, and the north of Europe, the old spindles of turret vanes, old bars of windows, &e aquire a sensible magnetism; their lower extremity becoming a north pole, and the other end a south pole Gilbert says, that this was ſirst observed in Mantua, in the vane spindle of the Augustine church** Vento flexa (says he) deprompta, et apothecario cuidam concessa, attrohebat ferrea romenta, vi perquam insigni The upper bar oſ a hand ral to a stair on the north side of the highest part oſ the steeple of St. Giles' church in Edinburgh is very magnetical; and the upper end of it, where it is lodged in the stone, is a vigorous south pole. It is worth notice, that the parts oſsuch old bars acquire the strongest magnetism when their metallic state is changed by exposure to the air, becoming foliated and friable It would be worth while to try, whether the æthiops martialis, produced by steam in the experiments for decomposing water, will acquire magnetism during its production. The pipe and the wires, which are converted into the shining æthiops, should be placed in the magnetic direction. 2. If a bar of steel be long hammered while lying in the magnetic direction, it acquires a sensible magnetism (See Dr. Gilberts plate, representing a blacksmith hammering a bar of iron in the maguetic direction). The points of drills, especially the great ones, which are urged by very great pressure; and broaches, worked by a long lever, so as to cut the iron very ſast, acquire a strong magnetism, and the lower end always becomes the north pole (Phil. Trans. xx. 17.) Even driving a hard steel punch into a piece of iron, gives it magnetism by a single blow. In short, any very violent squeeze given to a piece of tempered steel renders it magnetic, and its polarity corresponds with its position during the experiment. We can scarcely take up a cutting or boring tool in a smith's shop that is not magnetical. Even soſt steel * Gassendi is said to have ſirst observed this in the cross oſ the spiræe oſ the church oſ St. Jeau dAix, in Provence. En. MAGNETISM. 267 and iron acquire permanent magnetism in this vay Iron also acquires it by twisting and breakingg It is thereſore difficult to procure pieces of iron or steel totally void oſ determinate and permanent magnetism; and this ſrequently mars the experiments mentioned in the first paragraphs of this article*. The way therefore to ensure success in these experiments is to deprive the rods of their accidental magnetism, by some of the methods mentioned a little ago. Let them be heated red hot, and allowed to cool while lying in a direction perpendicular to the magnetic direction (nearly E. N. E. and WS. W. in this country.) 3. As heat is observed to destroy magnetism, so it may also be employed to induee it on substances that are susceptible of magnetism. Dr. Gilbert makes this observation in many parts oſ his vork. He says, that the ores oſ iron which are in that particular metallic state which he considers as most susceptible of magnetism, will acquire it by long continuance in a red heat, if laid in the magnetic direction, and that their polarity is conformable to their position, that end of the mass which is next the north becoming the north pole He also made many experiments on iron and steel bars exposed to strong heats in the magnetical direction Such experiments have been made since Gilberts time in great numher. Dr. Hooke, in 1684, made experiments on rods of iron and steel one fifth of an inch in diameter, and seven inches long. He found them to acquire permanent magnetism by exposure to strong heat in the magnetic direction, and if allowed to cool in that direction. But the magnetism thus acquired by steel rods vas much stronger, and more permanent, if they were suddenly quenched with cold water, so as to temper them very hard.  M. Gay Lussac was hence led to try iſ iron experienced any change of hulk in becoming magneticc. Having ſilled an iron tube with water, and attached to one end a very ſine tube of glass in which thæ water rose, he magnetised the iron tube, but conld not perceive any risæ oſ the water in the glass tube. This is precisely what we should have Pxpected, as we conceive that one of the poles is in a state of expansion, while the other is in a state of contraction. See Biots Troitẽ de Phyrique, EE. iĩi. ꝑ. . and Phil. Trans. 1816. ꝑ. 98, 105, 156, &e. MAGNETISM. 249 it had been heated only to that degree; nay, we always ſound it stronger when it was quenched when red hot. We offer no explanation at present; our sole husiness just noW being to state ſacts, and to generaliãe them, in the hopes oſ finding some fact which shall contain all the others. 4. The most distinet acquisitions and ehanges of magnetism are by juxtaposition to other magnets and to iron. As the magnetism oſ a loadstone or magnet is weakened by bringing its pole near the similar pole of another magnet, it is improved by bringing it near the other pole; and it is always improved by bringing it near any pieee of iron or soſt steel But this action, and the mutual relation of magnets and common iron, being the most general, and the most curious and instructive of all the phenomena of magnetism, they merit a very particular consideration, Of the communication of Magnetism. 270. TuEr vhole may be comprehended in one proposition, which may he said to contain a complete theory of magnetism. Fundamental proposition. Any piece of iron, when in the neighbourhood of a magnet, i: a magnet, and ils polarity is so disposed that the magnet and it mutually attract each other. The phenomena which result ſrom this fundamental principle are infinitely various, and we must content ourselves with describing a simple ease or two, which will suſficiently enable the reader to explain every other. 27l. Take a large and strong magnet NAS (Plate III fig. 7.), of which N is the north, and S the souh pole. Let it be properly supported in a horizontal position, with its % A very interesting series of experiments on the inſluence of temperaturæ upon magnets, was ſound, aſter the death of Coulomb, among his unpublished papers. Au account oſ them will be ſound in Biot's Trailè de Phyique, tom. ĩi. p. 106, or n the article MAG ETISM in the Epivaurcn Excrcrorænm, uritten by that eminent mathematician. En. 260 MAGNETISM. poles free, and at a distance from iron or other bodies. Take any small piece of common iron, not exceeding two or three inches in length, such as a small key Take also another piece of iron, such as another smaller key, or a hit of wire about the thickness of an ordinary quill. I. Hold the key horizontally, near one of the poles, (as shewn at No l. fig. T. Plate IIL), taking care not to touch the pole with it; and then bring the other piece of iron to the other end of the key (it is indiſferent which pole is thus approached with the key, and which end of the key is held ner the pole.) The wire will hang by the key, and will continue to hang by it, vhen we gradually withdraw the key horizontally from the magnet, till, at a certain distance, the vire vill drop from the key, because the magnetism imparted from this distance is too weak. That this is the sole reason of its dropping, will appear by taking a shorter, or rather a slenderer, bit of wire, and touch the remote end of the key with it: it will be supported, even though we remove the key still farther from the magnet. 2. Hold the key below one oſ the poles, as at No 2, or B, and touch its remote end with the wiree It will be suspended in like manner, till ve remove the key too ſar from the magnet 3. Hold the key abore the poles, as at No 4, or 5, and touch its adjacent end with the wire (taking care that the wire do not also touch the magnet). The wire will still be supported by the key, till both are removed too ſar ſrom the magnet. Thus it appears, that in all these situations the key has shewn the characteristic phenomenon of Magnetism, namely, attraction for iron. In the experiment with the key held above the pole, the wire is in the same situation in respect to magnetism as the key is vhen held below the pole: but the actions are mutua. As the key attracts the wire, so the vire attracts the key. If the magnet be supported in a vertical position, as in Plate III. fig. 8. the phenomena vill be the same; and vhen MAGNETIZM. 25l the key is held directly above or directly below the pole, it vill carry rather a heavier wire than in the horizontal position of the magnet and key. Instead of approaching the magnet with the key and wire, ve may bring the magnet toward them, and the phenomena vill be still more palpable. Thus, if the bit of wire be lying on the table, and we touch one end of it with the key, they vill shew no connection whatever. While we hold the key very near one end of the wire, bring down the pole of a magnet toward the key, and we shall then see the end of the wire rise up and stick to the key, which will no support it. In like manner, if ve lay a quantity of iron fillings on the table, and touch them with the key, in the absence oſ the magnet, we find the key totally inactive But, on bringing the magnet any how near the key, it immediately attracts the iron ſilings, and gathers up a heap of them. 272. In the next place, this vicinity of a magnet to a piece of iron gives it a directive power. Let NAS (Plate III. fig. 9.) be a magnet, and BC (No I.) a key held near the north pole, and in the direction oſ the axis Bring a very small mariner's needle, supported on a sharp point, near the end C of the key which is farthest from N. We shall see this needle immediately turn its south pole towards C, and its north pole away from C. This position of the needle is indieated at c, by marking its north pole vith a dart, and its south with a erosss. Thus it appears that the key has got a directive power like a magnet, and that the end C is performing the office of a north pole, attracting the south pole of the needle, and repelling its north pole. It may indeed be said, that the needle at c arranges itself in this manner by the directive power oſ the magnet; for it would take the same position although the key were avay. But if we place the needle at b, it ill arrange itself as there represented, shewing that it is influenced by the key, and not (wholly at least) by the magnet. In like manner, if we place the needle at a, we shall see it tum its north pole to- 252 MAGNETISM. ward B, notwithstanding the action of the magnet on it. This action evidently tends to turn its north pole quite another way; but it is influenced by B, and B is perſorming the office of a south pole. In like manner, if ve place the key as at No 2, we shall obhserve the end B attract the south pole of the needle -laced at ꝗ, and the end C attract the north pole of a needle iaced in 5. In this situation of the key, we see that B perſorms the office oſ a north pole, and C performs the office of a south pole. Thus it appears that the key in hoth situations has become a magnet, possessed of hoth an attractive and a directive power. It has acquired two poles. 273. Lastly, the magnetism of the key is so disposed, that the two magnets NAS and BC must mutually attract each other; for their dissimilar poles front each other. Nov, it is æ matter of uniform and uncontradicted observation, that vhen a piece of iron is thus placed near a magnet, and the disposition of its magnetism is thus examined by means oſ a mariner's needle, the disposition is such that two permanent magnets with their poles so disposed must attract each other. The piece of iron, therefore, having the same magnetic relation to the magnet that a similar and similarly diposed magnet has, must be affected in the same manner. We eannot, by any knowledge yet contained in this article, give any precise intimation in what way the polarity of the piece of iron will be disposed. This depends on its shape as much as on its position. By describing two or three examples, a notion is obviously enough suggested, which, although extremely gratuitous, and perhaps erroncous, is oſ service, because it has a general analogy with the observed appearances. If one end of a slender rod or wire he held near the north pole of the magnet, while the rod is held in the direetion of the axis (like the key in Plate III. fig. 7. Ne 1.) the near end becomes a south, and the remote end a north pole. Keeping this south pole in its place, and turning the rod in MAGNETISM. 2j33 uny direction from thence, as ſrom a centre, the remote end is alays a north pole And, in general, the end of any oblong piece of iron which is nearest to the pole of a magnet becomes a pole of the opposite name, while the remote end becomes a pole oſ the same name vith that of the magnet. Iſ the iron rod be held perpendicularly to the axis, with its middle very near the north pole of the magnet, the two extremities of the iron become north poles, and the mid' ſ is a south pole. If the north pole of a magnet be held perpendieular to the centre oſ a round iron plate, and very near it, this plate will have a south pole in its centre, and every part of its circumference will have the virtue of a north pole. If the plate be shaped with poinis like a star, each of these points will be a very distinet and vigorous north pole. Something like this will be observed in a piece of iron of any irregular shape. The part immediately adjoining to the north pole of the magnet will have the virtue of a south pole, and all the remote protuberances will be north poles. The notion naturally suggested by these appearances is, that the virtue oſ a north pole seems to reside in something that is moveable, and that it is protruded by the north pole of the magnet toward the remote parts of the iron; and is thus constipated in all the remote edges, points, and protuberances, much in the same manner as electricity is observed to be protruded to the remote parts and protuberances oſ a condueting body by the presence oſ an overcharged body. This notion will greatly assist the imagination; and its consequences very much resemble what we observe. As a farther mark of the complete communication of every magnetic power by mere vicinity to a magnet, we may here observe, that the wire D of Plate III. fig. 7. No 2, and 3, will support another wire, and this another; and so on, to a number depending on the strength of the magnet. The key has therefore become a true magnet in every respect; for ĩt induces complete magnetism on the appended wire. That this is not the same operation of the great magnet (at 254 MAGNETSN. least not wholly so), appears by examining the magnẽtisi of D with the needle, which will be seen to be more influenced by D than by AA This fact has been long knom The ancients speak oſ it: They observe, that a loadstone causes an iron ring to carry another ring, and that à third; and so on, till the string of rings appears like àa chain. 274. What has now been said will explain a seeming exception to the universality of the proposition. If the key be held in the situation and position represented in Plate III fig. IO. the bit of wire ill not be attracted by it; and we may imagine that it has acquired no magnetism: But if we bring a mariners needle, or a bit of wire, near to its remote end B, it will be strongly attracted, and shew B to be a north polee The needle held near to C vill also shew C to be a south polee Also, if held near to D, iĩt will shew D t0 be a north polee Now the ends C, both of the key and oſ the wire, being south poles, they cannot attract each other, but, on the contrary, they vill repel; and therefore the wire vill not adhere to the key And if the key of Plate III fig. . No 4. with the wire hanging to it, be gradually carried outward, beyond the north pole oſ the magnet, and then brought down till its lower end be level ith the pole, the wire vill drop off. There is, however, one exception to the proposition. If the key in Plate. III. fig. 7. with its appending wire D, be gradually carried from any of the situations 2, 3, 4, or 5; toward the middle oſ the magnet, the wire ill drop off whenever it arrives very near the middle If we suppose a plane to pass through the magnetic centre A, pependicular to the axis (which plane is very properly called the magnetic equatorial plane by Gilbert), a slender piece of iron, held any where in this plane, acquires no sensible magnetism. It gives no indication of any polarity, and it is not oltracted by the magnet. It is well known, that the activity of a loadstone or magnet resides chieſly in two parts of it, which have been called its poles; and that those are the best magnets or loadstones in which this activity is least diffused: MAGNETISM. a55 and that a certain circumſerence oſ every loadstone or magnet is wholly inactivee When a loadstone or magnet of any shape is laid among iron filings, it collects them on two parts only oſ its surſace, and between these there is a space all round, to which no filings attach themselves. We presume that the reader already explains this appearance to himsel?. Many things shew a contrariety oſ action of the two poles oſ a magnet. We have already observed that the north pole of a strong magnet will produce a strong northern polarity in the remote end of a small steel bar; and, if it be then applied near to that end in the opposite direction, it will destroy this polarity. In whatever these actions may consist, there is something not only different but opposite. They do not blend their effects, as the yellow and blue making rays do in producing green. They oppose each other, like mechanical pressures or impulsions. We have every mark oſ mechanical action; ve have local motion, though unseen, except in the gradual progression of the magnetical faculties along the bar; but we have it distinetly in the ultimate effect, the approach or recess of the magnets: and in these phenomena we see plainly, that the forces in producing their effects, act in opposite directions Whatever the internal invisible motions may be, they are composed of motions vhose equivalents are the same with the equivalents of the ultimate, external, sensible motions; therefore the internal motions are opposite and equal if the sensible motions are so, and conversely. Adopting this principle, therefore, that the actions of the two poles are not only different but opposite, it follows, that if they are also equal and act similarly, each must prevent the action of the other; and that there will be a mechanical equilibriumit may even be called a magnetical equilibrium. Therefore if every part of a slender rod, orofa thin plate oſ iron, lie in the plane of the magnetic equator, the magnetic state (ſin whatever it may consist) cannot be produced in it. It will exhibit no magnetism; have no polar faculties: and we can see no reason why it should be attracted by the 256 MAGNETISM: magnet, or should attract iron. We must not forget to oli serve in this place, that iron in a state oſ incandescence acquires no magnetism by juxtaposition. We have already remarked, that iron in this state does not aſfect the magnet. If a bar of red hot iron be set near a mariners needle, it does not affect it in the smallest degree till it almost ceases to appear red hot in day light, as has been observed by Dr. Gilbert. All actions that ve know are accompanied by equal and opposite re-actions; and we should expect, what really happens in the present case, namely, that red hot iron should not be rendered magnetical and attractable. There isa very remarkable circumstance which accompanies the whole of this communication of magnetism to a piece oſ iron. It does not impair the power of the magnet; but, on the contrary, improves it. This fact was observed, and particularly attended to, by Dr. Gilbert. He remarks, that a magnet, in the hands of a judicious philosopher, may be made to impart more magnetism than it possesses to each of ten thousand bars of steel, and that it will be more vigorous than when the operations began. A magnet (says he) may be spoiled by injudicious treatment with other magnets, but never can touch a piece of common iron without being improved by it. He gives a more direct proof. Let a magnet carry as heavy a lump of iron as possible by its lower pole. Bring a great lump of iron close to its upper pole, and it vill now carry more. Let it be loaded with as much as ĩt can carry vhile the lump of iron touches its upper pole. Remove this lump, and the load vill instantly drop of. But the following experiment shews this truth in the most convincing manner: Let NAS (Plate III. fig. 11.) be a magnet, not very large nor of extreme hardnesss. Let CD be a strong iron vire, hanging perpendicularly from a hook by a short thread or loop. The magnet, by its action on CD, renders D a north pole and C a south pole, and the polarity of D's magnetism fits it ſor being attracted. Let it assume the position C, and let this be very carefully marked. Now bring a great MAGNETISM. Q”7 bar of iron s B n near to the other end of the magnet. We shall instantly perceive the wire Ce approach to the south pole of the magnet, taking a position C ſ. Withdraw the bar of iron, and C f will ſall back into the position C e. As ve bring the iron bar gradually nearer to the magnet, the vire vill deviate ſarther from the perpendicular, and when the bar B touches the magnet, CD vill start a great woy forward. It is also ſarther to be observed, that the larger the bar of iron is, the more will CD deviate ſfrom the perpendicular. Now this must be ascribed to the action oſ the bar on the magnet. For if the magnet be removed, the bar alone will make no sensible change on the position oſ the wire We know that the bar of iron becomes magnetical by the vicinity of the magnet. If we doubt this, we need only examine it by means oſ a piece of iron or a mariner's needle This will shew us that s has hecome a south, and n a north pole. Here then are two magnets with their dissimilar poles fronting each other. In conſormity with the whole train of magnetical phenomena, we must conclude that they attract each other, and must improve each other's magnetism. 26. This is a most important circumstance in the theory of magnetism. For it shews us, that, in rendering a piece of iron magnetic, there is no material communication. There is no indication of the transſerence oſ any substance residing in the magnet into the piece of iron; nor is there even any transſerence of a power or qualit. Were this the case, or if the substance or quality which was in A be now transferred to B, it can no longer be in A; and therefore the phenomena resulting from its presence and agency must be diminĩished. We must say that the magnet has excited powers inherent, but dormant, in the iron; or is, at least, the occasion of this excitement, by disturbing, in some adequate manner, the primitive condition of the iron. We must also say that the competency of the magnet and of the iron to produce the phenomena, is owing to the same cireumstances vOL. v. r 258 MAGNETISM. in both; because we see nothing in the phenomena which authorises us to make any distinction between them. Whatever thereſore causes one magnet to attract another, is also the reason why a piece of iron in the neighbourhood of a magnet attracts another piece of iron; and we must say that the cause of polarity, or the origin of the directive pover, is the same in both. Now we understand perſectly the directive power of a magnet, as exerted on another magnet. We see that it arises from a combination and mechanical composition of attractions and repulsions. It must be the same in this magnetism now inherent in the iron. The piece of iron directs a mariner's needle, as a magnet vould direct it; thereſore, as there is something in a piece oſ iron, vhich now attracts something in another piecæ of iron, so ther is something in the first which repels something in the last. 277. It may indeed be said that it is not a piece of iron, but a mariner's needle, or magnet, that is thus directed by our iron magnetised by vicinity to a magnet. This objection is completely removed by the most curious oſ all the facts which occur in this manner oſ producing magnetism. Take a piece oſ common iron, ſashion it, and fit it up precisely like a mariner's needle, and carefully avoid every treatment that can make it magnetical. Set it on its pivot, and bring it near the north pole oſ a magnet, placing the end, made like the south pole oſ the needle, next to the north pole of the magnet. In short, place it by hand exactly as a real mariner's needle would arrange itself. It vill retain that positionn. Now carry it round the magnet, along the circumference of a magnetic curve, or in any regular and continuous route. This piece oſ iron vill, in every situation, assume the very same position or attitude which the real magnetical needle would assume if in the same place, and it will oscillate precisely in the same way. Here then it is plain, that there is no distinction of power between the magnetism of the iron and of the real needle. To complete the prooſ: Instead of approaching the magnet MAGNETISM. 6H with this iron needle, bring it into the vicinity of a piece of iron, which is itself magnetical only by vicinity to a magnet, it will arrange itself just as the real needle would do, with the sole diſference, that it does not indicate the kind of polarity existing in the extremities of the iron, because either end of it will be attracted by them. And this circumstance leads us to the consideration oſ the only distinetion between the magnetism of a loadstone or magnet, and that oſ common iron. : 278. The magnetism oſ common iron is momentary, and thereſore indiſferent; whereas that oſ a magnet is permanent and determinatee. When iron becomes magnetic in the way now mentioned, it remains so only while the magnet remains in its place; and when that is removed, Ihe iron exhibits no signs oſ magnetism. Therefore when the north pole of a magnet has produced a south pole in the nearest end of an iron wire, and a north pole at its remote end, if we turn the magnet, and present ĩts south pole, the nearest end of the wire instantly becomes a north pole, and the other a south pole; and this change may be made as often, and as rapidly, as we plensee This is the reason which made us direct the experimenter on the iron needle to begin his operation, by placing the end marked for a south pole next to the north pole of the magnet. It becomes a real south pole in an instant, and acts as such during its perigrination round the magnet. But in any one oſ its situations, if we turn it half round with the finger, the end which formerly turned away ſrom a pole of the magnet, vill noW turn as vigorously toward it. Therefore, in carrying the ĩron needle round the magnet, we directed the progress to be made in a continuous line, to avoid all chance of mistaking the polarities. 279. For all the reasons now adduced, we think ourselves bliged to say, that the magnetism produced on common iron bY mere juxtaposition o a magnet, is generated without any communication of substance or facult. The power of producing magnetical phenomena is not shared betwen the 200 MAGNETISM. magnet and the iron. We shall call it INDUCED MAGNETISN; MAGNETISM BY INDUCTION. We have said that induced magnetism of eommon iron is quite momentary. This must be understood with careful limitations. It is strietly true only in the case of the finest und purest soſt iron, free of all knots and hard veins, and thereſore in its most metallic state. Iron is rarely found in a state s0 verypure and metallic; aud even this iron vill acquire permanent and determinate magnetism by induetion, iſ it has been twisted or hammered violently, although not in the magnetic direction; also the changes produced (we imagine) on the purest iron by the action of the atmosphere make it susceptible of fixed magnetism. But the magnetism thus inducible on good iron is scarcely sensible, and oſ no duration, unless it has lain in the neighbourhood oſ a magnet for a very long whileWhat has now been said of common iron, is also true oſ it when in the state oſ soſt steel. 280. But any degree of temper that is given to steel makes a very important change in this respect. In the first place, it acquires magnetism more slowly by induction than an equal and similar piece of common iron, and finally acquires lesss These diſferences are easily examined by the deviations which it causes in the mariner's needle from the magnetic meridian, and by its attraction. ] When the inducing magnet is removed, some magnetism remains in the steel bar, which retains. the polarity which it had in the neighbourhood of the magnet. ] Steel tempered to the degree fit for watch springs acquires a strong magnetism, which it exhibits immediately on the removal of the magnet. But it dissipates very ſast; and, in a very ſew minutes, it is reduced to less than one half of its intensity while in contact with the magnet, and not to thirds oſ what it was immediately on removal from it. It conunues to dissipate for some days, though the bar be kept with care; but the dissipation diminishes ſast, and it retains at least one. MAGNETISM. 261 third of its greatest power for any length of time, unless carelessly kept or injudiciously treated. Steel tempered for strong cutting tools, such as chisels, punches, and drills for metal, acquires magnetism still more slowly by induction, and acquires less oſ it while in contact vith the magnet; but it retains it more firmly, and finally retains a greater proportion of what it had acquired. Steel made as hard as possible, is much longer in acquiring all the magnetism which simple juxtaposition can give to it. It acquires less than the former; but it retains it vith great ſirmness, and ſinally retains a much greater proportion. Such ores of iron as are susceptible of magnetism, are nearly like hard steel in these respects; that is, in the time necessary for their grealest impregnation, and in the durahility of the acquired magnetism. They diſfer exceedingly in respect to the degree of power which they can attain by mere juxtaposition, and the varieties seem to depend on heterogeneous mixture. We must observe, that fe ores oſ iron are susceptible oſ magnetism in their natural state The ordinary ores, consisting of the metal in the state of an oxyd, and combined with sulphur, are not magnetizable while remaining in that state. Most ores require roasting, and a sort of cementation, in contact with inflammable substances. This matteri not well understood; but it would seem that complete metallization is far from being the most ſavourable condition, and that a certain degree of oxydation, and perhaps some other composition, yet unknown, make the best loadstones. But all this is extremely obscure The late Dr. Gowin Enight made a composition which aequired a very strong and permanent magnelism, but the secret died with him. Dr. Gilbert speaks oſ similar compositions, in which ferrugineous clays were ingredients; but we know nothing of he state of the metal in them, nor their mode of acquiring nagnetism. 262 MAGNETISM. 251. It is of peculiar importance to remark that the acquisition of magnetism is gradual and progressive, and that the gradation is the more perceptible in proportion as the steel is oſ a harder temperr. When a magnet is brought to one end oſ a bar of common iron, its remote extremity, unless exceedingly long, acquires its utmost magnetism immediately. But when the north pole of a magnet is applied to one end of a bar of hard steel, the part in contact immediately becomes a south pole, and the far end is not yet aſſectedl. We observe a north pole formed at some distance from the contact, and beyond this a faint south pole These gradually advance along the bar The remote extremity becomes first a faint south pole, and it is not till aſter a very long while (if ever) that it becomes a simple, vigorous, north polee More ſrequently it remains a diſfused and feeble north pole: nay, if the bar be very long, it often happens that we have a succession of north and south poles, which never make their way to the far end of the bart This phenomenon was first observed (7e think) by Dr. Brook Taylor, who gives an account of his observations in the Philosphical Transactions, No. 344. 2652. From the account we have given of these phenomen⸗ oſ induced magnetism, it appears that the temporary magnetism is always so disposed that the sum oſ the mutual attractions oſ the dissimilar poles exceeds the sum of the repulsions between the similar poles, and that therefore the two magnets tend to each other. This is evidently equivalent to saying, that a piece of unmagnetic iron ĩs always attracted by a magnetic. No exception has ever been observed to this fact; for Plinys story of a Theamedes, or loadstone, which repels iron, is allowed by all to have been æ ſable. We think ourselves authorised to say that this attraction of the loadstone for iron, or this tendency oſ iron to the loadstone, is a secondary phenomenon, and is the consequence of the proper disposition of the induced magnetism. The prooſ MAGNETISM. 2163 already given of the compound nature of this phenomenon, namely, that it arises from the excess of two attractions above two repulsions, need (we imagine) no additionn. But the following considerations place the matter beyond doubt. I. The magnetism of the two poles is evidently of an opposite nature; the one repelling what the other attracts. If the one attracts iron, thereſore, the other should repel it. But each pole, by inducing a magnetism opposite to its on, on the nearest end of the iron, and the same with its ovn on the remote end, and its action diminishing with an increase of distance, there must always be an excess of attraction, and the iron must be attracted. 2. Each of the magnets A and B, in either of the positions represented in Plate III. fig. 12. would alone attract the piece of common ron C. But when placed together, the south pole o? A tends to render the upper end of C a north pole; while the north pole of B tends to make it a south pole. IF their actions be nearly equal, the weight of C cannot be supported by the magnetism induced by any diſſerence of action that may remain. While C is hanging by B alone, let A be gradually brought near; it gradually destroys the action of the north pole of B, so that C gradually loses its magnetism and polarity, and its weight prevails. S. In all those cases where the induction of magnetism is slow, the attraction is weak in proportion. This is particuIarly remarked by Dr. Gilbert. If we take pieces of common iron, and of steel oſ different tempers, but all of the same size and form, we shall find that the iron is much more strongIy attracted than any of the rest, and that the attraction for each of them is weaker in proportion as they are harder. This diversity is so accurately observed, that when the piece &s thoroughly susceptible of magnetism, we can tell, with considerable precision, what degree will be ultimately acquired, and how much vill be finally retained. Also, the attraction of the magnet for any of those pieces of steel increases æxactly in proportion as their acquired magnetism increases. L064 MAGNETISM. 4. An ore oſ iron incapable of acquiring magnetism is not attracted by a magnet. But we know that, by cementation with charconl dust, they may be rendered susceptible oſ magnetism. In this state they are attracted. It is an universal ſact, that any substance that is attracted by a magnet may be rendered magnetical, and that none else can We have already observed that red hot iron is not attracted; nor does it acquire any directive power while in that stat. From all this ve must conclude, that the previous inducetion oſ magnetism is the mean of the observed attraction oſ magnets for iron, and that this is not a primary ſact in magnetism. These observations also complete the prooſ that magnetie attraction and repulsion are equal at the same distance, and follow the same law. Dr. Gilbert seems to think, that the repulsion is alvays weaker than the attraction; and this is almost the only mistake in conception into which that excellent philosopher has fallen But it only requires a fair comparison of facts to convince a good logician, that since, in every case, and at every distance, either pole oſ a magnet attracts either end of a piece of common iron, ĩt is impossible that one of these forces can exceed the other. It might be s0, were it not that induced magnetism is durable in proper substances. And if ve take magnets which have been made such by induetion, and present them to each other with their similar poles fronting each other, they never ſail to repel each other at considerable distances, and even at very small distances for a fev moments; and this is the case which ever poles are next each other. This cannot be on any other supposition. Cases would oceur of polarity without attraction, or of attraction without polarity. Such have never been seen, any more than the Theamedes, always repelling iron. 283. Let a great number of small oblong pieces of iron be lying very near each other on the surſace oſ quicksilver. Bring a strong magnet into the midst of them. It immediately renders them all magnetical by induetionn. The onæ MAGNETISM. Lh nearest the north pole of the magnet immediately turns one end toward it, and the other end avay from it. The same effect is produced on the one that is just beyond this nearest one. Thus the remote end oſ the first becomes a north pole, and the nearest end oſ the second becomes a south pole. These, being very near each other, must mutually attract. The same thing may be said of a third, a fourth; and so on. And thus it appears, that not only is magnetism induced on them all, but also, that the magnetism of each is so disposed, that both ends of it are in a state of attraction for the ends of some ofſ its neighbours; and that they vill thereſore arrange themselves by coalescence in some particular manner. Should a parcel of them chance to be standing with their centres in a magnetic curve, with their heads and points turned in any ways whatever, the moment that the magnet i5 brought among them, and set in the axis of that magnetic curve, the whole pieces of this row will instantly turn towards each other, and their ends will adhere together, iſ they are near enough; otherwise they will only point ioward each other, ſorming a set of tangents to the magnetic curve, reaching from one pole of the magnet to the other. Or, suppose a vast number of small bits of iron, each shaped like a grain oſ barley, a little oblong. Let them be scattered over the surſace of a table, so near each other as just to have room to turn roundc Let a magnet be placed in the midst of themm. They vill all have magnetism induced on them in an instant; and such as are not already touching others, will turn round (because they rest on the table by one point only), and each will turn its ends to the ends oſ its neighbours; and thus they vill arrange themselves in curves, which will not differ greatly from true magnetic curves (because each grain is very short), issuing from one pole of the magnet, and terminating in the other. Does not this suggest to the reflecting reader an explanaſion oſ that curious arrangement of iron filings round a magnet, which has so long entertained and puæzled both the phi- 66 MAGNETTS M. Iosophers and the unlearned, and which has given rise the Cartesian and other theories of magnetism ? The particles of iron filings are litile rags oſ soſt iron torn oſf by the file, and generally a little oblong. These must have magnetism induced on them by a magnet, and, while falling through the air from the hand that strews them about the magnet, they are at perfect liberty to arrange themselves magnetically; and must therefore so arrange themselves, ſormmg on the table curves, which differ very little indeed ſfrom the true magnetic curves. Suppose them scattered about the table heſore the magnet is laid on it. If we pat the table a little, so as to throw it into tremors, this will allow the particles to dance, and turn round on their points of support, tiſl they coalesce by their ends in the manner already desoribed. Alll this is the genuine and inevitable consequence of what Dr. Gilbert has taught us of induced magnetism. It must be so; and canmot be otherwise. This curious arrangement of iron filings round a magnet is thereſore not a primary ſact, and a ſoundation for a theory, but the result of principles much more general. 284. Most of our readers know that this disposition of iron filings has given rise to the chieſ mechanical theories which have been proposed by ingenious men ſfor the explanation of all the phenomena of magnetism. An invisible fluid has been supposed to circulate through the pores of a magnet, rumning along its axis, issuing from one pole, streaming round the magnet, and entering agam hy the other pole This is thought to be indieated by those lines formed by the filingss The stream, rumning also through then, or around them, arranges them in the direction of its motion, just as ve observe a stream of water arrange the flote grass and weeds. It would require a volume to detail the different manners in which those mechanicians attempt to account for ſhe attraction, repulsion, and polarity of magnetic bodies, by the mechanical impulsion of this fluidl. Let it suſficœ to MAGNETISM. !q67 say, that almost every step of their theories is in contradietion to the acknovledged laws of impulsion. Nay, the whole attempt ĩs agamst the first rule oſ all philosophieal discussion, never to admit for an explanation oſ phenomena the agency of any cause which we do not know to exist, and to operate in the very phenomenon We know oſ no such fluid; and we can demonstrate, that the genuine effects oſ its impulsion would be totally unlike the phenomena of magnetism. But the proper refutation of these theories would fill volumes. Let it suffice (and to every logician it will abundantly suſfice) to remark, that this phenomenon is but a secondary fact, depending on, and resulting from, prineiples mnch more general, viz. the induction of magnetism, and the attraction of dissimilar, and repulsion of similar, poles. The above explanation of the curious disposition of iron filings round a magnet, occurred to the writer of this article while studying natural philosophy, on seeing the Professor exhibit Mr. Henshaws beautiful experiment in proof of terrestrial magnetism. He at that time imagined himself the author, and promised himself some eredit for the thought But having seen the Physiologia Nova de Magnete by Dr. ilbert, he found that it had not escaped the notice of that sagacious philosopher; as will appear past dispute from the following passage, as well as some others, less pointed in that work:  Magnetica frusta (that is, substances susceptible of magnetism) bene et convenienter intra vires posita, mutuo cohærent. Ferramenta, presente magnete (etiamsi magnetem non attingant), concurrunt, solicit? se mutuo quærunt, et amplexantur, et, conjuncta, quasi ferruminantur. Seobs ferrea, vel in pulverem redacta, fistulis imposita chartaceissupra lapidem meridionaliter locata, vel propius tantum admota, in unum coalescet corpus; et subito tam multæ partes concrescunt et combinantur; ſerrumque aliud aſfectat conjuratorum turma et attrahit; ac si unum tantum et integrum esset ſerri bacillum; dirigiturque supra 2068 MAGNETISM. lapidem in septemtriones et meridiem Set cum longius a magnete removeantur (tanquam soluta rursus) separantur et diffluunt singula corpuscula B. ii. e. 23. Mr. pinus also had taken the same view of the subjeet. It is also very clearly conceived and expressed by the celebrated David Gregory, Savilian Professor of astronomy in the University of Oxford, in a MS. volume of notes and commentaries, written by him in 1693, on Newton's Principia, and used by Newton in improving the second edition. The MS is now in the library of the university of Edinburgh. Gregory's words are as ſollows:  Mihi semper dubium visum est num magnetica virtus mechanicẽ, i. e. per impulsum, producatur. Mirum est, eſfluvia, quæ ferrum agitare valent, bracteas aureas interposilas ne vel minimum a loco movere Lucretii et Cartesii theoriam, de fugato intermedio aẽre, reſfutat experimentum infra aquam institutum. Sulci in limatura ferri, magneti in plano cujusvis meridiuni circumposila, non fiunt ab efftuviis secundum istos canales molis, sed ex inde, quod ipsa ramenta, magnetice excilata, sese seccundum longitudinem et secundum polos disponunt. Ex altera vero parte exinde quod vis magnetica, interveniente flamma aut calore, interrumpatur; quod virga ſerrea, vel diuturno situ perpendiculari, vel in eo situ frigescendo, virtutem magneticam a tellure acquirat; utnos docet perspicacissimus Gilbertus: quod mallei super incudem ictu forti ad alterum extremum, virtutem acquirat magneticam; quod ictu ſorti vel saltem ſortiori ad alterum extremum poli permutentur, ut qui prius septemtriones respiciebat nunc austrum respiciat; quod ictu forti ad medium, virtutem illam prorsus amittat: hæc inquam et similia, mechanicum ejus qualitatis ortum arguunt Hugenius, præter gravitatem, etiam magneticam, et electricam virtutem, aliasque plures ex perimento novit vires naturales, ut mihi ipsi narravit hac æstate ami 1693. Qualis ut hæc forsitan quod cymba papyracea, prope labra vasis aquam, cui innatet, continentis, posita, la- MAGNETISM. 2/9 brum vicinissimum continuo, et cum impetu petat*. Nat. MS. in Prop. 23. iĩi. Prin. Nor. 285. Not only the mere arrangement of the filings in curve lines ſollows of neccessity from the properties oſ induced magnetism, but all the subordinate circumstances oſ this phenomenon are included in the same explanation. By continuing to tap the table, and throw it into tremors, the filings are observed to approach gradually, but very slovly, to the poles of the magnet. Each partiele is a very small temporary magnet. The attractive pover of the great magnet, m—p n—3; is therefore extremely small in proportion to its directive power, mp n +. And ve observe that the accumulation of the filings round the poles of the magnet is so much the slower as the ſilings are finer. 286. If a paper be laid above the magnet, and the filings be sprinkled on it, ve observe them to constipate along its edges, vhile none remain immediately above its substance; they are all beyond, or on the outside of its outline, and they are observed not to be lying flat on the paper, but to be standing obliquely on one point. They move oſf from the paper immediately above the magnet, because they repel each other. They stand obliquely from the edges, becaũse that is the direction oſ a magnetic meridian at its partimg from the polee If the magnet be at some distance below the paper, then tapping the paper will cause the filings to move avay from the magnet laterall. This singular and unexpected appearance is owing to the combination oſ gravity with the magnetic actionn. A particle, such as n⸗ Plate III. fig. 12.), rests on the paper by the point n, which is a temporary north pole (S being supposed the south pole oſ the magnet). The particle takes a position n s nearer to the horizon than the position n o, which it would take if its * Perhaps it may be proper to observe, that Dr. Gregory expresses his difſering iu his opinion ſrom Newton about magnetism. Neœton, in this proposition thinks, that the law of magnetic action approaches to the inverse triplicate ratio oſ the distances. Dr. Gregory invalidates the argument used by Nevwton. 270 MAGNETISM. centre of gravity b were supported. The position is such, that its weight acting vertically at b, is in equilibrio with the magnetie repulsion ⸗ d, exerted between S and s. When the paper is tapped, it is beaten down, or withdrawn from n, and the particle of iron is leſt for a moment in the air. It thereſore turns quickly round b, in order to assume a position parallel o n o, and it meets the paper, as that rises again aſter the soke, in a point ſarther removed from the magnet, and again descends by its weight (turning round the newly supported point n), till it again takes a position parallel to ns, but ſrther off, as represented by the doited linee. Thus it travels gradually outwards from the magnet, appearing to be repelled, although it is really attracted by it. If the magnet be held above the paper, at a little distance, the filings, vhen ve repeatedly pat the paper, gradually collect into a heap under it. This will appear very plainly to one who considers the situation of a particle in the manner now explained. 287. The curve lines formed by very fine filings approach very nearly to the form of the primary curve which indicates the lav of magnetic action in the way already explained. IF the magnet be placed under water, and if filings be sprinkled copiously on the surface of it from a gauze search, held at some distance above it, the resistance to their motion through the water gives them time to arrange themselves magnetically before they reach the bottom, and the lines become more accurate. But they were so much deranged by any method that we could take for removing the water, and measuring them, that we were disappointed in our expectations of obtaining a very near approximation to the lav oſ action. 2858. We took notice oſ some very singular phenomena oſ a compass needle in the neighbourhood of two magneis, and ve observed that, in this case also, the needle was always a tangent to a curve of another kind, and which we called secondary and compound magnetic curves. These ar produced in the same way, by strewing iron filings rount MAGNETISM !u the magnetss Many representations have been given oſ these curves by different authors, particulary by Muschenbroek, in his Essois de Physique; and by Fuss in the Comment. Petropolitt. Great use has been made of these arrangements of ſilings by two magnets in the theories of magnetism proposed by those who insist on explaining all motion by impulse When the dissimilar poles of two magnets A and B (Plate III fig. 13.) face each other, the curves formed by the filings considerably resemble those which surround a single magnet, and give the whole somewhat of the appearance of a magnet with very diſfused poless. The arranging fluid, vhich streams from one pole of a magnet, is supposed to meet with no obstruction to its entry into the adjoining pole oſ the other magnet, but, on the contrary, to be impelled into it; and therefore (say the proposers) it circulates round hoth as one magnet, and by its vortex brings the magnets together; which phenomenon we call the attraction of the magnetss But when the similar poles front each other; for example, the poles ſrom which the arranging fluid issues, then the two streams meet, obstruct each other, accumulate, and, by this accumulation, cause the magnets to recede from each other; which we call the repulsion of the magnets. This is the only explanation of this kind that can make any pretensions to probability, or indeed that can be conceivedl For how the free circulation in the former case can bring the two magnets together, no person can form to himself any conceptionn. We see nothing like this produced by any vortex that we are acquainted with. All such vortices cause hodies to separate. But even this explanation of magnetic repulsion is inadmissible. It will not apply to the repulsion of the receiving poles; and the phenomena of the filings are inconsistent with the notion of accumulation. The ſilings indeed accumulate, and they look not unlike two streams which oppose each other, and deſlect to the sides (see Plate III. fig. 14.): m MAGNETISM. But, unfortunately, by tapping the paper gently, the filings do not move off from the magnets, but approach them much ſaster than in any other experiment. The phenomenon receives a complete and palpable explanation from the principles we have established. Both magnets concur in giving the same polarity to every particle of the filimgs. Thus, if the fronting poles are north poles, each partiele has ĩts nearest end made a vigorous south pole, and its remote end a north pole; and it is thereſore strongly attracted towards both magnets, while it is arranged in the tangent to the secondary curve of that class, which crosses the others nearly at right angles. 289. Since it is ſound, that the magnetism, even of natural loadstones and hard steel, and still more those of soſter tempered steel, are continually tending to decay; and since we find that it may be induced by mere approach to a magnet; and since ve know that magnets may oppose each other in producing itit is reasonable to suppose, that when a piece of iron has acquired a slight, though permanent magnetism, by the vicinity of a magnet, a magnet applied in the opposite direction will destroy it, and aſterwards produce the opposite magnetism. Accordingly, ve may change the poles oſ soſt magnets at pleasure. Farther; since we find that loadstones and hard tempered steel bars are distinguished from soſt ones only by the degree oſ obstinacy with which they retain their present condition, we should also expect that hard magnets will even aſſect each other. It must thereſore happen, that a poverful magnet applied to a weak one, so that their similar poles are in contact, shall weaken, destroy, and even change the magnetism of the weaker. Dr. Knight's famous magazine of magnets enabled him to change the poles of the greatest and the strongest natural loadstone, or artificial magnet, that could be given him, in the space of one minute. MAGNETISM. ?18 200. We now seè clearly the reason why magnetic repulsion is weaker than attraction at the same distancee When magnets are placed with their similar poles fronting each ether, in order 1o make trials of their repulsion, they really do weaken each other, and are not in the same magnetical condition as before. For similar reasons, we see how experiments with magnets attracting each other rather improve them, and make their attractive powers appear greater than they are. All these effects must be most remarkable in soſt magnets, especially when long. 291. We also see, that the observed law of attraction and repulsion between two magnets must be different from the real law of magnetic actionn For, in the experiments made on attraction at diſferent distances, beginning with the greatest distance, the magnetism is continually increasing, and the attraction will appear to increase in a higher rate than the just one: the contrary may happen, iſ we begin with the smaller distancess. The results of experiments on repulsion must be still more erroneous; because it is easier to diminish any accumulation which required an exertion to produce it, than to push it still ſarther. 292. We have nov a complete explanation of the remarkable fact, that the induction of magnetism does not weaken the magnet employed; but, on the contrary, improves it. The magnetism induced on the iron causes it to act on the magnet employed in the very same manner that a permanent magnet of the same shape, size, and strength, would do. Nay, it will have even a greater effſeet; ſor as it improves the magnet, its own induced magnetism will improve; and vill thereſore still farther improve the magnet. 293. Hence it is, that, in whatever manner a magnet touches a piece of iron, it improves by it. It may be hurt by a magnet in an improper position; but it always puts common iron into a state which increnses its ovn magnetism This has heen known as long as magnetism itselſ; YOL. IV. s ĩ MAGNETISM. and the ancients conceived the notion, that the magnet somehow fed upon the iron*. We think that these observations authorise us to say, that in reducing a loadstone into a convenient shape, as much a possible of the operation should be perſormed by grinding them vith emery, in cavities made in large blocks of lonmered ironn. The magnetism induced on the iron must he favourable to the conservation oſ that in the loadstone: which, we are persuaded, is rapidly dissipated by the rœ mors into which this very elastic substance is thrown by the grinding with coarse powders in any mould but iron. We imagine, that the cutting off slices by the lapidaries wheel has the same bad eſfect 204. Not only vill a magnet liſt a greater lump of iron by its north pole, when another lump is applied to its south pole, but it will lift a greater piece oſ iron ſrom an anvil than from a wooden table: for the magnet induces the properly disposed polarity, not only in the iron which it liſis but also in the anvil, or any piece of iron immediately beyond it. This is so disposed as to increase the magnetism oſ the piece of iron between them; and thereſore to increase their attraction. The magnetism induced on the anvil is also in part, and perhaps chieſly, induced by the intervening iron. These experiments are extremely variable in their resultsSometimes a small magnet ill pull an iron wire from a large and strong onee. Sometimes this will be done even " So Claudian- Nam ſerro nutrit vitam, ferrique vigore Vescitur: hoc dulces epulas, hoc pabula norit: Hmc proprias renovat vires: hinc fusa per artus Aspera secretum servant alimænta vigorem: Hoc absente perit, tristi morentia torpent Membra fame, venasque sitis consumit apertas Pimy says, Sola hæt materia ſerrom) virœs ab eo lapide accipit retimetqu: loogo tempore, aliud apprebendess ſerrum, ut annulorum catena spectetur interdum, quod imperitum vulgus ferrum appellat vivum. MAGNETISM. 25 by a piece of unmagnetie iron; and the results appear quite capricious. But they are accurately fixed, depending on the induced compound maguetism. Mr. Apinus has stated some of the more simple cases, in which we can tell which magnet shall prevail. But the unfolding even of these cases would take a great deal oſ room, and must he omitted here. Besides, we are too imperfectly acquainted ith the degree of magnetism induced on the various parts of an iron rod, and the degree of magnetism inherent in the various parts of the magnets, to be able to say, with certainty, even in those simple cases, on which side the superiority of attraction will remain. 295. We may now proceed to deduce from this theory (for so it may justly be called, since all is reduced to one ſact) the process for communicating magnetism to bodies fitted for receiving and retaining it; that is, the method oſ making urtificial magnets We acknovledge, that we do not knov the internal process by which magnetism is induced, nor even in what this magnetism consists. All that we know is, that the bringing the pole of a magnet near to any magnetisable mattor, produces a magnetism of the kind opposite to that of the pole employedl. We know that this is the ease with both poles, and that it obtains at all the distances where magnetism is observedlc We know that the action of one pole is contrary to that of the other; that is, it counteracts the other, prevents it from producing its effect, and destroys it when already produced: and we know, that the production of these effects resembles in its result the protrusion of something ſluid through the pores of the body, constipating it in all remote parts; as if the virtue of a pole resided in this moveable matter. This is nearly all that we know of it; and by these ſacts and notions ve must judge of the propriety and effect of all the processes ſor magnetising bodies. The most simple method of magnetising a steel bar, is to apply the north pole of a magnet to that end which we wish ę 7y MAGNETISM. 217 But this is a bad way oſ impregnation. It is seldom that uniform magnetism, with only two poles, and those of equal strength ean be given Even when there are but two, the remote pole is generally diffused, and therefore feeble. It is mueh improved hy employing two magnets, one at each end. And if the bar is not more than six or eight inches long, and good magnets are employed, the magnetism is abundantly regular. This, accordingly, is practised for the impregnation of dipping needles, which must not be touched, lest we disturb the centre of gravity of the needle. But in all cases, this method is tedious, and does not give strong magnetism. The method whieh was usually practised before we had obtained a pretty clear knowledge of magnetism, vas to apply the pole of a magnet to one end of the bar, and pass it along to the other end, pressing moderately. This was repeated several times on both sides of the bar, always beginning the stroke at the same end as at first, and, in bringing the magnet back to that end, keeping it at a distance from the bar. The efſect of this operation was to leave the end at vhich we began the stroke possessed of the polarity of the pole employed. A general notion of the process may be given as follows, observing, however, that there occur very many great and capricious anomalies. When the north pole N (Plate IV. ſig. 2.) of the magnet A is set on the end C oſ the bar CBD, a south pole is produced at C, and a north pole at D, vhen the length of the bar is moderate. As the magnet advances slowly along the bar, the southern polarity at C first inereases, then diminishes, and vanishes entirely when N has arrived at a certain point a; aſter which, a northern polarity appears at C, and increases during the whole progress oſ the magnet. In the mean time, the northern polarity first produced at D increases till the magnet reaches a certain point e, then diminishes, vanishes when the mag3 MAGNETISM. L79 this substance, avoiding the pole N of the magnet, escapes below it, and goes toward the farther end. As the magnet advances, it drives some of this back again, &e. &e. This is gratuitous; but it aids the ſaney, which, without some conception of this kind, has no object of steady contemplation. We have no thought, vhen we speak of the generating at C, or a, or e, a fſaculty of some kind, by the exertion of the same faculty in N. The conception is too abstracted, and much too complex. We must content ourselves with knoving, that N produces a south pole immediately under it, and a north pole everywhere else, or endeavours to do so. It is unnecessary to insist longer on this method: Common sense shews it io he a very injudicious one. This metliod was greatly improved by beginning the friotion at the cœntree Apply the north pole at the centre or middle of the bar, and draw it over the end intended for the south pole Having done this several times to one end on both sides, turn the magnet, applying its south pole to the middle of the bar, and drawing it several times over the end intended for the north pole. It was still more improved hy employing two magnets at once, placed as in Plate IV. ſig. S. on the middle B of the bar, and drawing them avay from each other, over the ends of it, as shewn by the directing darts, and repeating this operation. It is plain that, as ſar as ve understand any thing oſ this matter, this process must he much preferable to either of the former tvo. The magnets A and E certainly concur in producing a properly disposed magnetism on all that lies between them; and thereſore on the whole bar at the end of each stroke. The end C must become a north, and D a south pole. Still, however, us the stroke goes on to ihe point of indiſference, each magnet tends to weaken the polarity of the parts situated beyond it. This method continued to be practised till about the year I750. Mr. Canton, availing himself of the experiments oſ MAGNETISM. 281 The method of employing the magnets A and E (Plate IV. fig. 5.), preseribed by Mitchell and Canton, is extremely judiciouss. The meeting of the dissimilar pole: at top inereases the magnelism of eanch. The two dissimilar poles F and G, certainly tend to give a regular and proper magnetism to the part FG of the bar which lies between them; and this is the case on whatever part oſ the bar they are placed. But each pole tends to destroy the present magnetism of what lies between it and the pole of the bar on that sidee. But markthey tend to produce the desired magnetism on what lies between them with the sum oſ their forces; while each tends to destroy the magnetism of the part without it by the difference only of their forces. Thereſore, on the whole, as they are moved to and fro along the bar, and the ſoremost one even made to pass over the end of it a little way, they alvays add to the magnetism already acquired. This consideration seems to enjoin setting F and G extremely near each other; ſor this seems to increase the sum, and io diminish the difference of their actionn But it may be a question, Whether ve gain more by strongly magnetising a very small part during the very short while that the magnets pass over it, or by acting on more of the bar at once, and continuing a weaker action for a longer while on this larger portion. Mr. pinus adds another eonsideration depending on his notion of the internal process; but we deſer this to another opportunity. The saſest direction seems to be, to place them at the distance which enables them to liſt the greatest weightt. They are then undoubtedly acting with the greatest effect. Mr. Anthenume directs to place the touching magnets as in Plate IV. fig. 6.) for a reason to be mentioned aſterwards. Mr. pinus also recommends it ſor reasons ſounded on his own hypothesis We must say, that, in our trials, ve have found this method very sensibly superior, especially in the latter parts oſ the operation, when the resistance to ſarther impregnation becomes nearly a balance for the accumulating /r2 MAGNETISNL pover oſ the magnets; and we consider this as no inconsiderable argument for the justice of Mr. æ pinus's hypothesis. The great advantage oſ this method is the regularity oſ the magnetism which it produces We never find more than two poles; and when the hars are hard, and oſ uniform texture, the polarity is very ſittle diſffused, and seæmingly confined to a very small space at the very extremities of the barr. This is indeed a prodigious advantage in point oſ strength. It is no less so in order io fit the magnets ſor experiments on the law of magnetic action; for the latitude which the diffused condition of the poles gives in the selection of the points from which the distances are to be computed, has hitherto hindered us from pronouncing on the law of magnetic action with the precision of which we think it fully susceptible This method also is the only one hy vhich we have been able to impregnate two bars joined end to end, considering them as one barr. We have sometimes (though very rarely) succeeded in this; so that when ſilings vere streved over them, the appearance eould not be distinguished from a single barAN. B. Yet even in this case, in one experiment with two bars of six inches long, treated as one, vhen it could not be distinguished, either by the appearance oſ the ſilings, or by going round it very near vith a compass needle, a very small compass needle disœvered a neutral point, and a reversion oſ polarity similar to Plate III. fig 14. at F, shewing that it was really acting as two barss Perhaps it must always be so: and this question is oſ considerable importance in the establishment of any theory of the internal process. It deserves remark, that, in order to succeed in this attempt, a very considerable pressure is necessary. We were obliged to clean the ends of the bars very careſully, and to force the frame of bars and sſt pieces of iron strongly together by wedges, in the manner oſ a ſorm of types We thought that wetting the ends of the bars with pure water aided the experiment; and we are cery certain that oil not MAGNETISM. 2098 only greatly obstrueted it, but even sensibly impeded the common processs We had put a single drop of oil on a pair of bars which we were touching in the common Cantonian method, that the magnets might be more easily dran along them; but we were surprised at finding that ve could not give a strong impregnation The oil undoubtedly prevents the close contact. We ſound the ſinest gold leaſ produce the same effect in a great degree; as also tale, of which a square inch weighed th oſ a grainn. We do not inſer any thing like obstruetion to the passage of something material, but rather ascribe it to mere distance; although we are of opinion, that in the impregnation of two contiguous bars, so that the magnetism (Whatever it is) is. disposed precisely as in one bar, there is a material transſerence. But we shall speak of this in its due place. It is not unworthy of remark, that we found hars to acquire more powerful magnetism when pretty well polished than when rough. But we also ſound, that bars considerably rough acquired the ſirst degrees of it much more expeditiously than those which are smooth; although we never could bring them to that high degree oſ magnetism that the same hars acquired aſter they had been polished. We think it probable, that the tremors, occasioned by the rough and harsh surſaces of the hard steel, are the causes of this phenomenon. Some more observations on this method of the double touch vill be made aſtervards, vhen ve consider the hypothesis of Mr. Epinus: and we conclude the present subject, by attempting to explain some puzzling appearances which frequently occur in making artificial magnets. 207. A bar touched by a very strong magnet has been said by Muschenbroek to be impaired by going over it with a weaker magnet. If it had been made as strong as possible, the weaker magnet when passed over it in the way practised by Muschenbroek, must ſirst destroy part oſ this magnetism; 284 MAGNETISM. and having done so, it is unable to raise it anew to the same degree of vigour. Yet (says Muschenbroek with surprise) a large bar oſ common iron has greatly improved the magnet. A very large piece of iron must do this (especially if shaped like a horse shoe, and applied with both heels), if the bar be not already at its maximum. It was thought wonderſul, that in the method oſ double touch, not only was the magnetism of the magnets employed not impaired, but, beginning with two magnets, whos pover is almost insensible, and repeating the operations in the precise manner described by Mitchell or Canton, not only the bars intended to be made magnetical, but also the magnets employed, may be brought to their highest possible state of magnetism. This is in evident conformity to the general facts of induced magnetism, and affords the strongest proof that nothing is communicated in this operation, but that povers residing in the bars are excited, or hrought into ac tionn. The manipulation merely gives occasion to this action, as a spark of fire kindles a city. 298. There still remain some circumstances of this method, as practised by Savery, Canton, and Antheaume, which are extremely curious and important. Mr. Savery had observed a small bit of steel acquire very sensible magnetism by lying long in contact with the lower end of a great windov bar. Telling this to a friend, he was, ſor the ſirst time, informed, that this had been long observed, and that Dr. Gilbert had made some curious inferences from it. Mr. Savery wanted some magnets, and vas at a distance from town. Reſlecting, like a philospher, on what he had heard and observed, he saw here a source of magnetism which he could increase, in the manner commonly practised in making magnetss. He placed the bar AB (Plate IV. fig. 7.) to be magnetised between two great bars of common iron C and D, placing all the three in the magnelical directionn He took another bar EF, u MAGNETISM. a8b and put to little pieces of iron, like the armour of a load stone, on its ends; and with those ends he rubbed the bar AB, rubbing the upper half oſ it with the end F, and the lower with the end E The result oſ this was a very brisk magnetism in a ſew minutes, which, by various ell devised alternations, he brought to its highest degree. His numerous experiments published in the Philosophical Transactions in 1746, contain much curious information, highly deserving the attention oſ the philosopherss Mr. Canton, proceeding on the same principle, that bars of iron, which have been long in a vertical position, acquire an efficient magnetism, begins his operations by placing his steel bar on the head of a kitchen poker, and rubs it with the lower end of a pair of kitchen tongss Mr. Autheaume adheres more strictly to the inferences from the principle of terrestrial magnetism, and repeats precisely the previous disposition of things practised by Mr. Savery, placing his little steel bar AB (Plate IV. ſic S8.) between two great bars C and D of common iron, and arranging the whole in the magnetic direction. Then, proceeding most judiciously on the same principle, he greatly improves the process, by employing two bars EF and GH for the touch, holding them ahout an inch apart, inelined about 150 to the bar AB. It is plain, that the lower end of each of these five bars is a north pole, and the upper end a south pole Thereſore the poles F and G eoncur in giving the proper magnetism to the portion FG oſ the steel bar which is between them; and by rubbing it with these poles up and down, overpassing each extremity about half an inch, he must soon give to the har AB a regular magnetism; weak, perhaps, but to be aſterwards increased in the Cantonian method, on a horizontal tablee. In this manner did Mr. Antheaume make magnets of very great strength in 1766. See his Dissertation already quoted 2009. These observations naturally bring us to the Pur310LOGIA Nova nE MAGNETE ET CORPORIEUS MAGNETICIS MAGNETISM. 2n17 part of the constitution of this globee. Norman had, not long before, discovered, that if a steel needle be very exactly balanced on a horizontal axis, like the beam oſ a common balance, 30 that it would retain any position given it, and iſ it be then touched with a magnet, and placed on its axis in the magnetic meridian, it is no longer in equilibrio, but (at London) the north point of it will dip 72 or 73 degrees below the horizon. He did not, however, publish his discovery till he had obtained information how it stood in other parts of the world. The differences in the variation in different places naturally suggested the necessity oſ this to him Being a maker oſ mariners compasses, and teacher of navigation in London, he had the fairest opportunities that could be desired, by furnishing dipping needles to such oſ the navigators, his scholars, as he knew most able to give him good information. And the accounts which he received made his discovery, vhen announced to the world, a very complete thing; ſor the commanders of ships engaged in long voyages, and particularly to China, informed him that, in the vicinity of the equator, his dipping needles remained parallel to the horizon, but that in coming toward the north pole, the north end of the needle was depressed, and that the south end dipped in like manner at the Cape of Good Hope, and in the Indian Ocean; that the needle gradually approached the horizontal position as the ship approached the equator, but that in coming to the north of it at Batavia, tho north point again dipped, and at Canton was several degrees belov the horizon. On these authorities, Norman holdly said that, in the equatoreal regions, the needle was horizontal, and that either end dipped regularly as it approached either pole; and that in the poles of the earth, the needle was perpendicular to the horizonn He thereſore announced this as a discovery, not only singularly curious, but also of immense importance; for by menns of a dipping needle the latitude of a ship a S5œ|a may be ſound vithout seeing the sun or stars. 298 WAGNETISH. Dr. Gilbert, eomparing this position of the compass nedle with the positions which he had observed small needles assnme in his numerous experiments in relation to a mag net, as we have deseribed at great length, was naturally led  the notion oſ the earth's being a great loadstone, or a eontaining one, and that this arranged the dipping, or, in general, the marmer's needle, in the same manner as he observed a great magnet arrange a small needle poised on its pivo. He thereſore composed his Physiologia Nova dt Magnete, et de Tellure magno Magnete; in which he notices 30 many points oſ resemblance to the directive power of a magnet, that the point seems no longer to admit oſ any doubt. Dr. Gilberts theory may be thus expressed: All the phenomena of natural magnetism are analogous to what we should observe, iſ the earth were a great magnet, having its poles near the poles oſ the earths equator, the north pole not far from Baſſin's Bay, and the south pole nearly in the opposite part of the globe. A dipping needle, under the influence of this great magnet, must arrange itselſ in a plane which passes through the poles of the magnet, the position of which plane is indicated (at least nearly) by the ordinary compass needle; and it will be inclined to the horizon so much the more as ve recede from the equator oſ the great magnet. Thiæ opinion oſ Dr. Gilbert was not less ingenious than important: and, if firmly established, it furnishes a complete theory of all the phenomena of magnelism. But observations vere neither suſficiently numerous in the time oſ Dr. Gilbert, nor sufficiently accurate, to enable that great genius to assign the position of this great magnet, nor the laws oſ its actionn. The theory was chieſly founded on the phenomena of the dipping needle;: phenomena which might have heen unknown for ages, had the first notice of them ſullen into any other hands than Normanss They are not, like those oſ variation, which might he made by any saũlor. They rquire ſor their exhibition a dipping neædle, and the MAGNETISM. 289 attention to circumstances which ean occur onl y to a mathematician. A dipping needle is to this day, notvithstanding all our improvements in the arts, one of the most delicate and diſficult tasks that an instrument muker ean take in hand, and a good one eannot be had for less than twenty guineas. We are conſident that such as even Norman could make were ſar inferior to what are no made, and quite unſit ſor use at sea while the ship is under sail, although they may be tolerably exact for an observation of the dip in any port; and we presume that it was such observatiuns only that Norman conſided in. Our readers vill readily conceive the difficulty of poising a needle with such a perſect coincidence oſ its centre of gravity and axis of motion, and perſect roundness ofſ this axis, that it shall remain in any position that is given i. Add to this, that a grain of dust, invisible to the nicest eye, getting under one side of this axis, may be suſficient for making it assume another positionn. It must also be a difficult matter to preserve this delicate thing, so as that no change can happen to it Besides, all this must be performed on a piece of tempered steel which we are certain has no magnetism. Where can this be got, or what can insure us against magnetism? Nor is there less diſficulty in making the observations without great risk of error. If the needle, moveable only in a vertical plane, be not set in the plane oſ a magnetic meridian, it will alvays dip too much*. At Lon* Let HZOF (Plate IV. fig. 23.) he the plane of a magnetic meridian, H ” O ihe plane oſ the horizon, and NS the position of the magnetic needle in any place, when it is at liberty to settle in the true magnetic direction. The angle HON ĩs the inclination or dip of the needle. Let Z n F be a vertieal cirele, in hich a well constructed dipping neædle ean freely play up and down. This neeile cannot place itselſ in the magnetic direction, because it can only move Its north point is impelled in the direction n o, and its in a vertical plane. By the laws south point in the direction s ꝑ, both of which are parallel to NS. of mechanical equilibrium, it cannot rest, except in such a position that the forces n o and æꝓ are in a plane perpendicular to the plane Z n F. In any other position, there would be a force impelling the needle tovard that side on which n 0 makes an acute angle with the tangent r n ? oſ the vertical circle. ThereVOL. IV. T 290 MAGNETISM. don, where the magnetic direction is inelined 73 to the horizon, if it be in a plane 200 from the magnetic meridian, it will stand almost perpendicular; ſor it is easy to see, by the mechanical resolution of forces, that it will take the position which brings it nearest to the true magnetie direction. This, we think, is confirmed by several of Normans and other old observations of dip. They are much greater than they have been since found in the same places. 300. Mr. Daniel Bernoulli has given a very ingenious principle, by which we can make a dipping needle which vill give a very aceurate observation on shore; and being s0 ensily executed, it deserves to he generally knovn. Let a dipping needle be made in the best manner that can be done by a workman of the place, and balanced vwith some care beſore impregnation, so that ve may be certain that vhen touched it vill take nearly the true dip. Toueh it, and observe the dip. Destroy its magnetism, and then alter its balance in such a manner that, without any magnetism, it ill arrange itselſ in the inclination of the ohserved dip. Now toueh it again, giving it the same poles as before. It is plain that it will now approach exceedingly near indeed to the true dip, because its want of perſect equilibrium deranged it but a few degrees from the proper direction. If this second observation of the dip should differ several degrees from the first, by the inaccurate ſirst formation of the needle, it will be proper to repeat the operation. Very rarely indeed will the third observation of the dip vary from the truth half a degree. ſore the spherical triangle N n F is right angled in n, and Cos. NF n: R— Tan. n F: Tan. NF, = Tan. HN,: Tan.  n. Thereſore Tan. HN Cos. H n the real inclination oſ the magnetical direction to the horizon is different from what is poiuted out by a dipping needle when it is in a plane which declines from the magnetic meridian; and the tangent of the observed dip oſ the needle exceeds that of the inclination of the magnetic direction in the proportion of radius Lo the cosine of the deviation HC æ, or the proportion of the secantioſ this angle to the radius. Iſ thereſore the dipping needle play in a maguetic east and west circle, it uill stand perpendicular to the horizon. Tan.  n æ = Tan. HN X Sec. H ”. Thereſore, iu any place, MAGNETISM. L0l Mr. Bernoulli makes this simple contrivance answer the purpose of an universal instrument in the following ingenious manner. A very light brass graduated circle EFG (Plate IV. ſig. 9.) is ſixed to one side of the needle, concentric with its axis, and the whole is balanced as nicely as possible before impregnationn. A very light index CD is then fitted on the axis, so as to turn rather stiſly on it. This will destroy the equilibrium of the needle If the needle has been made with perſect accuracy, and perfeetly balanced, the addition of this index would cause it always to settle with the index perpendicular to the horizon, whatever degree of the cirele it may chance to point at. But as this is scarcely to be expected, set the index at various degrees oſ the cirele, and note what inclination the unmagnetic needle takes for each place oſ the index, and record them all in a table Suppose, for example, that when the index is at 50, the needle inclines 460 from the horizon. If in any place we observe that the needle (rendered magnetie by lying between two strong magnets), having the index at 50, inclines 460, we may be certain that this is the dip at that place; for the needle is not deranged by the magnetism ſrom the position which gravity alone would give it. As ve generally know something of the dip that is to be expeeted in any place, ve must set the index accordingly. If the needle does not shew the expected dip, alter the position oſ the index, and again observe the dip. See whether this second position of the index and this dip form a pair which is in the table. If they do, we have got the true dip. If not, ve must try another position of the index. Noticing whether the agreement oſ this last pair he greater or less than that of the former pair, we learn whether to change the position oſ the index in the same direction as beſore, or in the opposite. The vriter of this article has a dipping needle of this kind, made by a person totally unacquainted with the making of philosophical instrumentss It has been used at Leith, at Cronstadt in Russia, at Scarborough, and at New York, 2 292 MAGNETISM. and the dip indicated by it did not in any single trial diſſer 15 degrees from other trials, or ſfrom the dip observed by the finest instrumentss He tried it himself in Leith Roads, in a rough sea; and does not think it inferior, eĩther in certainty or dispatch, to a needle oſ the most elaborate construction. It is worthy oſ its most ingenious author, and of the public notice, because it can be made for a moderate expence, and thereſore may be the means oſ multiplying the observations of the dip, which are oſ immense consequenc] in the theory of magnetism, and for giving us an accurate knovledge of the magnetical constitution of this globe. 301. This knowledge is still very imperfect, owing to the vant of a very numerous collection of observations of the dip. They are oſ more importance than those oſ the horizontal deviations ſrom the meridian. All that we can say is, that the earth acts on the mariners needle as a great loadstone would do. But we do not think that the appearances resemble the effects of what ve would call a good loadstone, having the regular magnetism of two vigorous poles The dips of the needle in various parts of the earth seem to be such as would result ſfrom the action of an extremely irregular loadstone, having its poles exceedingly diſfusedc. The increase oſ the dip, as we recede from thos places where the needle is horizontal, is too rapid to agree with the supposition of two poles of constipated magnetism, whether we suppose the magnetic actiou in the inverse simple or duplicate ratio oſ the distances, unless the great terretrial magnet be oſ much smaller dimensions than what some other appearances oblige us to supposee If there be ſour poles, as Ior. Halley imagined, it will be next to impossible; to ascertain the positions of the dipping needle. It will be a tangent to one oſ the secondary magnelic curves, and thes vill be of a very intricate species We cannot hut consider æ the discovery of the magnetic constitution of this globe asa Esu point of very great importance, both to the philosopher and ſn to society. We have considered it with some care; but MAGNETISM. 209 hitherto we have not been able to form a systematic view oſ the appearances which gives us any satisſactionn. The vell informed reader is sensible, that the attempt by means oſf the horizontal or variation needle is extremely tedious in its application, and is very unlikely to succeed; at the same time it must be well understood. The two dissertations by Euler, in the 18th and 22d volumes oſ the Memoirs oſ the Royal Academy at Berlin, are most excellent performances, and give a true notion of the diſficulty of the subject. Yet, even in these, a circumstance is overlooked, which, for any thing we know to the contrary, may have a very great effect. If the magnetic axis be far removed from the axis of revolution, as far, for example, as Mr. Churchman places it, the magnetic meridians will be (generally) much inclined to ihe horizon; and we shall err very far, if we suppose (as in Eulers calculus) that the dipping needle will arrange itself in the vertical plane, passing through the direction of the horizontal or variation needle; or if we imagine that the ples of the great magnet are in that planee. We even presume to think that Mr. Euler's assumption of the place of his fictitious poles (namely where the needle is vertical), in order to obtain a manageable caleulus, is erroneous. The introduction of this circumstance of inclination of the magmtie meridians to the horizon, complicates the calculation such a degree as to make it almost uumanageable, except nume selected situations. Fortunately, they are important mes ſor ascertaining the places of the poles But the invesligation by the positions oſ the dipping needle is incomparallymore simple, and more likely to give us a knowledge of a miltiphicity o poles. The consideration of the magnetie ures (in the sense used in the present article), teaches us hat ve are not to imagine the poles immediately under those mns of the surface where the needle stands perpendicular to ihe horizon, nor the magnetic equator to be in those places vhere the needle ĩs horizontal; a notion commonly and plauũly entertained. Unfortunately our most numerons observa- 294 MAGNETISM. tions of the dip are not in places where they are the most instructive. A series should be obtained, extending from New Zealand northward, across the Pacific Ocean to Cape Fairweather on the west coast of North America, and eontinued through that part oſ the continent. Another series should extend ſrom the Cape of Good Hope, up along the west coast of Africa to the tropic of Capricorm; ſrom thence across the interior of Aſrica (where it would be of great importance to mark the place oſ its horizontality) through Sicily, Italy, Dalmatia, the cast of Germany, the Gulph of Bothnia, Lapland, and the west point of Greenland. This would be nearly a plane passing through the probable situstions oſ the poless. Another series should be made at right angles to this, forming a small circle, crossing the other near Cape Fairweather. This would pass near Japan, through Borneo, and the vest end of New Holland; also near Mexico, and a few degrees west of Easter Island. In this place, and at Borneo, the inclination of the magnetic plane to the horiZon would be considerable, but we cannot find this out. It may, however, be discovered in other points of this circle, vhere the dip is considerable. We have not room in this short account to illustrate the advantages derived from these serieses; but the refleeting reader will be very sensible o them, if he only supposes the great magnet to be accompanied by its magnetic curves, to which the needle is always a tangent. He will then see that the first series from New Zealand to Cape Fairveather, and the second from Cape Fairveather round the other side of the globe, being in one plane, and at very diſferent distances from the magnetic axis, must contain very instructive positions oſ the needle But ve still confess, that when ve compare the dips already known with the variations, they appear so irreconcileable with the results oſ an uniſorm regular magnetism, that we despair of suecess. Every thing seems to indicate a multiplicity of poles, or, what is still more adverse to all calculation, an irregular magnetism with very diffused polarity. MAGNETISM. 20956 Much instruction may surely be expected from the observations oſ the Russian academicians and their eleves, vho are employed in surveying that vast empire; yet we do not meet with a single observation of the dip of the needle in all the by-gone publications of that academy, nor indeed are there many of the variation. 302. For vant of such information, philosophers are extremely divided in their opinions of the situation oſ the magnetic poles of this globe. Proſessor Kruſſt, in the I7th volume of the Petersburgh Commentaries, places the north pole in lat. 700 N. and long. 230 W. from London; and the south pole in lat. 500 S. and long. 920 E. Wilcke of Stockholm, in his indication chart (Sued. Mem. tom. xxx. p. 218.), places the north pole in N. Lat. 759, near Baſſin's Bay, in the longitude of California. The south pole is in the Pacific Ocean, in lat. 700 S. Churchman places the north pole in lat. 560N. and long. 185° W. a little vay inland from Cape Fairveather; and the south pole in lat. 590 S. long. 165 E. due south from New Zealand. A planisphere by the Academy of Sciences at Paris for 1786, places the magnetic equator so as to intersect the earth's equator in long. 750, and 1550 ſrom Ferro Canary Island, vith an inclination of 12 degrees nearly, making it a great circle very nearly. But we are not informed on what authority this is done; and it does not accord with many observations oſ the dip which we have collected from the voyages of several British navigators, and from some voyages between Stockholm and Canton. Mr. Churchman has given a sketch of a planisphere with lines, which may be called parallels of the dip. Those parts of each parallel that have been ascertained by observation are marked by dots, so that we can judge of his authority for the whole constructionn It is but a sketch, but gives more synoptical imformation than any thing yet publishedl. The magnetic equator cuts the earths equator in long. 15°, and 195 E. 2L06 MAGNETISM. ſrom Greenwich, in an angle of nearly 17 degrees. The cireles of magnetic inelination are not parallel, being considerably nearer to each other on the short meridian than on its opposite. This circumstance, heing founded on ohservation, is one of the strongest arguments ſor the existence oſ a magnet of tolerable regularity, as the cause of all the positions of the compass needle; for such must be the positions oſ the circles of equal dip, if the axis of this magnet is ſar removed from the axis of rotation, and does not intersect it. The celebrated astronomer Tobias Mayer of Gottingen, proposed the following hypothesis, by which the direction of the mariners needle in all parts of the earth may be determined. He supposes that the earth contains a very poverful magnet of inconsiderable dimensions, which arranges the needle according to the known laws of magnetism. The centre of this magnet was distant from the centre oſ the earth about 480 English miles in 1756, and a line joining these centres intersected the earth's surface in a point situaled in 17° N. Lat. and 183°0 E. Long. from London. The axis oſ the magnet is perpendicular to this line, and the plane in which it lies is inclined about IIC to the plane of the meridian, the north end of the axis lying on the east side of that meridian. From these data, it will be found that the axis oſ this magnet cuts the surſace of the earth about the middle of the eastern shore of Baffin's Bay, and in another point about 500 miles S. S. W. of the southem point of New Zealand. Professor Lichtenberg of Gottingen, who givos this extract from the manuscript, says, that the hypothesis is accompanied by a considerable list of variations and dips caleulated by it, and compared with observations, and that the agreement is very remarkablee He gives indeed a dozen instances in very diſſerent regions of the earth. But we suspeet that there is some error or defect n the data given by him, because the annual changes, which he also gives, are such as are inconsistent with the data, ant MAGNETISM. F ĩi even with each other. He says, that the distance ſrom the centre increases about four miles annually, and that thence arises an annual diminution of 8 minutes in the latitude and I4 in the longtitude of that point where the straight line joining the centres meets the surface It can have no such consequence. He says also, that the above mentioned inelination of the planes increases 8 minutes annually. The compound force of the magnet is said to be as the square root of the distance inversely. We are at a loss to understand the meaning of this circumstance; because Mayers hy pothesis concerning the law of magnetic action is exceedingly different, as related by Mr. Lichtenberg ſrom the same manuscript. But it was our duty to communicate this notice, though imperſect, of the speculations of this celebrated mathematiciann See Exliben's Elem. of Nat. Phil. published by Lichtenberg I784. ꝑ. G45. 308. Nov, if the situation oſ the poles be any thing near the average or medium oſ these determinations, and if we form all our notions by analogy, comparing the positions of the compass needle in relation to the great terrestrial magnet, with the positions assumed by a small needle in the neighhourhood of a magnet, ve must conclude, that the magnetical constitution of this globe has little or no reference to its regular external form. The axis of the magnet is very far removed from that of the globe (at least 1500 miles), and is not nearly parallel to it, nor in the same plane. It required the sagacity and the skill oſa Euler to subject such anomalous magnetism to any rules of computation; and every person qualified to judge of the subject must allow his dissertation in the 18th volume of the Berlin Memoirs to be a work of wonderful research. It is a very agreeable thing to see such a conformity between the lines which express the regular magnetism of Euler's dissertation, and the lines drawn by Dr. Halley from observation, and which appeared to himselſ so eapricious, that he despaired (notwithstanding his consummate skill in geometry) of their ever being reduced to a mathematical and precise system. 205 MAGNETISM. 304. Without detracting from the merit oſ Dr. Gilberi we may presume to say that his notion of the earth's being a great magnet was not, in his mind, more than a sagacious eonjecture, formed from a very general and even vagm eomparison. Yet the comparison was suſficiently good give him great conſidence in his opinion that the action of this great magnet, in perfect conformity to vhat we obseræ in our experiments with magnets, is the source of all the magnetism that we obseve. If there was nothing else in prooſ of the justness oſ his theory, it is abundantly provel by the beautiful experiment of Mr. Henshaw, mentioned in the article VaniaTiox, Encycl. p. 621. col. 2. An iron har held nearly upright, attracts the south end of a compass needle with ĩts lower end; and if that end of the bar be kept in its place, and the bar turned round till it becomes the upper end, the south point oſ the needle immediately turns avay from it, and the north end is now attracted. This experiment may be perfectly imitated with artificial magnetism. Having supported a large magnet SAN (Plate IV. ſig. 10.) s0 that its ends are detached from surrounding bodies, place a small needle B (poised on its pivot) about three inches below the north pole N of the magnet, and in such a situation that its polarity to the magnet may be very weak Take now a small piece of common iron, and hold it in the position represented at C. Its lower end becomes a north pole, attracting the south pole of the needlee. Keeping this in its place, turn round the piece of iron into the position D; the south pole of B vill now avoid it, and the north pole will be attractedl We directed the needle to be n placed, that its polarity in relation to the magnet, may be weak. IF it be strong, it may act on the end of C or D like a magnet, and counteract the magnetism induced on C or D by vicinity to A An anonymous writer in the Philosophical Transactions, No. 177. Vol. XV. relates several observations made during a voyage to the East Indies, which are quite conformable u MAGNETISM. 200 this A ſew leagues northwest ſfrom the island Ascension, the south point of the compass needle hardly shewed any tendeney to or from the lower end oſ an iron bar. It seemed rather to avoid the upper end; it was not in the least aſfected by the middle of the bar; but when the har was laid horizontal, in the magnetic direction, its two ends aſſected the dissimilar ends of the compass needle very strongly; but when horizontal, and lying at right angles to the magnetic direction, its polarity was altogether indifferent. As the other phenomena of induced artificial magnetism have the same resemblance to the phenomena of natural magnetism, a bar which has remained long in the vicinity of a magnet acquires magnetism (permanent) in the same way, and modiſied by the same circumstances, as in natural magnetism. Hammering a bit of common iron in the immediate vicinity of a magnet, gives it very good magnetism. Exposing a red hot bar to cool in the neighbourhood of a magnet has the same effectt. Also quenching it suddenly has the same efſfect. Quenching a small red hot steel bar between two magnets, was ſound by us to communicate a mueh stronger magnetism than we could give it by any other method. Its ſorm indeed was very unfavourable ſor the ordinary method of touching; for it consisted of two little spheres connected by a slender rod, and could scarcely be impregnated in any other way than by placing it for a very long while between magnets. In all these experiments, the polarity acquired is precisely similar to that acquired by the same treatment in relation to this supposed great terrestrial magnet. In short, in whatever manner we pursue this analogy in our experiments, we find the resemblance most perfect in the phenomena. We cannot but think, thereſore, that this new physiology of the magnet by Dr. Gilbert is well established; and we think ourselves authorised to assume it as a proposition fully demonstrated, that the earth is a great magnet, or contains a great magnet, the agency of which produces the di- 300 MAGNETISM. rection oſ the magnetic needle, and all the magnetism which iron acquires by long continuance in a proper position It is this hich made us say, in the beginning oſ this arti cle, that attraction and polarity were not confined to magnets, but were properties belonging to all ron ©n its metallic stat We now see the reason vhy any piece oſ iron brought very near to another piece will attract itboth hecome magnetical, in consequence of the agency of the great magnet; and their magnetism is so disposed, that their mutmal attractions exceed their repulsions Also, why an ĩon rod, placed nearly in the magnetical direetion, vill finally arrange itselſ in that direction Also, vhy the terrestrial polarity of common iron is indiſferent, and eĩther end of the rod will settle in the north, if it have neæly that position at firstt. The magnetism induced by mere momentary position is so ſeeble as to yield to any artiſicial magnetismm As a moment was suſficient for imparting it, a moment suffice: for destroying it; and another moment will impart the opposite magnetism. But artificial magnetism requires more force ſor its production, and some of ĩt remains when the producing cause is removed, and ĩt does not yield at oncæ b the contrary magnetism. That there is no farther diſference appears from this, that long continued position gves determined and permanent magnetism, and that it is destroyed by an equally long continuance in the contrary postion. It seems 10 be very generally true, that a magnet vill carry more by its north than by its south pole. It should be s in this part oſ the world, because the terrtrial magnetism induced on the iron conspires with the magnetism induced by the north pole of a magnet, but counteracts the magnetism nduced by the south pole. The propriety oſ Mr. Saveryss Mr. Cantons, and Mr Antheaume's processes for beginning the impregnation o hard steel bars is now plain, and the superior effeet oſ i two great bars oſf common ĩron in the proposed method o Mr. Antheaume. We cannot but take this opportunity o MAGNETISM. , 30I paying the proper tribute of praise lo the ingenuity of Mr. Savery. Every circumstance of his process was selected in consequence of an accurate conception oſ magnetism, and the combination oſ this science with Dr. Gilbert's theory. His process is the same with Antheaume's in every respect, exeent the circumstance of the double touch borrowed from Mitchell and Canton. These observations do not detract ſrom the discernment of Mitchell and Canton, who sav in those experiments what had ęscaped the attention of hundreds oſ readers. S05. But there occurs an objection to this theory of Dr. Gilbert, which was urged against it with great forcee We observe no tendency in the magnet or compass needle ſovard this supposed magnet. An iron or steel bar is not found to increase its tendency downwards, that is, is not sensibly heavier, vhen its south pole is uppermost in this part of the world. A needle set aſloat on a piece oſ cork arranges itself quickly in the proper direction; but if continued ever so long afloai, it has never been observed to approach the north side of the vessel. This is quite unlike what we observe in the mutual actions of magnets, or the action oſ magnets on iron. This objection appears to have given Dr. Gilbert some concern; and he mentions many experiments which have been tried on purpose to discover somæ magnetical tendency. He gets rid of it as vell as he can, by saying, that the directive power oſ a magnet extends much farther than its attractive power. He confirms this by several experimentss But Dr. Gilbert had not studied the simultaneous actions of the ſour poles, nor explained, by the principles of compound motion, how these produced all the possible positions of the necdlee. Indeed, the composition of mechanical forces was by no means familiar with philosophers at the end oſ the I6th century We see it now very distinctly. The polarity oſ the needle, or the ſorce with which it turns itselſ into the magnetical position, depends on the difference between the sums of the actions oſ 504 MAGSETISM. As an example oſ this comparison, let us suppos ſhe great terrestrial magnet to be a thousand ſimes larger and stronger than the magnet ?hose attraction we are comparing with that oſ terrestrial magnetism. Let us also suppoæ the distance ſrom the pole of the great magnet io be small 20 that its attraction may be considerable Let us make d = 1200, a being = 1000, and 5 =I. These are all rery reasonable suppositionss Substituting these values in the formula, ve have atir of A: attr oſ B=1I: IO00 very nearly; and thereſore vhen the neædle, when placed neara magnet, vibrates by ĩts polarity as ſast as it does by natural magnetism, its tendency toward that magnet must be altgether insensible; for the disproportion is incomparably greater than that of I to I000, in the larges: magnets with vwhich ve can make experiments Observæ also, that we have taken the case where the attractions are the strongest, viz when the magnet C is placed in the axis of A or B. In the oblique positions, tangents io the magnetic curves, the attractions are smaller, almost in any ratioWe took the inversæ ratio of the distances ſor the law of action, only because the analvsis was very simple. It is very evident, that the disproportion ill be still more remarkable iſ the action be inversely as the square oſ the distance. The objection thereſore to the orign oſ the polarity of the compass neædle, and of all other magnets, namely, the action of a great magnet containeqd in the earth, appears plainly to be oſ no force We rather think that the want oſ all sensible attraction, where there is a brist polarity, is a prooſ of the justness of the conjecture; ſor iſ the compass needle vere arranged by the action of magnetic rcks, or even extensive strata, near the surſace of the earth. the attractions would bear a greater proportion to the polarities We have even observed this A coꝶsderable mass of magnetie stratum was found 1o derange the neædle of a surVeyors theodolite at a coniderable distanœ all aroã (about 140 yards). The vriter placed the needæ on a thin lath, which just floated it MAGNETISM. 305 on vater in a large vooden dish, and set it in a place where it was drawn about I5 degrees from the magnetic meridian. It was leſt in that situation a vhole night, vell defended from the wind by a board laid on the dish. Next morning it was ſound applied to that side of the dish which was nearest to the disturbing rockss. It had moved about six inches This was repeated three times, and each time it moved in the same direction (neorly), which differed considerably from the direction of the needle itself. It is now plain that we may, vith conſidence, assume Dr. Gilbert's theory oſ terrestrial magnetism as suſficiently established. And, since ve must certainly call that the north pole of the great magnet which is situated in the northern parts of the earth, and since those poles of magnets which attract each other have opposite polarities, ve must say, that what we eall the north pole of a mariners needle, or of any other magnet, has the southern polarity. 307. We may now venture to go farther with Dr. Gilbert, and to say that all the magnetism which we observe, whether in nature or art, is either the immediate or the remote effect oſ the action of the great magnet As soſt bars soon acquire a transient magnetism; as hard bars, aſter long exposure, acquire a sensible and permanent magnetism ve must inſer, that ores oſ iron, vhich are in a state fit for impregnation, must acquire a sensible and permanent magnetism, by continuing, for a series oſ ages, in the bowels oſ the earth. And thus the magnetism of loadstones, which, till the discovery of the natural magnetism acquired by position, were the sources oſ all our magnetical phenomena, is now proved to be a necessary consequence oſ the existence and agency of a great magnet contained in the bowels of the earth. 308. It seems to result ſrom this theory, that, in these northern parts of the world, that part of every natural loadstone that is at the extremity of the line dravn through the stone in the magnetię direction should be its pole; and that vOL. Iv. v l 306 MAGNETISM. the loadstone, when properly poised, should of itselſ assume the very position which it had in the mine. Dr. Gilbert complains oſ the inattention oſ minets (rude hominum genus, lucro potius quam physicæ consulentes) to this important circumstancee Once, however, he had the good fortune to he advertised of a great magnetic mass lymg in its matrix. He repajred quickly to the mine, examined it, and marked its points which were in the extremities of the magnetic line. When it was detached from its matrix, he had the pleasure oſ finding its poles in the very places he expected. The loadstone was of considerable size, weighing about 20 pounds. NMr. Wilcke gives in the Swedish Commentaries several instances of the same kind. But should this always be the case? By no means. There are many eircumstances which may give the magnetism of a loadstone a very different direetionn. We have found, that simple juxtaposition to a magnet will sometimes give a sucession of poles to a long bar of hard steel. The same thing may happen to an extensive vein of magnetisable matter. The loadstone taken out of this vein may have been placed like that oſ a soft bar placed in the magnetic line, if lying in one part of the vein; iſ taken from another part oſ, its polarity may be the very reverse; and in another part it may have no magnetism, although completely fitted for acquiring it. It may have its poles placed in a direction diſferent from all these, in consequence of the vicinity of a greater loadstone. As londstones possessed of vigorous magnetism are alvays found only in small pieces, and in pieces of various sizes and force, we must expect every position oſ their poless. The only thing that ve can expeet by theory is, that adjoining loadstones will have their ſriendly poles turned toward each other, and a general prevalence of or tendency to a polarity symmetrical with that of the earth. The reader vill find some more ohservations to this purpos in the article VArRiarioN, in the APPENDIX to this dissertation, as also in Gilberts treatise, B. III. . 2. ꝑ. 121. MAGNETISM. [07 Nor should all strata or masses of iron ore he magnetica. We know that none are susceptible oſ induced magnetism, but such as are,  a certain degree, in the metallie stat. Such ores are not abundant. Nay, even all of such strata do not necessarily acquire magnetism by the action oſ the great magnet. Iſ their principal dimensions lie nearly perpendicular to the magnetic direction, they will not acquire any sensible quantity. A stratum in this country, rising about I7 degrees to the N. N. W. vill scarcely acquire magnetism. It may also happen, that the influence of the great magnet is counteracted by that of some extensive stratum inaccessible to man, by reason of ils great depth. 8509. Thus we see that all the appearances of the original magnetism of loadstones are perfectly consistent with the notion that they are effects of one general cosmical cause, the action of the great magnet contained in the earth, and that there is no occasion to suppose this great magnet to diſfer, in ĩts constitution or manner of action, from the small masses of similar matter called loadstone. The only diſfieulty that presents itselſ is the great superiority of magnetic foree observable in some loadstones over other masses of ores cireumjacent, which are not distinguishable by us by any other circumstancee We acknov ledge ourselves unable to solve this difſiculty; for the magnetism oſ such pieces is sometimes incomparably stronger than vhat a bur of iron acquires by position; yet this bar is much more susceptible than the ores which are ſit for becoming loadstones Perhaps there is some ehemical change which obtains gradually in eertain masses, which aids the impregnation, in the same way that we know that being red hot destroys all magnetism, vhether in a metal bar or in an oree This seems o be confirmed by what we see in some old iron stanchions, which acquire the strongest magnetism in those parts of their substance which are combining themselves with ingredients floating in the atmosphere. That part which is cased in the stone, and exfoliates and splits with rust, being con⸗ 308 MAGNETISM. verted into something like what is called finery-cinder, becomes highly and permanently magneticc. Such peculiarities as these, operating ſor ages, may allow a degree oſ magnetical impregnation (in whatever this may consist) to take place, to which we can see no resemblance in our experiments. It would be worth while to place iron wires in a tube in the magnetic direction, which could be kept oſa proper red heat, while it is converted into æthiops by steam. It is not unlikely that it would acquire a sensible and permanent magnetism in this vay. It may be, that the little atoms, as they arrange themselves in a sort of crystalline or symmetrical form, may also arrange so as to ſavour magnetism. Were this tried in the vicinity of a strong magnet, the effect might be more remarkable and precise. Perhaps, too, while iron is precipitated in a metallic form from its solutions by another metal, something oſ the same kind may happenn. We know, that proper ores of iron, exposed to cementation in a low red heat, in the magnetic direction, become magnetic. 310. Notice has been taken in the APPEXDIX, on the variation of the Compass, oſ the attempts oſ ingenious men to explain the change which is observed in all paris of the globe, on the direction oſ the mariners needle, the gradual change oſ the variation. The hypothesis of Dr. Halley, that the globe which we inhabit is hollow, and incloses a magnetic nucleus, moving round another axis, is not inconsistent with any natural law, iſ he did not suppos the interval filled up with some ſluid The action oſ the nucleus and shell on the intervening fluid, vould gradually bring the two to one common motion of rotation, as may be inferred from the reasonings employed by Newton in his remarks on the Cartesian vortices. Leaving out this circumstance, there is only another causæ vhich can aſfeet, and must aſſeet the rotation of both, namely, the mutual action of the magnetic nucleus, and the masses of magnetic matter in the shell. If the axis of rota tion of this nucleus be diſferent. from the line joining it: MAGNETISM. 309 magnetic poles, these poles will have a motion relative to the shell; and this motion may easily he conceived such as vill produce the changes of magnetic direction which we observe. It may even produce a motion of the northern magnetic pole in one direction, and of the southern pole in the opposite direction, and this with the appearance of diſferent periods oſ rotation, as supposed by Mr. Churchman. We may here observe, by the way, that the change of magnetic direction in this country is not nearly so great as is commonly imagined. The horizontal needle has shiſted its position about 359 at London since 1585; but the point of the dipping needle has not changed 100. We may also observe, that when the pole of the central magnet changes its place, the magnetism of an extensive stratum, influenced by it, may so alter its disposition, as to change the position of the compass needle in the opposite direction to that of the change which the central magnet alone would induce on it. But as motions have not yet been assigned to this nucleus, which quadrate with the observed positions of the needle, and as the very existence oſ it is hypothetical, it may not be amiss to examine, whether such a change of variation may not be explained by what ve know of the laws of magnetism, and of the internal constitution of this earth? l. It is pretty certain, that the veins in which loadstones are found are not parts of the great magnet. This appears from their having two poles while in the mine, and also from the very small depth to which man has been able to penetratee. When we compare the positions of the dipping needle with those of a small needle near a magnet, ve must infer, that the poles are very far below the surface. Yet ve know, that there are magnetisable strata of very great extent occupying a very considerable portion of the external covering. Though their bulk and absolute power may be small, vhen compared vith those of the great magnet, yet their greater vicinity to the needles on which observations are made, may give them a very sensible influence. In this vay may a great deal of the observed irregularities j10 MAGNETIS. oſ the positions of the neerle be accounted for. In the Logoon at Teneriſfe, Feuillè observed the variation 130 0 west in 1794, while at the head of the island it was only 5. The dip at the Lagoon was 630 30, greatly surpassing what vas observed in the neighbourhood. Muller found, in the mountains of Bohemia, great and desultory diſferences oſ declination, amounting sometimes to 500. At Mantus, the variation in 1758 was 120; while at Bononia and Brixia it vas neorly 18. Great irregularities were observed hy Goẽte in the Gulph of Finland, especially near the island of Sussari, among some rocks: on one of these, the needle shewed no polanity. Captain Cook and Captain Phipps observed differences of 109, extending to a considerable distance, on the vest coasts of North America. In the neighbourhood of the island Elba in the Mediterranean, the position of the needle is greatly aſſected by the iron strata, vhich that island so much abounds. In this country, there are also observed small deviations, vhich extend over considerable tracts of country, indicating a great extent oſ strata that are veakly magneticc. Since such strata receive their magnetism by induction, in a manner similar to a bar of hard steel, and since we know that this receives it gradually, it may very probably happen, that a long series of years may elapse before the magnetism attains its ultimate disposition. Here, then, is a necessary change oſ the magnetic diretion; and although it may be very different in different places, according to the disposition and the power oſ thoæ strata, there must be a general vergency oſ it one way. 2. It is well known that all metals, and particularly ĩron, are in a progress oſ continual production and demetalliztionn. The veins oſ metals, and more particularly those oſ iron, are evidently oſ posterior date to that of the rocks in vhich they are lodged. Chemistry teaches us, by thæ very nature of the substances which compose them, that they are in a state oſ continual changee This is another causæ oſ change in the magnetic direetionn Nay, we know that some of them have suddenly changed their situation by æarth MAGNETISM. S11 quakes and voloanoess Some of the streams of lava ſrom Vesuvius and /tna abound in iron. This has greatly changed its situation; and if the strata from which it proceeded were magnetical, the needle in its neighbourhood must be affected. Nay, subterranean heat alone vill effect a change, by changing the magnetism of the strata. Mr. Lievog, royal astronomer at Bessestedt in Iceland, writes, that the great eruption from Hecla in 1783, changed the direction of the needle nine degrees in the immediate neighbourhood. This change was produced at a miſẽb distance from the frozen lava; and it diminished to two degrees at the distance of 2F miles. He could not approach any nearer, on account of the heat still remaining in the lava, aſter an interval oſ l4 months. All these causes of change in the direction of the mariner's needle must be partial and irregular. But there is another cause which is cosmical and universal. Dr. Halleys supposition of four poles, or, at least, the supposition of irregular and diffused poles, seems the only thing that vill agree with the observations of declinationn. We know that all magnetism of this kind (that is, disposed in this manner) has a natural tendency to change. The two northern poles may have the same or opposite polaritiess Ifthey are the same, their action on each other tends to diminish the general magnetism, and to cause the centre of effort to approach the centre of the magnet. If they have opposite polarities, the contrary eſſect will be produced. The general magnetism of each ill inorease, and the pole (or its centre of effort) vill approach to the surfacee In either oſ these cases, the compound magnetism of the whole may change exceedingly, by a change by no means considerable in the magnetism of each pair of poles. It is diſficult to subject this to caloulation: but the reader may have very convincing prooſ oſ it, by taking a strong and a weuker magnet of the same length, and one of them, at least, of steel not harder than spring temper. Lay them acros each other like an acute letter 312 MAGNETISM. X: and then place a compass needle, so that its plane of ro tation may be perpendicular to the plane of the X. Note exactly the position in which the needle settles. In a fen minutes aſter, it will be ſfound to change considerably, although no remarkable change has yet happened to the magnets themselves. S11. We ſlatter ourselves, that our readers will grant tha the preceding pages conta what may justly be called æ theory oſ magnetism, in as much as ve have been able to include every phenomenon in one general faet, the induetion of magnetism; and have given such a deseription oſ that faet and its modifications, that ve can accurately predie vwhat will be the appearances oſ magnets and iron put into any desired situation with respect to each other. But it is not easy to satisſy human curiosity. Men have even investigated, or sought for causes of the perseverance oſ matter in its present condition. We have not been contented vith Newton's theory oſ the celestial motions, and have sought for the cause of that mutual tendency which he called gravitation, and of which all the motions are particular instances. Philosophers have been no less inquisitive after what may be the cause oſ that mutual attraction of the dissimilar poles, and the repulsion oſ the similar poles, and that faculty of mutual impregnation, or excitement, which so remarkably distinguish iron, in its various states, from all other substances. The action of bodies on each other at a distance, has appeared to them an absurdity, and all have had recourse to some material intermedium. The phenomenon of the arrangement of iron ſilings is extremely curious, and naturally engages the attention. It is hardly possible to look at it vithout the thought arising in the mind oſ a stream issuing ſrom one pole of the magnet, moving round it, entering by the other pole, and again issuing from the former outlet Accordingly, this notion has been entertained ſrom the ear- MAGNETISM: 315 liest times, and diſferent speculatists have had diſſerent ways of conceiving how this stream operated the effects which we observe. The simplest and most obvious was just to make it act like any other stream of fluid matter, by impulsion. Impulsion is the thing aimed at by all the speculatistss. They have a notion, that we conceive this vay of communicating motion with intuitive elearness, and that a thing is ſully explained when it can be shewn that it is a case of impulsionn. We have considered the authority oſ these explanations in the article IMruLSION, in the Suppl. to the Encycl. Brit. and need not repeat our reasons for refusing it any preeminencee But even when we have shewn the phenomena to be cases of impulsion by such a stream, thoe greatest diſſiculty, the most eurious and the most embarrassing, is lo ascertain the sources of this impulsive motion of the fluidlHow, and ſrom what cause does it begin? What forces bend it in curves round the magnet ? Those philosophers, whose principle obliges them to explain gravitation also by impulse, must have another stream to impel this into its curvess. Acting by impulsion, this magnetic stream must lose a quantity of motion equal to what it communicates. What is to restore this? What directs it in a particular course through the magnet ? And what is it that can totally alter that course in a momentin all the phenomena of induced magnetism? How does it impel ? Lucretius, either of himself, or speaking aſter the Greek philosophers, makes it impel, not the iron, but the surrounding air, sweeping it out oſ the way; and thus giving occasion for the surrounding air to rush around the magnet, and to hurry the bits of iron toward itt. There is; perhaps, more ingenious refinement in this thought than in any of the impulsive theories adopted since his day by Des Cartes, Euler, and other great philosophers: But it is sagaciously remarked by D. Gregory, in his MS. notes on Newton, that this theory of Lucretius falls to the ground; because the experiments succeed just as well under water as in the airr. As to the explanations, or de- MAGNETISM: 815 most general lavs. But the communication of magnetism scems a great mystery. The simple approach of a magnet communieates these powers to a piece of iron; and this vithout any diminution of its own powerss On the contrary, beginning with magnets which have hardly any sensible power, ve can, by a proper alternation of the manipulations, communicate the strongest magnetism to as many hard steel hars as we please; and the original magnets shall be brought to their highest degree of magnetism. We have no notion of powers or faculties, but as qualities of some substances in vwhich they are inherent. Yet here is no appearance of something abstracted ſfrom one body, and communieated to, or shared with another. The process is like kindling a great fire bya simple spark: here is no communication, but only necasion given to the exertion of powers inherent in the combustible matter. It appears probable, that the case is the same in magnetism; and that all that is perſormed in making a magnet is the excitement of powers already in the steel, or the giving occasion for their exertions; as burning the thread vhich Sies together the two ends of a bow, allows it to unbend. This notion did not eacape the sagacity of Dr. Gilbert; ænd he is at much pains to shev, that the coitio magnetica is a quality inherent in all magnetical bodies, and only requũres the proper circumstance for its exertion. He is not veræ fortunate in his attempts to explain ho it is developed by the vicinity of a magnet, and how this faculty, or actual exertion of this pover, hecomes permanent in one body, while in another it requires the constant presence oſ the magnet, It is to Mr. Epinus, of the Imperial Academy of St. Petersburgh, that ve are indebted for the first really philosophical attempt to explain all these mysteries We mentioned, under ELECTRICITY, the cireumstance vhich suggested the first hint of this theory to Epinus, vi. the resemblance between the attractions and repulsions oſ the tourmaline and of a magnett. A material enuse oſ the elec- MAGNETISM. 317 ſorces itselſ on the mind, and led Mr. Epinus to think, that the faculty of producing the magnetical phenomena belonged to a magnetical ſluid, residing in all bodies susceptible oſ magnetism; and that the exertion of this faculty requires nothing but the abstraction of the fluid from one end of the magnetic bar, and its constipation in the other. And this conjecture was confirmed by observing, that in the induction of magnetism on a piece oſ iron, the power of the magnet is not diminished. All these cireumstances led Mr. Epinus to ſrame the following hypothesis: , I. There exists a substance in all magnetic bodies, which may be called the magnetic fluid; the particles of which repel each other vith a force decreasing as the distance increases. 2. The particles oſ magnetic ſluid attraet, and are attracted by the particles oſ iron, with a force that varies according to the same law. S. The particles of iron repel each other according to the same lav. 4. The magnetic fluid moves, without any considerable obstruction, through the pores of iron and soſt steel; but is more and more obstructed in its motion as the steel ĩs tempered harder; and in hard tempered steel, and in the ores of iron, it is moved vith the greatest difficulty. In consequence of this supposed attraction ſor iron, the fluid may be contained in it in a certain determinate quantity. This quantity will be such, that the accumulated attraction oſ a particle for all the iron halances, or is equal to, the repulsion of all the fluid which the iron contains. The quantity of fluid competent to a particle of iron is supposed to be such, that the repulsion exerted hetween it and the fluid competent to another particle oſ iron is also equal to its attraction for that particle of iron: And thereſore the attraction between the fluid in an iron bar A for the iron of another har B, is just equal to its repulsion MAGNETIBM. 81 discourse to relate to the magneticol fluid. Let N, S, n, s, be considered as the overcharged and undercharged parts of a magnetical body, or the poles oſ a magnet, and of iron rendered magnetical by inductionn. We shall confine our observations in this place to those cireumstances in which the mechanical phenomena of magnetism are limited by the circumstance, that magnets alvays contain their natural quantity of fluid; so that their action on iron, and on each other, depends entirely on its unequable distribution; as is the case with induced electricity. 312. Let the magnet NAS (Plate IV. ſig. 12.), having its north pole NA overcharged, be set near to the bar n b  of common iron, and let their axes ſform one straight line. Then (as in the case oſ eleotries) the overcharged pole NA acts on the bar B only by means of the redundant fluid which it contains. For that portion of its fluid, which is just sufficient for saturating the iron, will repel the fluid in B just as much as the iron in NA attracts it; and therefore the fluid in B sustains no change ſrom this portion oſ the fluid in NA. In like manner, the pole SA acts on B only n consequence of the iron in SA, which is not saturated or attended by its equivalent fluid. If the ſluid in B is immoveable, even the redundant fluid in NA, and the redundant iron in SA, vill produce no sensible eſfect on it: For every purticle of iron in B is accompanied by as much ſluid as will balance, by its repulsions and attractions, the attractions and repulsions oſ the equidistant particle of ironn. But as the magnetical fluid in B is supposed to be easily moveable, it will be repelled by the redundant fluid in AN tovard the remote extremity n, till the resistance that it meets vith, joined to its own tendeney to uniform diſfusion, just balances the repulsion of AN. This tendency to uniform diffusion obtains as soon as any fluid quits its place; as has been suſficiently explained under Exscrreny, §j I6, I7. But, at the same time, the redundant iron in AS attract: the ſluid in B, and would abstract it ſrom B n, and condense 20 MAGNETISM. it into B This attraction opposes the repulsion now men. tioned But, because AS is more remote ſrom every poit oſ B than AN is from the same point, the repulsions of the redundant fluid m AN will prevail; and, on the whole, fluid ill be propelled toward n, and ill be rarefied on the part B2. But as to what will bæe the law oſ distribution, both in the redundant and deficient parts oſ B, ĩt is plain that nothing can be said with precisionn. This must dæpend on the distribution oſ the filuid in the magnet NAS. The more diffused that we suppose the redundant fluid and maiter in the magnet, the farther removed will the centres oſ effort oſ its poles be from their extremities; the smaller will be the action of AN and AS, the smaller ill be their diſſerence oſ action; and thereſore the smaller ill be the condensation in B n, and the rareſaction in B2. Hence we learn, in the outset oſ this attempt to explanation, that the action oſ a magnet will be 50 much the greater as its poles are more concentrated. This is agreeable to observation, and gives some credit to the hypothesis We can just se, in a very general manner, that the fluid will be rarer than its natural state in 5, and denser in n; that the change of density is gradual, and that the density may be represented by the ordinates oſ some line c b d, (Plate IV. ſig. 13) vhile the natural density is represented by the ordinates io the line Cb D, parallel to s . There vill be some pont B of the iron bar, where the ſluid will be of its natural density, and the ordmate B b will meet the line c àd in thæ point of ĩts intersection with CD. All this action is internal and imperceptiblee Let us inquire what will be the sensible external actionn There is a superiority oſ attraction towards the magnet: For since the magnetic action is supposed to diminish continually by an increase of distance, the curve, hose ordinates represent the ſorces, has its convexity oward the axis Also, the force oſ the poles AN, AS are equal at equal distances: For, by the hypothesis, the attraction and repulsion of an MAGNETISM. 82l indimdual particle are equal at equal distances; and the condensation in AN is equal to the deficiency in AS, by the same hypothesis; because NAS still contains its natural quantity of fluidc. Thereſore the action of both poles may be expressed by the ordinates oſ the same curve, and they vill differ only by reason of their distances We may thereſore express the actions by the four ordinates M m, P p. Nn, Qq oſ Plate III. fig. .; of which the property (deduced from the single circumstance of its being convex toward the axis) is, that Mm + Qq is greater that P » + Nn. There is thereſore a surplus oſ attraction It is only this surplus that is perceived The fluid, moveable in B, but retained by it 5o0 as not to be allowed to escape, is pressed towards its remote end n by the excess P p  Q q of the repulsion of the redundant fluid in AN, above the attraction oſ the redundant iron in AS. This excess on every particle of the fluid is transmitted, by the common laws of hydrostatics, to the stratum immediately incumbent on the extremity n, and B is thus pressed away from A. But every particle of the solid matter in B is attracted towards A by the excess M m  Nn of the attraction of the redundant ſluid in AN above the repulsion of the redundant iron in AS; and this excess is greater than the other; for m +q is greater than 2 + n The piece of common iron n B⸗ is therefore attracted, in consequence of the fluid in it having been propelled towards its remote extremity, and distributed in a manner somewhat resembling its distribution in NAS. Nov, in this hypothesis, magnetism is held to depend entirely on the distribution of the ſluid. B has therefore hbecome a magnet, has magnetism induced on it, and, only in consequence oſ this induction, is attracted by A. Had we supposed the deficient, or south pole oſ A, to have been nearest to B, the redundant matter in AN would have attracted the moveable fluid in B more than the remoter redundant fluid in AS repels it: and, on this account, the magnetic fluid vould have been constipated vOL. IV. x 3529 MAGNETISM. in BS, and rareſied in Bn. It would, in this case also, hae been distributed in a manner similar to its situation in the magnet. And B would therefore have been a momentary magnet, having its redundant pole ſronting the deſcient or dissimilar pole of A. It is plain, that there would be the same surplus of attraction in this as in the former instance, and B would (on the whole) be attracted in consequence, and only in consequence, of having had a proprly disposed magnetism induced on it by juxtaposition. The sensible attraction, in this case, is a consequence of the distribution now deseribed; because, sinee the ſluid constipated in the end next to A cannot quit B, the tendency of this fluid toward A must press the solid matter of B in this direction (by hydrostatical laws) more than this solid matter is repelled in the opposite direction. Thus it appears, that the hypothesis tallies precisely with the induction of magnetism. We do not call this an explanation oſ the phenomenon; ſor the ſact ĩs, that ĩt is the hypothesis that is explained by the phenomenon: That is, iſ any person be told that induced magnetism is produced hy the action of a ſluid, in consequence of its situation being changed, he vill find, that in order to agree with the attraction oſ dissimilar, and the repulsion of similar poles, he must accommodate the fluid to the phenomena, by giving it the properties assigned to it by Apinus. 314. But the agreement with this simplest possible caæ of the most simple example oſ induced magnetism, is not enough to make us adopt the hypothesis as adequate to the explanation oſ all the magnetie phenomena. We must confront the hypothesis with a variety oſ observations, o seæ whether the coincidence will be without exception. When the key CB, in Plate III. ſig. 5. is brought below the constipated north pole N of the magnet SAN, its own moveable fluid is propelled from C towards B, and is dis posed in CB nearly aſter the same manner as in SAN. There fore the redundant fluid in the lower end of the key repel MAGNETISM. 323 the moveable fluid in the wire BD more than the redundant matter in the upper end C attracts it; and thus the fluid is nrefied in the upper end of the wire BD, and condensed in its lower end D. CB and BD therefore are two temporary magnets, having their dissimilar poles in contact, or nearest to each other. This is all that is required for their attraction. This effect is promoted by the action of N on the wire BD, also propelling the fluid toward D; and thus increasing the mutual attraction of CB and BD. In like manner, when the key CB is held above the magnet, the moveable ſluid in ĩt is more attracted by the redundant matter in SA than it is repelled by the more remote redundant fluid in AN. The same thing happens to the fluid in the wire BD. Therefore CB and BD must attract each other; and the key will carry the wire, although the magnet is below it, and also attracts it. This singularity proceeds from the almost perfect mobility of the fluid in the two pieces of common iron, which renders their poles extremely constipated; vhereas the hardness required for the fixed magnetism oſ the magnet prevents this complete constipation and rareſaction. This can be strictly demonstrated in the case of slender rods of iron; but we can shev, and experience confirms it, that in other cases, depending on the shape and the temper of the pieces, the wire will not adhere to the key, but to the magnet. In the various situations and positions of the key and wire represented in Plate III. fig. 7. the actions of some of the poles on the moveable fluid in the iron are oblique in regard to the length of the pieces; but, since the moveable matter is supposed to be a fluid, it will still be propelled along the pieces, notwithstanding their obliquity, in the same manner as gravity makes water occupy the lower end of a pipe lying obliquely. If indeed the magnetic fluid could escape from the iron without any obstruction by the propulsion of the magnet, it could produce no attraction, or sensible motion, ny more than light does in a transparent body. What is 2 324 MAGNETISM. demonstrated oſ the electrie ſluid in ELECTRICITY, No. 133. is equally true here Why the fluid does not escape when it ĩs s0 perſectly moveable, is a question of another kind, and vill be considered afterwards; at present, the hypothesis is, that it does not escape. If the kev and wire have the position Plate III. fig. IO. No. I. the ſluid is expelled from the parts in contaet, and is condensed in the remote ends. So ſar from attracting each other, the key and wire must repel. They are temporary magnets, having their similar poles fronting each other. They must repel each other, if presented in a similar manner 1o the south pole oſ the magnet. If they be presented as in No. 2. Plate III. fig. 10. where the actions of both poles oſ the magnet are equal, the state of the fluid in them will not be affected. The redundant pole of the magnet repels the moveable fluid in both the key and the wire tovard the upper ends: but the deficient pole acts equally on it in the opposite direetion. It thereſore remains uniformly distributed through their substance; and thereſore they can exhibit no appearance of magnetism. But iſ the key and wire be presented to the same part of the magnet, but in another position, as shewn in Plate III. fig. 5. No. 3. the fluid of the key will be abstracted from C, and condensed in B, by the joint action of both poles of the magnet. The rsame thing will happen in the wire BD. Here, thereſore, ve have tvo magnets with their dissimilar poles touching. They vill attract each other strongly; and if carried gradually toward the upper or lower end oſ the magnet, they will separate beſore the point B arrives abreast of N or S. For similar reasons, the pieces of iron presented to the middle of the magnet, as in Plate III. fig. 10. uill have one side a weak north pole, and the other side a weak south pole; but this will not be conspicuous, unles: the pieces be broad. This experiment shews, in a very perspicuous manner the competency oſ the hypothesis to the explanation oſ th MAGNETISM. 325 phenomena. When the fluid is not moved, magnetism is not induced, even on the most susceptible substancee When a piece of iron A (Plate III. fig. 10.), nearly as large as the magnet can carry, hangs at either pole, a large piece of iron B, brought near to the pole on the other side, should cause it immediately to fal IF S he the deficient pole, it causes the ſluid in A to ascend to the top, and A is attracted; but, for the same reason, it causes the ſluid in B to accumulate in its lower end. This redundant fluid must evidently counteract the redundant matter in S, in the induction of the magnetic state on AA Being more remote from A than S is, it cannot wholly prevent the accumulation in the upper end oſ A; but it renders it so trifling, that the remaining attraction thence arising cannot support the weight of A. This is a very instructive experiment. But iſ, on the contrary, ve bring a large piece of iron C below the heavy key A, this piece C will have its fluid aecumulated in its upper end, both by the action of A on it, and by the action of the magnet. The attraction oſ the magnet ſor A should therefore be augmented; and a magnet should carry a heavier lump of iron when a great lump is beyond it. And it is clear (we think), for similar rensons, that the magnetism oſ the magnet itself in Plate III. fig. 1l. should be inereased by bringing a great lump of iron near its opposite pole: for the magnet differs from common iron only in the degree of the mobility of its ſluid. When a compass needle ĩs placed opposite to the redundant pole N of a magnet AN (Plate IV. ſig. 14.), it arranges itselſ magnetically. If a piece of common iron be now presented laterally to the near point of the needle, the redundant matter in the adjoining parts of the needle and the iron should make them repel; but if presented to the remote end, the redundant matter in the iron should attract the redundant fluid in that end of the needle, and that end should turn toward the iron. A pareel of slender iron wires, carried by the pole of a magnet, as in Plate IV. fig. 15. should avoid each other. If 326 MAGNETISM. N be the redundant pole, the fluid in each wire will be drive to the remote end, where it must repel the similarly situated fluid of its neighbour. The same external appearance must be exhibited by pieces of wire hanging at the deficient pole of the magnet. The redundant pole oſ a magnet A (Plate IV. fig. I6) being held vertically above the centre of two pieces oſ œnmon iron, moveable round a slender pin, renders the middle of each deficient, and their extremities redundant; therefore they should repel each other, and spread outt. The same effect should be producæd by the under charged pole of A The redundant pole of a magnet A being applied to one branch of the piece of forked iron NCS Phtæ IV. fig. I7), should drive the fluid into ĩts remote parts C, and then the branch NC should be able to induce the magnetic state on a bit of iron D. But if the deficient pole S of another magnet B be applied to the other branch, these two actions should counteract each other at C, and the ron should remain indiſferent, and ſallVYet the magnet B alone would equally cause C to carry the piece of iron. It is surely unnecessary to demonstrate, that the consequence of this hypothesis must be, that when a magnet puts any piece of iron into the magnetic state, ĩts oWn magnetism is improved. For the induced magnetism of the iron is always s disposed as to give the ſiuid in the magnet a greater constipation where already condensed, and to abstract more fluid from the parts already deſicient If magnetism be produced by such a ſluid, a magnet must always improve by lying any how among pieces oſ iron. But the case may be very different when magnets are kept in each other's neighbourhood When the overcharged poles of tvo magnets are placed ſronting each other, the redun dant ſluid in each repels that in the other more than it attracts the remoter redundant ron. The magnets must there fore repel each other. Moreover, in rendering them mag - l MAGNETISM. 37 netical, the repulsion of redundant fluid, or the attraction of redundant matter of some other magnet had been employed; and when the magnet was removed, some of the constimted fluid overcame the obstruction to its uniform diſfusion, and escaped into the deſicient pole; what remains is vithheld by the obstruction, and the restoring forces are just in equilibrio with this obstruction. If we now add to them the repulsion of redundant fluid, directed toward the deficient pole, some more of the constipated fluid must be driven that vay, and the magnet must be veakened. Nay, it may be destroyed, and even reversed, if one of the magnets be very powerſul, and have its ovn magnetism very fixed; that is, iſ its fluid be very redundant, and meet with very great obstruction to its motionn. Hence it also should follow, that the repulsion observed between two magnets should be weakerat the same distance than their attraction, and should ſollow a diſſerent lavw For, in the course of the experiments, the situation of the fluid in the magnets is continually changing, and approaching to a state of uniſorm difſusion. 315. Let us now examine into the sensible eſſeet oſ this fluid on a magnet which cannot move from its place, but can tum on its centre like a compass needlee. This scarcely requires any diseussion. We should only be repeating, with regard to the redundant ſluid and redundant matter, what ve formerly said in regard of north pole and south pole; the little magnet must arrange itself nearly in the tangent oſ a magnetic curve. But ĩt requires a more minute invesligation to determine what the sensible phenomenon should be when the fluid of the little magnet is perfectl7 moveable. Suppose thereſore a particle C Plate IV. fig. 18.) of magnetic fluid, at perfect liberty to move in every direction, and acted on by the redundant and deficient poles of a magnet NAS. The redundant iron in S attracts C in the direction and vith the force CF, while the redundant fluid in N repels it in the direction and with the foree CD. By their joint action it must be urged in the direction and with the force CE, the 325 AGCETISH. diagonal oſ the parallelogram CDEF, which must be aco. rately a tangent to a magnetic curve- I this particle of ſuid belong io the piecæ of ron æ Cs, which lies in that very direction, it will unquestionably be pushed towards the extremity . The same must happen to other particless Henæ it appears that a piecæ of common æon i this situation ad position must become a magnet, and must retain this pstion; only the mechanical energy of the lever may change the equilibrium of the magnetic forces a itile; because when the piece of iron æ C⸗ has any sensible magnitude, the ætion on ĩts dũſferent points will be a ſitile unequal, and may ompose diagonals which divide a ſttle from the tangent. Should the iron needle chance not io have the exact position, but not deviate very ſar from ĩ, it b also clear that the ſluid, not being able to esxcape, wũl press on the side vard which ĩt is impelled; and thus ũl caus the needle to turn on ĩs pivot, and ſinally arrange itslſ in magnetical and mechanical equilibrium, deviating so much the less from a tangent to a magnetic curve as the piece oſ iron is smaller. Any piece of common ĩron, held in the næighbourhood oſ a magnet, will become more overcharged at one end and undercharged at the other, in proportion as the position oſ its length comes nearer io the tangent oſ a magnetic curvee A slender wire held perpendicular io this position, that is, perpendicular to the curve, should not acquire any sensible magnetism, eĩther attractive or directive. 316. We surely need not noW employ many words o shew that a parcel oſ iron filings, strewed round a magnet, should arrange themselves in the primary magnetic curves, or that when streved round tVo magnets they should form the secondary or composite curves 317. Læt us now nquire more particularly into the modifications of this accumulation of magnetic fluid which may resuli from the nature oſ the piece of iron, as iĩt is put into the magnetic state The propelling ſorce oſ A acts against the mutual repulsion of the particles of fluid in B, and also MAGNETISM. 329 against the obstruetion to its motion through the pores of B. The greater this obstruction, the smaller will he the accumulation which suſfices, in conjunction with the obstruetion and the attraction oſ the deserted iron, to balance the propulsive ſorce of the redundant fluid in the overcharged pole of A. This ciroumstance thereſore must limit the accumulation that can be produced in a given time. Therefore the magnetism produced on soſt steel or iron should be greater than that produced in hard steel at the same distance. Hence the great advantage of soſt poles, or of armour, or of capping, to a loadstone, or to a bundle of hard bars. The best form and dimensions of this armour is certainly determinable by mathematical principles, if we knew the lav of magnetical action, and the disposition of the magnetism in our loadstone; but these are too imperſectly known in all cases for us to pretend to give any exact ruless We must decide experimentally by making the caps large at first, and reducing them till we find the loadstone carry less; then make them a small matter larger. The chief things to be attended to are the purity, the uniformity, and the soſtness of the iron, and the closest possible contaet. If the obstruction resemble that to motion through a clammy fluid, the final aceumulation in hard steel may be nearly equal to that in iron, but will require much longer time. Also, because such obstruction to the motion oſ the fluid will nearly balance the propelling force in parts that are far removed from the magnet, the accumulation will begin thereabouts, while the bar beyond is not yet aſfectedd A redundant pole will be formed in that placee This will operate on what is immediately beyond it, driving the fluid farther on, and oceasioning another accumulation at a small distance. This may produce a similar effect in a still smaller degree farther on. Thus the steel bar will have the fluid alternately eondensed and rareſied, and contain alternate north and south poles. This state of distribution will not be permanent; 1he fluid will be gradually changing its place; these poles 330 MAGNETISM. vill gradually advance along the bar, the remoter poles be coming gradually more diſſuse and ſaint: and it will not he till after a very long time that a regular magnetism vith tuo poles will be produced. To state mathematically the procedure of this mechanism would require many pages. Vet it may be done in some simple cases, as Newton has stated the process of aerial undulation. But we cannot enter upon the task in this limited dissertationn What is said in the article ELuCTRICITY (5 217, 2I8.) On the distribution of the eleetric fluid in an imperfect insulator, will assist the reader to form a notion of the state of magnetism during its induetion. That such alternations proceed from such mechanism, we have suſficient prooſ in the instances mentioned in the former part oſ this articlee The wave, or curl, produced on the surface oſ a clammy ſluid, is a phenomenon oſ the same kind, and owing to similar causes. When the magnet which has produced all these changes is removed, it is evident that a part of this accumulation vil be undone againn. The repulsion of the condensed ſluiò, and the attraction of the deserted iron, will bring back some of the fluid. But it is very evident, that a part of the accumulation will remain, by reason of the obstruction to ils motion in returning; and this remainder must be so much the greater as the obstruction to the change oſ situation is greater. In short, we cannot doubt but that the magnetism which remains will be greater in hard than in spring tempered steel. S18. Thus have we traced the hypothesis in a great variety of circumstances and situations, and pointed out what should be the external appearance in each. We did not, in each instance, mention the perſect coincidence of these consequences with what is really observed, but leſt it to the recollection of the reader. The coincidence is indeed s complete, that it seems hardly possible to refuse granting that nature operates in this or some very similar manner. Ve get some confidence in the conjecture, and may even pron MAGNETISM.. 331 ceed to explain complicated phenomena by this hypothetical theory. We might proceed to shew, that the effects oſ all the methods practised by the artists in making artificial magnets are easy consequences of the hypothesis; but this is hardly necessary. We shall just mention some ſacts in those processes which have puzzled the naturalists. I. A strong magnet is known to gommunicate the greatest magnetism to a bar of hard steel; but Muschenbroek frequently found, that a weak magnet would communicate more to a soſt than to a hard bar. Explanatio. When the magnet is strong enough to impregnate both as highly as they are capable oſ, the hard bar must be the strongest; but if it can saturate neither, the spring- tempered bar must be leſt the most magnetieal. 2. A strong magnet has sometimes communicated no higher magnetism than a veaker one; both have been able to saturate the bar. S. A weak magnet has often impaired a strong one by simply passing along it two or three times; but a piece of iron always improves a magnet hy the same treatment. Explanatioo. When the north pole of à weak but hard magnet is set on the north pole of a strong one, it must certainly repel purt of the fluid towards the other end, and thus it must weaken the magnet. When it is carried forward, ĩt cannot repel this back again, because it is not of ĩiselſ supposed capable of making the magnet so strong. But the end of a piece oſ iron, always acquiring a magnetism opposite to that of the part which it touches, must increase the auccumulation of fluid where it is already condensed, and must expel more from those parts which are already deficient. 4. All the parts of the process oſ the double touch, as practised by Messrs. Mitchell and Canton, are easily explainæed by this hypothesiss. A partiele of ſluid ꝓ (Plate IV. ſig. 19.) situated in the middle between the two magnets, is repelled in the direction ꝓ e by the redundant pole oſ the mag- 332 MAGNETISM. net AN, whose centre of effort is supposed to be at C. It is attracted with an equal force in the direction ꝓ d toward the centre of effort of the deficient pole of AS. By thes combined actions it is impelled in the direction ꝓ ſ. Now it is plain that, although by increasing the distance between N and S, the ſorces with which these poles act on ꝓ are diminished, yet the compound force ꝓ f may inerease by the dil minution of the angle d p e. If the action is as 72ſ vil Cos. d be greatest hen iy is a maximum, or (nearly) when Sin2 d p f x Cos. d ꝑ f is a maximum: but this depends on the place of the centre of effort. We can, however, gather ſrom this observation, that the nearer we suppose the centres of efſort of the poles N and S to the extremities of the magnets, the nearer must they be placed to each other But ve must also attend to another circumstance; that hy bringing the poles nearer together, although we produce a greater action on the intervening fluid, this action is exerted on a smaller quantity of it, and therefore a less effect may be produced. This makes a wider position preſerable; but we have too imperſect a knowledge oſ the circumstances to be able to determine this with accuracy. The unfavourable action on the fluid beyond the magnets must also be considered. Yet all this may be ascertained with precision in some very simple instances, and the determination might be oſ service, if we had not a better method, independent of all hypotheses or theory; namely, to place the magnets at the distance where they are observed to lift the heaviest bar of iron; then we are certain that their action is most favourable, all circumstances being combined. We also see a sufficient reason for preſerring the position of the magnets employed by Mr Antheaume (and before him by Mr Servington Savery), in his process ſor making artificial magnets. The form of the parallelogram d pef is then much more favourable, the diagonal ꝑ f being much longer. MAGNETISM. 333 We also see, in general, that, by the method oſ double touch, a much greater accumulation of fluid may be produced than by any other known process. And, lastly, since no appearances indicate any diſference between natural and artiſicial magnetism, this hypothesis is equally applicable to the explanation of the phenomena of natural magnetism; such as the position oſ the horizontal, and of the dipping needle, and the impregnation of natural loadstones. Having such a body of evidence for the aptitude of this hypothesis for the explanation of phenomena, it will surely be agreeable to meet with any circumstances which render the hypothesis itself more probablee These are not wanting; although it must be acknowledged that nothing has yet appeared, besides the phenomena of magnetism, to give us any indication of the existence of such a fluid; but there are many particulars in their appearance which greatly resemble the mechanical properties of a ſluid. 319. Heating a rod of iron, and allowing it to cool in a position perpendicular to the magnetic direction, destroys its magnetism. Iron is expanded by heat. If the particles of the magnetic fluid are retained between those of the iron, notwithstanding the forces which tend to diffuse them uniformly, they may thus escape from between the ferrugineous particles which withheld them. For similar reasons, magnetism should be acquired by heating a bar and letting it cool in the magnetic direction. But, besides this evident mechanical opportunity of motion, the union of fire (or whatever name the neologists may choose to give to the cause of expansion and of heat) with the particles oſ iron may totally change the action of those particles on the particles of fluid in immediate contact with them; nay, it may even change the sensible law of action between magnet and magnet. Of this no one can doubt who understands the application oſ mathematical science to corpuscular attraction (see 334 MAGNETISM. the Treatise on CoRPUSCULAR AcTION in vol. I. Boscovien) A change may be produced in the action between magnets without any remarkable change happening in the actions within the magnet, and it may be just the reverse. The union oſ fire with the magnetic fluid may inerease the mutual repulsion of ĩis parts, as it does in all ærial ſluids or gases. This alone would produce a dissipation oſ some magnetism. It may increase the attraction (at insenible distances) between the fluid and the iron, as it does in numberless cases in chemistry. 320. It is well known that violently knocking or hammering a magnet weakens its force, and that hammering a piece of iron in the magnetic direction ill give it some magnetism. By this treatment the parts of the iron are put into a tremulous motion, alternately approaching and receding ſrom each other. In the instants oſ their recess, the pent-up puticles of the fluid may make their escape. A quantity of small shot may be uniſormly mixed with a quantity of wheai, and vill remain so for ever, if nothing disturb the vessel; but continue to tap it smartly with a stick for a long time, and the grains of small shot will escape from their confinements, and will all go to the bottom. We may conceive the particles of magnetic fluid to be affected in the same way. The same effect is produced by grinding or filing magnets and loadstones. The latter are frequently made useles by grinding them into the proper shapee This sſould be avoided as much as possible, and it should alvays be done in moulds made of soſt iron and very massive; but this will not always prevent the dissipation oſ strong magnetism As a farther reason for assigning this cause for the dissipation in such cases, it must be observed (Muschenbroek takes notice of it), that a magnet or loadstone may be ground at ĩts neutral point without much damage But we had the ſollowing most distinet example of the processs. A very fine artificial magnet was suspended by a thread, with its south pole down. A person was employed to knock it incessantly with a piece of pebble, in such a manner as to make ĩ MAGNETISM. 8386 ring very clearly, being extremely hard and elastie. Its magnetism was examined from time to time with a very small compass needle. In three quarters of an hour, its magnetism was not only destroyed, but the lover end shewed signs oſ a north polee The same magnet was again touched, and made as strong as beſore, and was then wound about very tight with wetted whipcord, leaving a small part bare in the middle. It was again knocked with the pebble, but could no longer ring. At the end oſ three quarters oſ an hour its magnetism vas still vigorous, and vas not near gone aſter two hours and a quarte. We discharged a Leyden jar (coated vith gold leaf) in the same way. It stood on the top of an axis; and while this was turned round, the edge was rubbed with a very dry cork filled with rosin, and ſastened to the end of a glass rod. This made the jar sound like the glass of a harmonica. One of them was split in this operation. A small bar of steel was heated red hot and tempered hard between two strong magnets lying in shallow boxes filled with water, and was more strongly impregnated in this way than in any other that we could think of for a bar oſ that shape. It has not yet been ascerlained in what temperature it is most susceptible of magnetism, but it was considerably hotter than to be just visible in a dark place. It is no objection to our way of conceiving magnetism, that the fluid is immoveable or inactive when the iron is red hott. Either of these, or both of them, may result from the union with the cause of heatt. Even a particular degree of expansion may so change the law oſ action as to make it immoveable; or the union with caloric may render it inactive at all sensible distances. We cannot but think, that some very instruetive ſacts might be obtained by experiments made on iron in the moment of its production, and changes in various chemical processes. All magnetism is gone when it is united with sulphur and arsenic in the greatest number 336 NAGCSETISN. of ores; and when it is in the state of an ochre, ruæ thiops, or slution in acids; and vhen united vith æ tringent substances, such as galls When, and in vha state, does it become magnetic? And whence comesthe ſluid of æpinus? It were worth while to try, vhether mgnes have any influence in the ſormation or erystalſmtion of the martial salts; and what will be theĩr eſſect on iro vhen precipitated ſrom ĩts solutions by another metal, &æ ke. 321. There remains one remarkahile fact o be taken notice of, vhich, n one pomt of vev, is a conſirmation of the is, but in another presents considerabie diſficulties. It is well known that no magnet has ever beæen æen vhich has but one pole; that is, on the hypothesis of Epinus, which is wholly redundant, or vholly dæſicieat If all magnetism be either the immediate or the remote effect of the great magnet contained in the earth, and ĩ ĩt be produced by induction, without any communication of substance, but only by changing the disposition of the ſiluĩd already in the iron, ve never should sææ a magnet ĩth only one pole. It must be oWned, that we never can make such a magnet by any of the processes hitherio deseribed; but the existence of such does not seem imposĩble. Supposing a magnet, of the most regular magnetism, having only two poles; and that we cut ĩt through at the neutral point, or that we cut or break off any part oſ itthe ſact is (ſor the experimen has been tried ever since men began to speculate about maꝶnetism), that each part becomes an ordinary magnet, vith two poles, one of which is of the same kind as beſore the æparation. The question now is, What should happen æcording to the theory maintamed by æpinus ? Tentan Theor. Elect. et Magnetismi, p- 104, &e. Let NAS (Plate IV. ſig. 20.) be a magnet, of which N& the overcharged pole. Let the ordinates of the curve DAT express the diſference between the natural density of ſfluid, in a state oſ uniſorm difusion, and ĩts density aæ: MAGNETISM. 837 really disposed in the magnet *. The area p n ND vill there express the quantity of redundant fluid in the part æn N, and the area  ES m expresses the fluid vanting in the part S m. The intersection A marks that part oſ the magnet where the fluid is of its natural density. Suppose the part N n to be separated from the rest, containing the redundant fluid ND p n. The tendency of this fluid to escape from the iron with which it is connected will be greater (Mr. Epinus thinks) than before; because its tendency to quit the magnet formerly was repressed by the attractions of the redundant matter contained in AS. This is certainly true of the extremity N; nay, perhaps of all the old external surface. Fluid will therefore escape. Suppose that so much has quitted the iron that the point n has the fluid of its natural density, as is represented in No. S. there is still a force operating at n, tending to escape, arising from the repulsion oſ all the redundant fluid n DN. If this be suſſicient for overcoming the obstruetion, it will really escape, and the iron will be left in the state represented by No. 4. with an overcharged part f N, and an undercharged part fn. In like manner, the tendency of the magnetic fluid surrounding the magnet to enter into its deficient pole, will be greater when it is separated ſrom the other, not being checked by the repulsion of the redundant ſluid in that other.  Coulomb found that the magnetic action diminished from the north or south pole of a magnet towards the neutral point according to the ſollowing lav. Distance from the North or soulh Pole in Inches. Intensity of aelion. 0 - - - - 165+ l - n 90 :i 2 - - - - 48 a - - - 23 4.5 - - - - 9 6 - - - 6 The magnet with which these results were obtained, was cylindrical, and was 7 inches long, and two lines in diameter. See Biovs Traitt de Physique, vol ĩ p. 138, 4, 79EDb. VOL. IV. Y 335 MAGNETISM. Mr. Epinus relates some experiments which he made on this subject. The general result of them was, that the moment the parts were separated, each had two poles, and that the neutral point of each magnet was much nearer to the place of their former union than to the other endss In a quarter of an hour aſterwards, the neutral points had advanced nearer to their middle, and continued to do so, by very small steps, for some hours, and sometimes days, and finally were stationary in their middles 322 We acknov ledge, that this reasoning does not aliogether satisfy us, and that the gradual progress of the neutral point toward the middle of each piece, although agreeable to what should result from an escape oſ fluid, is not a prooſ of it We know already, that the induetion oſ magnetism is a progressive thing; and ve should have expected this change of the situation of the neutral point, whatever be the nature oſ magnetism. There is something similar to this, and perhaps equally puzzling, in the immediate recovery oſf magnetism which has been weakened by heat; it is partly recovered on cooling But our chieſ diſiculty is this: At the point A (Plate IV. fig. 20.) every thing is in equilibrium before the fracture The particle A is repelled by the redundant fluid in AN, and atiracted by the redundant matter in AS; yet ĩt does not move, for the magnetism is supposed to have permanency. Therefore the obstruction at A cannot be overcome by the united repulsion of AN and attraction of AS. Nor ean the obstruction at N be overcome by the diſference oſ these two forces Now suppose AS annihilatedl. The change made on the state oſ things at A is surely greater than that at N, because the force abstracted is greater, the distance being less It does not clearly appear, thereſore, that the removal oſ AS should occasion an eſflux at N. This, however, is not impossible; because the flũid may be s0 disposed, by great constipation near N, and no great excess of density near A, that a smaller change at N may pro- MAGNETISM. 339 duce an efflux there But surely the tendency to escape at A must now be diminished, instead of being greater aſter the ſracturee And iĩf any escape from N, this will still more diminish that tendency to escape from A. It does not thereſore appear a elear consequence of the general theory, that the constipated fluid should eseape; and more particularly, that A should become deficient. And with respect to the entry of fluid into the other fragment, and its becoming overcharged at m, the reasoning seems still less convincing. The steps of the physical process in the two parts of the original magnet are by no means convertible or counterparts of each other. There is nothing in the part AS to resemble the force of repulsion really exerting itselſ in the corresponding point of AN. There would be, if there were a particle of ſluid in that place; but there is not. The tendeney therefore of external fluid to enter there, does not resemble the tendency of the internal fluid to expand and dissipate. It is true, indeed, the discourse should be confined to points oſ the surſace But the internal motion must al50 be considered; and the great objection always remains, namely, that the obstruetion at A No. 1.) or at n (No. 3) is suſficient to prevent the passage oſ a particle oſ fluid from the pole AN into the pole AS, when urged by the repulsion of the fluid in the one, and the attraction of the iron in the other; and yet vill not prevent the escape oſ a particle when one oſ those causes of motion is removed. Add to this, that the whole hypothesis assumes as a principle, that the resistance to escape ſrom any point is greater than the obstruction to motion through the poress This is readily granted; for however great we suppose the attraction, in the limits of physical contaet, it will be no obstruetion to motion through the pores, because the particle is equally aſfected by the opposite sides of the pores; whereas, in quitting the body altogether, there is nothing beyond the body to counteract the attraction by whioh it is retained. 2 MAGNETISM. 341 as one bar, making the magnetism perfectly regular; he then separated them, and found that each had two poless But was he certain that, when joined, they made but one magnet? We have sometimes succeeded in doing this, as ve thought, by the curves of iron ſilings; but on putting the needle with which we were examining their polarity into proper situations, ve sometimes found it in the second intersection oſ the secondary curves, shewing that the bars were really tvo magnets, and not one. On the other hand, when a piece is broken off ſrom a a magnet, the succussion and elastic tremor into which the parts are thrown, and even the bending previous to the fracture, may give opportunity to a dissipation, which could not otherwise happenn. The parts should be separated by corrosion in an acid, and the gradual change of magnetism should be careſully noted. The writer of this article has made some experiments of this nature, the results oſ which present some curious observations: but they are not vet brought to a conclusion that is ſit to be laid before the public*, The very remarkable fact, that every fragment oſ a magnet, whether it is taken from its north or its south extremity, is itself a magnet, with two distinet and opposite poles, appears incapablè of being explained by the theory oſ Epinus. The hypothesis of Coulomb however accounts for it in a very simple manner. This eminent philosopher considers every patticle oſ iron as a small magnet, possessing a north and a south pole of equal intensity, and hence a maguet is an assemblage oſ such inſinitely small magnets, having their axes parallel to the axis of the great magnet which they compose, in the same mauner as a tourmaline is composed of a number of elementary crystals disposed symmetrically, and exhibiting the two opposite electricities When therefore a fragment is broken ſrom the north pole of a magnet, the extremity oſ the ſragment nearest the neutral point, becomes a south pole, because the southern polarity oſ the particles at this extremity is no longer counteracted by the northern polarity of the other particles with which they were formerly in contact. In the Philosophical Trunsactions for 1816, we have given a ſull account oſ a series oſ very remarkable phenomena in crystallized glass, which are precisely the same as those which take place in magnets. A rectangular plate of glass, whether it is transiently or permanently crystallized, exhibits in its action upon 342 MAGNETISM. 323. Mr. Prevòst oſ Geneva, in a dissertation on the origin oſ magnetic ſorces, endeavours to give a theory which obviates the only difficulty in that of æpinus; but it is incomparably more complex, employing two fluids, which by their union compose a third, which he calls combined fluid. There is much ingenuity, and even mathematical address, in adjusting the relative properties oſ those fluidss But some oſ them are palpably incompatible; ex. gr. the particles oſ each attract each other, but those oſf the other kind most strongly; yet they are both elastic like air. This is surely inconceivableGranting this, however, he suits his difſerent attractions, so that a strong elective attraction of the combined fluid ſor iron decomposes part oſ the fluid in the iron, and each oſ its ingredients occupies opposite ends of the bar: then vill the bars approach or recede, according as the near ends contain a difſerent or the same ingredient. All this is operated without repulsion. But the whole of this is mere accommodation, like  pinus's, but 5s0 much more complex, that it requires very intense contemplation to follow the author through the consequences. Add to this, that his attractions are operated by another fluid, inſinitely more subtle than either of those already mentioned, every particle of these being, as it were, a vorld, in comparison oſ those of the other. In short, he adopts all the extravagant suppositions of Le Sage oſ Geneva, and every thing is ultimately impulsion. Nor is the contrivance for obviating the diſficulty (so oſten mentioned) at all clear and convincing; and it is equally gratuitous with light, a north pole at each edge, and a south pole in the middle; a neutral point lying belween the south pole and each north one. Iſ a rectangular slip is cut vith o diamond from this plate, so that the whole slip beſore its separation may possess only northern polarity, yet no sooner is it separated than it exhibits the Bame properties as the original plate, having a north pole at each edge, and a south pole in the middle. For ſarther information on the subject of this note, see Hauy's Natural Philosophy, vol. ii. p. 90. Phil. Trans. 1816, pp. 82, 98, 9 æ, à6, ſ, and the Epivvacn Excrcrormnia, Art. HeAT, vol. x. ꝑ. 677.ED. MAGNETISM. 343 the rest. We camnot think this hypothesis at all intitled to the name of explunalion 324. This must serve for an account of the hypothesis of æpinus. The philosophical reader will see, that however exactly it may tally with every phenomenon, it cannot be called an explanation of the phenomena; because it is the phenomena which explain the hypothesis, or give us the characters oſ the magnetic ſluid, if such fluid existss But we are not obliged to admit this existence, as ve admit that to be the true decyphering of a letter which makes sense of itt. In that case we know both parts of the subjectithe characters and the sounds; but are ignorant which corresponds to which. Did we see a fluid abstracted ſrom one part of a bar and constipated in another, and perceive the abstraction and constipation always accompanied by the observed attractions and repulsions, the rules of philosophieal discussion, nay, the constitution of our own mind, would oblige us to assign the one as the cause or occasion oſ the other. But this important circumstance is vanting in the present casee. We think, however, that it merits a close attention; and ve entertain great hopes of its being one day completed, by including this single exception. At the same time, it must be owned, that it gives no extension of knowledge; for it can have no greater extension than the phenomena on which it is founded, and cannot, without risk of error, be applied to an untried case, of a kind dissimilar in ĩts nature to the phenomena on which iĩt is foundedlc. We doubt not but that its ingenious author would have said, that a bit broken off ſrom the north pole of a magnet would be wholly a north pole; if he had not known that the fact was otherwise. But this hypothesis greatly aids the imagination in conceiving the process oſf the magnetical phenomena. The more ve study them, the more do they appear to resemble the protrusion of a fluid through the parts of an obstructing body. It proceeds gradually. It may be, as it were, over- 34 MAGNETISM. done, and regorges when the propelling cause is remo ed. The motion is aided by what we know to aid other obstructed motions As a fluid would be constipated in all protuberances, so the faculty of producing the phenomem is greater in all such situations, &e. &c This, joined to the impossibility oſ speaking, with clearness oſ conception, of the propagation of powers without the protrusion of something in which they inhere, gives it a hold of the imagination which is not easily shaken off. To say that nothing is explained when the attraction of the fluid is not explained, and that this is the main question, gives us little concernn We oſfer no explanation of this attraction, more than of the attraction of gravit. There is nothing contrary to the laws oſ human intellect, nothing inconsistent with the rules of reasoning, in saying, that things are so constituted, that when two particles are together, they separate, although we are ignorant oſ the immediate cause oſ their separationn. Those who think that all motion is performed by impulsion, and who explain magnetism by a stream of fluid cireulating round the magnet, must have another fluid to impel this fluid into iĩts curvilineal path; for they insist, that the planets are so impelled. Then they must have a third fluid to deſlect the vertical motions of the second, and so on without end. This is evident, and it is absurd. 325. We conelude with desiring the reader to remark, that the explanation which we have given of the magnetical phenomena is imdependent of the hypothesis oſf E pinus, or any hypothesis hatever. We have narrated a variety oſ very distinguishable ſacts, and have marked their distintionss. We have been able to reduce them to general classes; and even to groupe those classes into others still more general; and at last, to point out one which ĩs discoverable in them al. This is giving a philosophical theory, in the strictest sense oſ the word; because we shew, in every case, the modification oſ the general ſact which allots it this or that particular place in that classification. Thus we have MAGNETISM. 345 shewn that the polarity or directive power of magnets is only a modiſication oſ the general fact of attraction and repulsionn. Dr. Gilberts theory oſ terrestrial magnetism is indeed a hypothesis, and we enounced it as such. It only claims probability, and ve apprehend that a very high degree oſ credit will be given to it. We hope that many of our readers will have their curiosity excited by the account we have given of æpinus's theory To such we earnestly recommend the serious perusal of his hook Tentamen Theoriæ Electricitatis et Magnetismi, Auet. P. æpino, Petropoli, 1759. Van Swinden has included a very good abstract of it in his 2d volume Sur IElectricitè, written by Proſessor Steiglehner of Ratishon or Ingoldstadt. The mathematical part is greatly simplified, and the whole is presented in a very clear and accurate manner. Mr. Van Swinden is a professed foe to all hypotheses; but he is not moderate, and we vish that we could say that he is candid. He attacks every thing; and takes the opportunity of every analogy pointed out by /ipinus between magnetism and electricity to repeat the first sentence oſ his dissertation, namely, that magnetism and eleetricity are not the same; a thing that pinus also maintains. But he even charges pinus with a mistake in his fundamental equations, vhich invalidates his whole theory. IIe says that pinus has omitted one of the acting forces assumed in his hypothesis This is a most groundless churge; and we own that we eannot conceive how Van Swinden could fall into such a mistake. The Abbe Hauy of the French Academy has also published an abridgment of pinus's theory, with many excellent remarks, tending to clear the theory of the only defect that has been found in it. This work was much approved of, and recommended by the Academy. We have not had the good fortune to see a copy of it*.  This excellent work, which we would recommend to those who are not much rersæd in mathematical knowledge, is entitled Exposition raisonnge de la Theorie iæ ſ Electriciti et du Magnetisme, d apres les principes de M. æpinus, Paris, 187. En. 346 MAGNETISM. 326. The reader cannot but have remarked the cloæ analogy between the magnetical phenomena and those of induced electricity; indeed, all the phenomena oſ attraction and repulsion are the same in both. The mechanical conposition of those actions produces a directive power and a polarity, in electrical as vell as in magnetical hodies We can make an electrical needle which vill arrange itselſ, vith respect to the overcharged and undercharged ends of a body electrified by mere position, just as a compass needle is arranged by a magnet. We can touch a stick of stealing vaxin the manner of the double touch, so as to give it poles oſ considerable ſorce and durability. As a red hot steel bar acquires permanent poles by quenching it near a magnet, 50 melted wax acequires them by freezing in the neighbourhood of a positive and negative electric. Some have inferred a sameness of origin of these two species of powers from thos various circumstances of resemblance; but the original causes seem to be distinet on many accounts. Electricity is common to all bodiess The cause of magnetism can operate only on iron. Although lightning or an electrical shock ⸗ gives polarity to a needle, we need not infer the identity of⸗ the cause, because the polarity which it gives is always the æ same vith that given by great heat; and there is alvays intense heat in this operation The phenomenon which looksũ tricity and magnetism is the direction of the rays of the au rora borealisthey converge to the same point of the h vens to which the elevated pole of the dipping needle di itself. But this is by no means a suſficient ſoundation establishing a sameness. Electricity and magnetism however, be related by means of some powers hitherto Eknown. But ve are decidedly of opinion, that the el and magnetic fluid are totally diſferent, although their chanical actions are so like that there is hardly a ph non in the one which has not an exact counterpart in other. But we see them both operating, with all MAGNETISM. 3471 nmarks of distinetion, in the same body; ſor iron and loadstones may be electrified, like any other body, and their magnetism sufſers no change or modiſication. We can set these two ſorces in opposition or composition, just as we can oppose or compound gravity with either. While the iron filings are arranging themselves round a magnet, the mechanivl action oſ electricity may be employed either to promote o hinder the arrangement. They are thereſore distinet pvers, inherent in different subjects 327. But there are abundance oſ other phenomena which 2ew this diversity. Theræ is nothing in magnetism like a body overcharged or undercharged in totoo. There is noſing which indicates the presence of the fluid to the other unsesnothing like the spark, the snap, the visible dissipaion; because the magnetic fluid enters into no union with ir, or any thing but iron. There is nothing resembling ihat inconceivably rapid motion which we see in electriũty; the quickest motion of magnetism seems inferior (even heyond comparison) to the slowest motion along any elecr conductor. Therefore there is no possibility of discurging a magnet as we discharge a coated plate. Indeed, he resemblance between a magnet and a coated plate of zlass is exceedingly slightt. The only resemblance is beeen the magnet and an inconceivably thin stratum of the gass, vhich stratum is positive in one side and negative in ie other. The only perſect resemblance is between the inmagnetism of common iron, and the induced electriity oſ a conductor. The following seem the most instruetive dissertations on tism, either as valuable collections of observations, or judicious reasonings from them, or as the speculations of nent or ingenious men concerning the nature of magnetibertus de Magnete, Lond. 1600, fol. pini Tentamen Theoriæ Magn. et Electr. berhard’s Tentam. Theor. Magnetismi 172. 345 MAGNETISM. Dissertations sur I'aimant, par du Fay, 1728. Muschenbroek Dissert. Physico Experimentalis de Mag. nete. Pieces qui ont emportẽ le prix de IAcad. des Sciences à Paris sur la meilleure construction des Boussoles de declimtionn. Recueil des pieces couronnẽes, tom. v. Euleri opuscula, tom. iii. continens Theoriam Magnetis, Berlin, 1751. Zpini Oratio Academica, 1758. Zpini item Comment. Petrop. nov. tom. x. Auton. Brugmanni tentam. Phil. de materia Magnetics, Francqueræ, 1765. There is a German translation of this work by Eisenbach, vith many very valuable additions. Scarella de Magnete, 2 tom. fol. Van Swinden Tentamina Magnetica, 4to. Van Swinden sur IAnalogie entre les phenomenes Electriques et Magnetiques, 3 tom. Svo. Dissertation sur les Aimans artificielles par Antheaume Experiences sur les Aimans artiſicielles par Nicholas, Fuss, 1759. Essai sur I'Origine des Forces Magnetiques par Mr. Prevost. Sur les Aimans artificielles par Rivoir, Paris, 1752. Dissertatio de magnetismo par Sam. Klingenstier et Jo Brander, Holm. 1752. Description des Courants Magnetiques, Strasbourg, 175 Traitẽ de I Aiman par Dalancẽ, Amst 1657. DBesides these original works, ve have several dissertations on magnetical vortices by Des Cartes, Bernoulli, Euler, Du Tour, &e. published in the collections of the works oſ those authors, and many dissertations in the memoin oſ difſerent academies; and there are many popular treatises by the traders in experimental philosophy in London and Paris Dr. Gowin Knight, the person in Europe who was most eminently skilled in the knowledge of the phenomena, als MAGNETISM. 349 published a dissertation intitled, 4n altempt to explain ihe Phenomena of Nature by tuo principles, Attraction and Repulsion, Lond. 1748, 4to, in hich he has included a theory of magnetism. It is a very curious work, and should be studied by all those who have recourse without seruple to the agency of invisible fluids, vhen they are tired of patient thinking. They would there see what thought and combination are necessary before an invisible fluid can be really fitted ſor performing any office we choose to assign it. And they vill get real instruction as to what services ve may expect of such agents, and from what tasks they must be excluded. The Doctor's theory of magnetism is very unlike the rest of the performance; for he does not avail himselſ of the vast apparãtus of propositions which he had established, and adopts without any nice adjustment the most common notions of an impulsive vortex. Both the produetion and maintenance oſ this vortex, and its mode of operation, are irreconcileable with the acknowledged laws of impulsion*. . ſron, steel, nickel, and cobalt, have generally been regarded as the only metals which are magnetic. M. Coulomb, however, in the month of May, 1802, announced to the National Institute oſ France, that when small needles about 7 or 8 millimetres long, and about halfa millimetre thick, and made oſ any substaunce whatever, were suspended between the two opposite poles oſ to strong magnets, they always arranged themselves in the line joining the poles. The needles which were tried, were made oſ gold, silver, lead, copper, tin, glass, wood, chalk, bone, and other organic and iuorganic substances. The only way of explainiug this remarkable fact, is to suppose either that all substances in nature are magnetic, or that they owe this property to the presence oſ a quantity of iron or other magnetic metal, too small to be ascertained by chemical tests Some oſ these experiments were repeated by Dr. Thomas Young at the Royal Institution. The memoir of Coulomb, which contains an account of ſhese discoveries, has never been published; but M. Biot, who had access to it, has given a full accouut oſ the leading results in his Truitẽ de Physique, tom. iii. chap. ix. p. 117. The English reader ill ſind the subject fully treated in the article MacnꝶTisu in the Eninaunca Excvetoræsia.En. APPENDIX. INVESTIGATION OF THE MAGNETIC CURVES. I nAvE been ſavoured with the following investigation of the curves, to which a needle of indeſinite minutenes: vill be a tangent, by Mr. Playſair, Professor of Mathematios in the University of Edinburgh. Two magnetical poles being given in position, the force of each of which is supposed to be as the mth power oſ the distance from it reciprocally, it is required to find a curv in any point of which a needle (indefinitely short) being placed, its direction, when at rest, may be a tangent to the curve ? I. Let A and B (Plate IV. fig. 21.) be the poles oſ a magnet, C any point in the curve required; then ve may suppose the one of these poles to act on the needle only by repulsion, and the other only by attraction, and the direction of the needle, when at rest, will be the diagonal of a parilelogram, the sides of which represent these forces. Therefore, having joined AC and BC, let AD be drawn parillel l to BC, and make /4 -/ BCR: AC: AD; join CD, then CDY vill touch the curve in C. 2. Hence an expression for AF may be obtained. For, ACmtl by the construetion, AD BCA and since BC: AD: BF: FA, and BC  AD: AD:: AB: AF, ve have AF AB xX ACmtl = BC —ACn?? MAGNETISM. 3/3 A construction somewhat more expeditious may be had by describing the semicircle AFB, cutting AE in F, and AE in N, and describing a cirele round A, with the distance AL=2 AF, cutting AE' in b. I BG be applied in the semicircle AFB =N, BG must cut AN in a point E of the curve, because AN + BG æ 2 AF, and AN and GB are cosines of the angles at A and B. As the lines AN and BG may be applied either above or below AB, there is another situation of their intersection E'. Thus A n being applied above, and B g below, the intersection is in ?. The curve has a branch extending below A: and if D e be made = DE, and B e be dran, it will be an assymptote to this branch There is a similar branch below B. But these portions of the curve evidently suppose an opposite direction of one of the two magnetic ſorces, and therefore have no connection with the position of the needle. VOL IV. z VARIATION OF THE COMPASS*. Tur coriation of the Compass, is the deviation oſ the magnetic or mariner's needle from the meridian or true north and south line. On the continent it is called the declination of the magnetic needle; and this is a better term for reasons which vill aſterwards appear. Our readers know, that the needle of a mariner's compass is a small magnet, exactly poised on its middle, and turning ſreely in a horizontal direction on a sharp point, so that it always arranges itself in the plane of the magnetic action. About the time that the polarity of the magnet was first observed in Europe, whether originally, or as imported ſrom China, the magnetic direction, both in Europe and in China, was nearly in the plane of the meridian. It was thereſore an inestimable present to the mariner, giving him a sure diretion in his conrse through the pathless ocean. But by the time that the European navigators had engaged in their adventurous voyages to far distant shores, the deviation of the ® It is necessary to remind the reader, that the following article on the VaRIATION OF THE ComPass, was published a considerable time beſore the urticle on MacuETISM.ED. VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. 3855 compass needle from the meridian was very sensible even in Europe; and it is somewhat surprising that the Duteh and Portuguese navigators did not observe it on their own coasts. The son of Columbus positively says, that it was observed by his father in his ſirst voyage to Ameriea, and made his companions so anxious lest they should not ſind the way back again to their own country, that they mutinied and reſused to proceed. It ĩs surprising that any should doubt of its being known to this celebrated navigator, because he even endeavours to account for it by supposing the needle to he alvays directed to a ſixed point of the heavens, diſſerent ſrom the pole of the world, which he calls the point attractive. It is at any rate certain that Gonzales Oviedo and Sebastian Cahot observed it in their voyages. Indeed it could not possibly escape them; ſor in some parts of their several tracks the needle deviated above 25 degrees from the meridian; and the rudest dead reckoning, made on the supposition of the needle pointing due north and south, must have thrown the navigators into the utmost confusion. It would indeed be very diſſicult for them, unprepared for this source of error, to make any tolerable guess at ĩts quantity, till they got to some place on shore, where they could draw a meridian linee. But we know that spherical trigonometry was at that time abundantly ſfamiliar to the mathematicians of Europe, and that no person pretended to take the command of a ship hound to a distant port that was not much more informed in this science than most masters of ships are now- a. days. It could not be long, thereſore, before the methods were given them ſor discovering the variation of the compass by observation of AMPLITUBES and AZIMUTHS, as is practised at present. But the deviation of the compass from the meridian was not generally allowed by mathematicians, vho had not yet hecome sensible of the necessity of quitting the Aristotelian trammels, and investigating nature by experiments. They rather chose to charge the navigators with inaccuracy in heir observations than the schoolmen with error in princi2 VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. 35m Gunter, and himself, and found that the north end of the mariners needle was gradually drawing more to the westward. For Norman and Burroughs had observed it to point about 11 degrees to the east of the north in 1580; Gunter found its deviation only 6 in 1629, and he himselſ had observed only 40 in 1634; and it has been found to deviate more and more to the westward ever since, as may be seen ſrom the following little table in Waddington's Navigation. Variation at London. 1576 Norman 11°15 East 1550 Burroughs 1m 1622 Gunter 6 12 1684 Gillebrand 4 5 1662 O O 1666 Sellers O 34 West 1670 2 06 1672 2 30 1700 9 40 1720 13 1740 16 10 1760 19 80 1774 ?2? 20 1778 Phil. Trans.  ll 1804 June, Phil. Trans. 24 8.4 1806 June, Phil. Trans. 24 8.6 1807 Sept. Phil. Transs. 24 10.2 15808 Phil. Trans. 4 I0 1811 Sept. Phil. Trans. 24 122 1812 October, Phil. Trans. 24 16 30 1813 June, Col. Beauſoy 24 22 I7 1814 June, Ditto 2à 22 48 1815 June, Ditto ?x 27I18 1815 June, Phil. Trans. 4 18  The measures of the variation ater 1778, have been added prioeipally om the Philooghical TransactionEn5. VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. 859 tion. These lines have since been called Holleyan lines, or curves. This chart was received with universal applause, and was undoubtedly one oſ the most valuable presents that science has made to the arts. But though recommended with all the earnestness which its importance merited, it was oſfered with the candour and the caution that characterises a real philosopher ardently zealous for the propagation of true knowledge. Its illustrious author reminds the publio of the inaccuracy oſ observations collected from every quarter, many of them made by persons not sufficiently instructed, nor provided with proper instruments; many also without dates, and most of them diſfering in their dates, so that some reduction was necessary for all, in order to bring them to a common epoch; and this must be made without having an unquestionable principle on which to proceed. He said, that he plainly saw that the change of variation was very different in different places, and in the same place at diſferent times; and confesses that he had not discovered any general principle by which these changes could be connected. Halleys Variation Chart, however, was of immense use; but it became gradually less valuable, and in 1745 was exceedingly erroneouss. This made Messrs. Mountain and Dodson, fellows of the Royal Society, apply to the Admiralty and to the great trading companies for permission to inspect their records, and to extract from them the observations of the variations made by their oſficerss They got all the assistance they could demand; and, after having compared above 50,000 observations, they composed new variation charts, ſitted for 1745 and 1756. The polarity of the magnetie needle, and a general though intricate connection between its positions in all parts of the world, naturally causes the philosopher to speculate about its cause. We see that Cortez ascribed it to the attraction oſ an eccentric point, and that Bond thought that this point was placed not in the heavens, but in the earth. This notion made the basis oſ the famous Theory of Magnetism oſ VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. 361 it will remain there, and vill exhibit the same phenomena. We may here add, that if ns be almost inſinitely small in comparison of NS, the line n s vill be in such a position that ifsa, s b, be drawn parallel o N, 8 c, we shall have s a to 1h as the force of the pole N to the force of the pole S. And this is the true eause of that curious disposition of iron filings vhen strewed round a magnett. Each fragment becomes a momentary magnet, and arranges itselſ in the true magnetic direction; and when so arranged, attracts the two adjoining fragments, and co-operates with the ſorces which also arrange them. Now, to apply this theory to the point in hand.Let ns (Plate IV. fig. 4.) be a small compass needle, oſ which n is the north and s the south pole: let this needle be poised horizontally on the pin c d; and let n & be the position of the dipping needlee. Take any long bar oſ common iron, and hold it upright, or nearly so, as represented by AB. The lower end B vill repel the pole n and will attract the pole s, thus exhibiting the properties of a north pole of the bar AB. Keeping B in its place, turn the bar round B as a centre, till it come into the position AB nearly parallel to 5. You vill observe the compass needle ns attract the end B vith either pole n or s, vhen BA' iĩs in the position B æ perpendicular to the direetion n's' of the dipping needle: and when the har has come into the position B'A⸗, the upper end B' will shew itself to be a south pole by attracting n and repelling s. This beautiful experiment was exhibited to the royal society in 1673 by Mr. Hindshaw. From this it appears, that the great magnet in the earth induces a momentary magnetism on soſt iron precisely as a common magnet would doo. Therefore (says Dr. Gilbert) it induces permanent magnetism on magnetisable ores oſ iron, such as loadstones, in the same manner as a great loadstone would do; and it affects the magnetism already imparted to a piece of tempered steel precisely as any other great magnet would. VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. 363 an elegant and a most expert mathematician, and it would have cost him little trouble to ascertain the places oſ two poles only, and the direction which these would have given to the needlee But to say what would be its position when acted on by four poles, it was necessary to know the lav by vhich the magnetic action varied by a variation of distance; and even vhen this is known, the computation would have been exceedingly difficult. In order to account for the change oſ variation, Dr. Halley supposes this internal magnet not to adhere to the external shell which we inhabit, but to form a nueleus or kernel detached ſrom it on all sides, and to be so poised as to revolve freely round an axis, of which he hoped to discover the position by observation of the compass. The philosopher will find nothing in this ingenious hypothesis inconsistent with our knowledge of nature. Dr. Halley imagined that the nucleus revolved ſfrom east to west round the same axis vith the earth. Thus the poles of the magnet would change their positions relatively to the earths surface, and this would change the direction of the compass needle. The great Euler, whose delight it was always to engage in the most difficult mathematical researches and computations, undertook to ascertain the position of the needle in every part of the earth. His dissertation on this subject is to be seen in the 18th volume of the Memoirs of the royal Academy of Berlin, and is exceedingly beautiful, abounding in those analytical tours daddresse in which he surpassed all the world. He has reduced the computation to a wonderſul simplicity. He found, however, that ſour poles would engage him in an analysis which would be excessively intricate, and has contented himself with computing for two only; observing that this supposition agrees so well with observation, that it is highly probahle that this is the real constitution of the terrestrial magnet, and that the coincidence would have been perſect if he had hit on the due positions of the two pole⸗ VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. 365 rection of the needle. In all those places where these magnetical curves touch the meridians, there is no variation; and the variation in every other place is the angle contained between these magnetical meridians and the true ones. The program of a work of this kind has been published by a Mr. Churchman, who appears to have engaged in the investigation with great zeal and considerable opportunities. He had been employed in some operations connected vith surveys of the back settlements in North America. It is pretty certain that the north magnetic pole (or point, as Mr. Churchman chooses to call it) is not far removed from the stations given it by Halley and Euler; and there seems no doubt but that in the countries between Fludsons Bay and the western coasts of North America the needle will have every position with respect to the terrestrial meridian, so that the north end of a compass needle vill even point due south in several placess. Mr. Churehman has solicited assistance from all quarters, to enable him to traverse the whole of that inhospitable country with the compass in his hand. It vas greatly to be wished that our gracious sovereign, who has always shewn such a love for the promotion of nautieal science, and who has so0 munificently contributed to it, already enriching the world with the most valuable discoveries, and thus laying posterity under unspeakable obligations; it vere greatly to be wished that he would put this almost ſinishing stroke to the noble work, and enable Mr. Churchman, or some fitter person, if such can be found, to prosecute this most interesting inquiry.. Almost every thing that can be desired would be obtained by a few well-chosen observations made in those regions. It would be of immense advantage to have the dips ascertained with great precision. These would enable us to judge at what depth under the surface the pole is situated; for the well informed mechanician, vho vill study seriously what we have said about the magnetical curves, will see that a compass needle, when compared vith the great terrestrial magnet, is but as a partiele VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. 369 axis of this nucleus is not its axis of revolution. It may not even bisect that axis; and this circumstance vill cause the two poles to have diſferent degrees of motion in relation to the shell which surrounds it. But this regular progress of the magnet within the earth may produce very irregular motions of the compass needle, by the intervention of a third body susceptible of magnetism. The theory of which we have just given a hint comes here to our assistance. Suppose NS (Plate IV. fig. 25.) to represent the primitive magnet in the earth, and ns to be a stratum of iron-ore susceptible of magnetism. Also let n be another small mass of a similar ore; and let their situations and magnitudes be such as is exhibited in the figure. The fact will be, that n will be the north pole and s the south pole of the great stratum, and n and s vill be the north and south poles of the small mass or loadstone Any person may remove all doubts as to this, by making the experiment with a magnet NS, a piece of iron or soſt tempered steel n s, and another piece n s. The well inſormed and attentive reader will easily see, that by such interventions every conceivable anomaly may be producedd While the great magnet makes a revolution in any direction, the needle will change its position gradually, and with a certain regularity; but it will depend entirely on the size, shape, and situation, oſ these intervening masses oſ magnetisable ironore, whether the change of variation of the compass shall be such as the primitive magnet alone would have produced, or whether it shall be oſ a kind wholly difſerent. No, that such intervening disturbances may exist, is past contradiction. We know that even on the film oſ earth vwhich we inhahit, and with which only we are acquainted, there are extensive strata or otherwise disposed masses of iron-ores in a state susceptible of magnetism; and experiments made on bars of hard tempered steel, and on bits of such ores, assure us that the magnetism is not induced on such bodies in a moment, but propagated gradually along ihe mass.That such disturbances do actually exist, we VOL. IV. 2A 312 VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. (Philosophical Transactions, No. 353,) and reported to the Royal Society o London. It usually moves (at least in Europe) to the vestward from 8 morning till 2 P. M. and then gradually returns to its former situation. The diurnal variations are seldom less than 0° 5, and often much greater. Mr. Graham mentious (Pilosophical Transactions, No. 428.) some observations by a Captain Hume, in a voyage to America, here he found the variation greatest in the aſternoon. This being a general phenomenon, has also attracted the attention oſ philosophers. The most detailed accounts of it to be met with are those of Mr. Canton, in Philosophical Transuctions, Vol. LI. Part I. p. 399, and those oſ Van Swinden, in his Treatise on Electrieity and Mugnetism. It appears from Canton's observations, that although there be great irregularities in this diurnal change of position oſ the mariners needle, there is a certain average, which is Eept up ith considerable steadinesss. The following table shews the average of greatest daily change of position in the different months of the year, ohserved in Mr. Canton's house, Spittal Square, in 1759. January T78 July I3'1February 6 85 August 1219 Marehn II 27 Sept. II 438 April 12 20 October 10 36 May 13 Nov. 9 June 1321 Dec. 6 58 Mtr. Canton attempts to account for these changes oſ position, by observing that the ſorce of a magnet is weakened  The ſollowing results deduced ſrom very accurate observations made by Colonel Beauſoy at Hackney, in west long. 6 ſẽ5 in time, and north lat. 510, 52, 40, will shew the greatest daily variation in the year 1813. 1815. Mareh I4. 1 ~ Sept. 29. & a4 April 18 80 Oet. 10. 11 49 May 3. 16 55 Nov. õI.  à8 June 29. 13 55 Dec. I. 5 55 July I9. 105 1814. Jan. 11. 9 Aug. 97.  ”” Feb. 10 1 47 The two variations, of which the preceding numbers are the diſſerences, wert taken about eight ſclock in the morning, and two in the aſternoon. The rea er will ſind a very ſull series of magnetic observations by Colonel Beauſoy, in Dr. Thomson's ànnals of Philo;ophy, vols. h ĩi ĩi. &c.Eo. VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. 373 by heatt. A small magnet being placed near a compass needle, ENE from it, so as to make it deſlect 45° from the natural position, the magnet was covered with a brass vessel, into which hot water was poured. The neeile gradually receded from the magnet ;ths oſ a degree, and returned gradually to its place as the water cooled. This is confirmed by uniſorm experience. The parts of the earth to the eastward are first heated in the morning, and therefore the force of the earth is weakened, and the needle is made to move to the vestvard. But as the sun warms the western side of the earth in the aſternoon, the motion of the needle must take the contrary direction. But this way of explaining by a change in the force of the earth supposes that the ehanging cause is æeting in opposition to some other ſoree We do not know of any such. The ſorce, whatever it is, seems simply to produce its own efſect, in deranging the needle from the direction oſ terrestrial magnetism. If Epinus's theory of magnetic action be admitted, viz. that a bar oſ steel has magnetism induced on it by propelling the quiescent and mutually repelling particles oſ magnetic fluid to one end, or attracting them to the other, we may suppose that the sun acts on the earth as a magnet acts on a piece of soſt iron, and in the morning propels the fluid in the north-west paris The needle directs itselſ to this constipated fluid, and thereſore it points to the eastward of the magnetic north in the aſternoonn. And (to abide by the same theory) this induced magnetism vill be somevhat greater when the earth is varmer; and therefore the diurnal variation vill be greatest in summer. This ehange oſ position of the constipated fluid must be supposed to bear a very small ratio to the whole fluid, which is naturally supposed to he constipated in one pole of the great magnet in order to give it magnetism Thus we shall have the diurnal variation a very small quantity. This is departing, however, from the principle of Mr, Cantons explanation; and indeed we cannot see how the veakening the general foree 174 VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. oſ the terrestrial magnet should make any change in the needle in respect to its direction; nor does it appear probble that the chang: o temperature produced by the sun will penetrate deep vnough to produce any sensible eſfect on the magnetism. And if this be the cause, we think that the derangements oſ the needle should vary as the thermometer varies, which is not truee. The other method of explaining is much better, if ſpinus's theory of magnetic attraetion and repulsion be just; and we may suppose that it is only the secondary magnetism (e. that of the magnetisable minerals) that is sensibly affected by the heat; this ill account very vell lor the greater mobility oſ the fluid in summer than in winter. A great ohjeetion to either of these explanations is the prodigious diversity of the diurnal variations in different places. This is so very great, that we can hardly ascribe the diurnal variation to any change in the magnetism of the primitive terrestrial magnet, and must rather look for ĩts cause in local circumstancess. This conelusion becomes more probable, when we learn that the deviation from the meridian and the deviation from the horizontal line are not aſfected at the same time. Van Swinden ascribes them solely to changes produced on the needles themselves. Iſ their magnetism be greatly deranged by the sun's position, it may throw the magnetic centre avay ſrom the centre of the needles m tion, and thus may produce a very small change of positiun. But if this be the cause, we should expect diferences in diſferent needles Van Swinden says, that there are uch, and that they are very great; but as he has not specified them, we cannot drav any conclusion. But, besides this regular diurnal variation, there is another, which is subjected to no rule The aurora borealis is observed (in Europe) to disturb the needle exceedingly, sometimes draving it several degrees from its positionn It is nlways observed to increase its deviation from the meridian, that is, an aurora borealis makes the needle point more westerly This disturbance sometimes amounts to six or VARIATION OF THE COMPASS. 375 seven degrees, and is generally observed to be greatest when the aurora borealis is most remarkable. This is a very curious phenomenon, and ve have not been able tofind any connection between this meteor and the position of a magnetic needle. It is to be observed, that a needle oſ copper or wood, or any substance besides iron, is not affectedlc We long thought it an electric phenomenon, and that the needle was afſected as any other body balanced in the same manner would be; but a eopper needle would then be affected. Indeed it may still be doubted whether the aurora borealis be an eleetric phenomenon. They are very ſrequent and remarkable in Sweden; and yet Bergman says, that he never observed any electric symptoms about them, though in the mean time the magnetic needle was greatly afſected. We see the needle ſrequently disturbed both from its general annual position, and from the change made on it by the diurnal variation. This is probably the effect oſ auroræ boreales which are invisible, either on account of thick weather or day-lightt. Van Swinden says, he seldom or never failed to observe auroræ boreales immediately after any anoma lous motion of the needle; and concluded that there had been one at the time, though he could not see it Since no needle but a magnetic one is affected by the aurora borealis, ve may conclude that there is some natural connection between this meteor and magnetism. This should farther ineite us to ohserve the circumstance ſformerly mentioned, vi2. that the south end of the dipping needle points to that part of the heavens where the rays oſ the aurora appear to converge. We wish that this were diligently observed in places which have very diſferent variation and dip of the mariner's needle. : For the diurnal and this irregular variation, consult the Dissertations of Celsius and oſ Hiorter, in the Memoirs of Stoclholm; Wargentin, Philosophieal Transaelions, Vol. 48. Braun Comment. Petropol. Novi, T. V. VII. IX.; Graham and Canton as above. i l TEMPERAMENT OF THE SCALE OF MUSIG. 7 The ingenious, in all cultivated nations, have remarked the great influence of music; and they found no difficulty in persuading the nations that it was a giſt of the gods. Apollo and his sacred choir are perhaps the most respectable inhabitants of the mythological heavens of the Greeks. Therefore all nations have considered music as a proper part of their religious worship. We doubt not but that they ſfound it ſit for exciting or supporting those emotions and sentiments which were suited to adoration, thanks, or petition. Nor would the Greeks have admitted music into their serious dramas, if they had not perceived that it heightened the effect. The same experience made them employ it as an aid to military enthusiasm; and it is recorded as one of the respectable accomplishments of Epaminondas, that he had the musical instructions of the first masters, and was eminent as a perſormer. Thus vas the study oſ music ennobled, and recommended to the attention of the greatest philosophers. Its cultivation was held an object of national concern, and its proſessors were not allowed to corrupt it in order to gratiſy the fastidious taste of the luxurious or the sensualist, who sought from it nothing but amusement. But its influence was not confined to these public purposes; and, while the men of speculation found in music an inexhaustible fund oſ employment for their genius and penetration, and their poets felt ĩts aid in their compositions, it was hailed by persons of all ranks as the soother of the cares and anxieties, and sveetener of the labours of lifee O Phube decusIlaborum dulce lenimen. 329. It is chieſly in this humble department of musical influence that we propose at present to lend our aid. To be able to tune a harpsichord with certainty and accuracy, seems an indispensible qualification of any person worthy of the name oſ a musician. It would certainly be thought an unpardonable deficiency in a violin perſormer if he could not tune his instrument; yet we are well inſorm- 378 TEMPEEAMENT OF ed, that many proſessional perſormers on the harpsichor camot do it, or cannot do ĩt any other way than by uncetain and painſul trial, and, as it were, groping n the dark; and that the tuning oſ harpsichords and organs is commitied entirely to tuners by professionn. This is a great inconvenience to persons residing in the eountry: and thereſore many take lessons from the proſessed harpsichord tuners, who also proſess to teach this at We have been present during some of these lessons: but it did not appear  us that the instruetions were such as could enahle the scholar to tune an mstrument vhen alone, unless the lessons had been so ſrequent as to ſorm the ear to an nstantaneous judgement of tune by the same hahit that had nstructed the teacher. There seemed to be ſittle principle that uld be treasured up and recllectæd vhen vanted 530. Yet we cannot help thinking that there are phenomena of facts in musie, suſficiently precisæ to furnish principle oſ absolute certainty for enabling us to produce temperaments of the seale which shall hare determined characters, and among vhich ve may choos such a one as shall be preferable 1o the others, according to the purposes we have in vieæ; and we think that the principles are oſ such easy appheation, that anv person, oſ a moderate sensibility to just intonation, may, æithout much knowledge or practice in music, tune his harpsichord æith all desirable accuracy. We prop to lay these beſore the reader. We might content ourselves with simplv giving the practical rules deduced ſrom the principles: but ;t is surely more desirable to perceive the validity oſ the principles This wũl give us confidenc: in the deducæd rules oſ practice S31. It is a most remarkable ſact, that, in all mtions, however they may diſſer in the structure o that chaunt which ve call the accent, or tone, or twang, in the lloquial language oſ a particular nation, or in the ſavourite phrases or passages which are most frequent in thæir songs, all men make use of the sæsme rises and ſalls, or mſections oſ voice THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 879 in their musical language or airs We have henrd the songoſ the Iroquois, the Cherokee, and the Esquimaux, of the Carib, and the inhabitant of Paraguay: oſ the Aſrican oſ Negroland and of the Cape, and of the Hinduo, the Malay, and the native of Otaheiteand ve found none that made use of a different scale from our own, although several seemed to be very sorry perſormers by any scalee There must be some natural ſoundation for this uniſormity. We may never discover this; but ve may he fortunate enough to discover ſacts in the phenomena of sound which invariably accompany certain modiſications of musical sentiment. If we succeed, we are entitled to suppuse that such inseparable companions are naturally conneeted; and to conelude, that if we can insure the appearance of those ſacts in sound, we shall also give occasion to those musical sentiments or impressions. S532. There is a quality in lengthened or continued sound which ve call its piteh or note, by which it may be accountæd sbrill or hoarse. It may be very hoarse in the heginning, and during its continuance it may grow more and more shrill by imperceptible gradations. In this case we are sensible of a kind oſ progress from the one state of sound to the other. Thus, while ve gently drav the bow across the string oſ a bass viol, if we at the same time slide the finger slowly along the string, from the nut tovard 1he bridge, the sound, from being hoarse, becomes gradually acute or shrill. Hoarse and shrill thereſore are not different qualities, although they have diſferent names, but are diſſerent states or degrees oſ the same quality, like cold and heat, near and ſar, early and late, or, what is common to all these, little and greatt. A certain state of the air is accounted neither hot nor cold. All states on one side oſ this are called varm or hot; and all on the other are cold. In like manner, a eertain sound is the boundary between those that are called hoarse and those called shril. The chemist is accustomed to say, that the temperature of a body is higher when it is 350 TEMPERAMENT OF warmer, and lower when colder. In like manner, we a aceustomed to say, that a person raises or depreses the piteh of his voice when it beeomes more shrill or more hoim The antient Greeks, however, called the shriller sounds æ: and the hoarser sounds high; probably because the homæ sounds are generally stronger or louder, which ve are alo accustomed to consider as higher. In common langusg a low piteh oſ voice means a ſaint sound, but in musieal lnguage it means a hoarser sound. The sound that is neither hoarse nor shrill is some ordinary piteh oſ voice, but without any precise criterion. 333. The change observed in the piteh of a violin string, when the finger is carried along the finger- hoarũ vith a continued motion, is also continuous; that is, not by staris: we call it gradual, for want oſ a better term, although gndual properly means gradatim, by degrees, steps, or stari; which are not to be distinguished in this experiment. But we may make the experiment in another vay. Aſter souning the open string, and while the bow is yet moving acns it, ve may put down the finger about I inches from ihe nut. This will change the sound into one which is suib shriller than the former, and there is a maniſest start ſn the one to the other. Or we may put down the finger 2 inches from the nut; the sound of the open string vil change to a shriller sound, and we are sensible that ũis change or step is greater than the former. Moreover, u may, while draving the bow across the string, put down on finger at 1I inches, and, immediately aſter, put dovn aother finger at 23 inches from the nut. We shall han three sounds in succession, each more shrill than the preceding, with two maniſest steps, or subsultory changes of pitch. 334. Now since the last sound is the same as iſ the second had not been sounded, we must conceive the sum oſ the tv successive changes as equivalent or equal to the chang from the first to the third This change seems somehow b THE SCALE OF MUSIẽ. 851 include the other two, and to be made up of them, as a whole is made up of its paris, or as 2; inches are made up of 13 and  of an inch, or as the sum I5 is made up oſ I0 and 5. 335. Thus it happens that thinking persons conceive some thing like or analogous to a distance. or interval, between these sounds. It is plain, however, that there can be no real distance or space interposed between them; and it is not easy to acquire a distinet notion of the bulk or magnitude oſ these intervalss. This conception is purely figurative and analogical; but the analogy is very good, and the observation of it, or conjecture about it, has been of great service in the science of musie, by making us search for some precise measure of those manifest intervals of musical sounds. 336. It must now be remarked, that it is in this respect alone that sounds are susceptible oſf musie:. Nor are all sounds possessed of this quality. The smack of a whip, the explosion of a musket, the rushing of water or wind, the scream of some animals, and many other sounds, both momentary and continuous, are mere noises; and can neither be called hoarse nor shril. But, on the other hand, many sounds, which differ in a thousand circumstances of loudness, smoothness, mellowness, &e. which make them pleasant or disagreeable, have this quality of musical piteh, and may thus may be compared. The voice of a man or voman, the sound of a pipe, a bell, a string, the voice of an animal, nay the single blow on an empty caskmay all have one pitch, or ve may be sensible oſ the interval between them. We can, in all cases, tighten or slacken the string of a violin, till the most uninformed hearer can pronounce with certainty that the piteh is the samee. We are indebted to the celebrated Galileo for the diseovery oſ that physical circumstance in all those sounds which communicates this remarkable quality to them, and even enables us to induce it on any noise whatever, and to determine, with 352 TEMPEEANENT OF the utmost precision, the musical piteh of the sound, ani ihe interval between any two such sounds. OF this shall speak ſully hereaſter; and at present we only observ that two sounds, having the same pitch. are called uxsom by musicians, or are said to be in unison to one another. à37. When two untaught men attempt to sing the same air together, they always sing in unison, unless they expres ly mean to sing in different pitches oſ voic: Nay, it is an extremely diſficult thing to do otherwise, except in a fe verv peculiar casess. Also, vhen a man and voman, wholly uninstructed in musie, attempt to sing the same air, they al80 mean to sing the same musical notes through the whole air; and they generally imagine that they do soo. But there is a maniſest diſference in the sounds which they utter, and the woman is said to sing more sERILL, and the man more HoAESE. A very plain experiment, however, vill convince them that they are mistakenn. N. B. We aæ nov supposing that the performers have so much of a musical ear, and ſlexible voice, as to be able to sing a common ballad, or a psalm tune, with tolerable exactness, and that they can prolong or dvell upon any particnlar note when desired. Let them sing the common psalm tune called St. Davids in the same vay that they practice at church; and when they have done it two or three times, in order to fix their voic: in tune, and to ſeel the general impression of the tune, let the woman hold on in the first note of the tune, which we suppose to be g, while the man sings the first three in suecession, namely g, d,  He vill now perceive, that the last note sung by himself is the same with that sung by the woman, and vhich she thinks that she is still holding on in the ſirst note of the tune. Let this be repeated till the perſormance becomes easy. They vill then perceive the perfect sameness, in respect of musical piteh, of the womans first note of this tune and the mans third notee. Some differencæ however, vill still be perceived; but it will not be in the THE SCALE OF MUSIO. 383 piteh, but in the smoothness, or clearness, or other agreeable quality of the voman's note. 835. When this is plainly perceived, let the man try by what eontinued steps he must raise his piteh, in order to arrive at the vomans note from his own. If he has been accustomed to common hallad singing, he will have no great difficulty in doing this; and ill find that, beginning with his own note, and singing, gradually up, his eighth note vill be the womans note. In short, if two flutes be taken, one of which is twice as long as the other, and if the man sing in unison with the large flute, the voman, vwhile singing, as she thinks, the same notes with the man, will be ſound to be singing in unison with the smaller flute. 339. This is a remarkable and most important fact in the phenomena of musie. This interval, comprehending and made up of seven smaller intervals, and requiring eight sounds to mark its steps, is therefore called an ocTAVE. Now, since the female performer follows the same dictates of natural ear in singing her tune that the man follows in singing his, and all hearers are sensible that they are singing the same tune, it necessarily follows, that the two serieses of notes are perſectly similar, though not the same: For there must be the same interval of an octave between any step of the lower octave and the same step of the upper one. In whatever way, thereſore, we conceive one of these octaves to he parcelled out hy the different steps, the partition of both must be similar. If we represent hoth by lines, these lines must he similarly dividedl. Each partial interval of the one must bear the same relation to the whole, or to any other interval, as its similar interval in the other octave bears to the whole oſ that octave, or to the other corresponding interval in it. 340 Farther, we must now observe, that although this similarity of the oetaves was ſirst observed or diseovered by means of the ordinary voices of man and woman, and is a legitimate inference ſfrom the perſect satisſaction that each THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 385 junetion with the similar scales of the adjoining octaves. This partition is now to be the subject of discussion. 342. In the inſancy oſ society and cultivation, it is probable that the melodies or tunes, which delighted the simple inhabitants, were equally simplee Being the spontaneous effusions of individuals, perhaps only occasignal, and never repeated, they would perish as ſost as produced. The airs were probably connected vith some oſ the rude rhimes, or gingles of words, which were bmdied about at their ſestivals; or they were associated with dancing In all these cases they must have been very short, consisting oſ a few favourite passages or musical phrases. This is the case vith the common airs of all simple people to this day They seldom extend beyond a short stanza of poetry, or a short movement of dancing The artist who could compose and keep in mind a piece oſ considerable length, must have been a great rarity, and a minstrel fit for the entertainment of princes; and therefore much admired, and highly rewarded: his excellencies were almost incommunicable, and could not be preserved in any other way hut by repeated perſormance to an attentive hearer, who must also be an artist, and must patiently listen, and try to imitate; or, in short, to get the tune by heart. It must have been a long time beſore any distinct notion was formed oſ ihe relation oſ the notes to each other. Tt was perhaps impossible to recollect today the precise notes of yesterday. There was nothing in which they were fixed till instrumental music was invented. This has been ſound in all nations; but it appears that long eontinued cultivation is necessary for raising this ſfrom a very simple and imperſect statee. The most refined instrument of the Greek musieians was very far below our very ordinary instrumentss. And, till some method oſ notation was, invented, ve can searcely conceive how any determined partition of the oetave could he made generally known. 343. Accordingly, we find that it was not iill after a long vhile, and by very rude and avkward steps, that the Greeks VOL. Iv. 25 THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 857 Having done this several times, and then repeated it without a pause, he will become very sensible oſ the propriety of the pause, and of this natural division oſ the octave. He vill even observe a considerable similarity between these two musical phrases, without being able, at ſirst, to say in what it consists. 345. Let him now study each phrase apart, and try to compare the magnitude oſ the changes oſ sound; or steps which he makes in rising ſrom do to re, ſrom re to mi, and ſrom mi to ſa. We apprehend that he vill have no diſſiculty in perceiving, aſter a ſew trials, that the steps do re, and re mi, are sensibly greater than the step mi ſ. We feel the last step as a sort of slide; as an attempt to make as little change oſ piteh as we can. Once this is perceived, it will never be ſorgotten. This will be still more clearly perceived, iſ, instead of these syllables, he use only the vowel a, pronounced as in the word hall, and iſ he sing the steps, sliding or slurring from the one to the other. Taking this method he cannot ſail to notice the smallness of the third step. 346. Let the singer ſarther consider, vhether he does not ſeel this phrase musical or agreeable, making a sort of tune or chaunt, and ending or closing agreeably aſter this slide of a small, or, as it were, halſ step. It is generally thought s0; and is thereſore called a cLosE, 2 CADENCE, when ve end with a half step ascending, S347. Let the singer now resume the whole seale, singing the ſour last notes sol, la, si, do, louder than the other four, and ealling ofſ his attention ſrom the low phrase, and ſixing it on the upper onee. He vill now be able to perceive that this, like the other, has two considerable steps; namely, sol, ſa, and la, si, and then a smaller step, si, do. A few repetitions will make this clear, and he will then be sensible oſ the nature oſ the similarity between these two phrases, and the propriety oſ this great division oſ the scale into the intervals do, ſa, and sol, do, with an interval ſa, sol, between them Q THE SCALE OE MUSIC 880 gether artificial, had no connection with musie, and that the ear alone was the judge of musical intervals. The artist had no other guide in tuning his instrument; because the ratios, which were said to be inherent in the sounds (though no person could say how), vere never perceived by the ear. The justice oſ this opinion is abundantly confirmed by the avkward attempt of the Greeks to improve the lyre by means of these boasted ratios. Instead of illustrating the subject, they seem rather to have brought an additional obscurity upon it, and threw it into such conſusion, that although many voluminous dissertations were written on it, and on the composition of their musical scale, the account is so perplexed and confused, that the ſirst mathematicians and artists of Europe acknovledged, that the whole is an impenetrable mystery. Had the philosophers never meddled with it; had they allowed the practical musicians to construcet and tune their instruments in their ovn way, so as to please their ear, it is scarcely possible that they should not have hit on what they wanted, vithout all the embarrassment of the chromatic and enharmonic scales of the lyre. It is scarcely possible to contrive a more cumbersome method of extending the simple scale of Nature to every case that could occur in their musical compositions, than what arose from the employment of the musical ratio. This seems a bold assertion; but we apprehend that it will appear to be just as we proceed. 351. The practical musicians could not be long of ſinding the want of something more than the mere diatonic scale of their instrumentss. As they were always accompanied by the voice, it would often happen that a lyre or ſlute, perfectly tuned, was too low or too high for the voice that was to accompany it. A singer can pitch his tune on any sound as a key; and if this be too high for the singer who is to accompany him, he can take it on a lower notee But a lyrist cannot. do thiss Suppose his instrument two notes too lov, and that his accompanyist can only sing it on the key which 590 TEMPERAMENT OF is the si of the lyre. Should the lyrist begin it on that key, his very ſirst step is wrong, being but a half step, whereas it should be a whole one. In short, all the steps but one vil be ſound wrong, and the lyrist and singer will be perpetual ly jarring. This is an evident consequence of the inequali ty oſ the fourth and seventh steps to the rest. And iſ the other steps, vhich we imagine to be equal, be not exactly 50, the discordance will be still greater. The method oſ remedying this is very obviouss Iſthe mtervals mi fa and si do, are half notes, we need only to interpose other sounds in the middle between each of the vhole notes; and then, in place of seven unequal steps, ve shll have twelve equal ones, or twelve intervals, each oſ them equal o a semtonee. The lyre thus constructed vill osuit any voice vhatever. It will perfectly resemble our keyel instruments, the harpsichord, or organ, which have tueli seemingly equal intervals in the octave. Accordingly, itapears that such additions were practised by the musicians of Greece, and approved of by Aristoxenus, and by all thœ who referred every thing to the judgment of the ear Anl we are confident that this method would have been adopted, if the philosophers had had less influence, and if the Greels had not borrowed their religious ceremonies along ith ther musical sciencee Both of these came from the same quiter; they came united; and it was sacrilegious to attempt innovationss. The doctrine of musical ratios was an occuqtion only for the refined, the philosophers; and by subjeing music to this mysterious science, it became mysterious as0, and s0 much the more venerablee. The philosophers mv, that there was in Nature a certain inserutable connection htween mathematical ratios and those intervals which the ex relished and required in melody; but they were ignorant the nature and extent of this connection. s What is this connection, or what is meant when we sm of the ratios of sounds! Simply this: Pythagoras is said ©® have found, that if to musical cords be strained hy œqul THE SCALE OF MUSIC 391 weights, and one oſ them be twice the length of the other, the short one will sound the octave to the note of the other. If it be two-thirds of the length of the long string, it will sound the fiſth to it. If the long string sound do, the short one vill sound sol. Iſiĩt be three-fourths of the lengih, it will sound the fourth or ſu. Thus the ratio oſ 2: I vas called the ratio of the niarasoN; that oſf 3:  was called the DiaPrENTE; and that of 4: 3 the nrATESzanON. Moreover, if we now take all the four strings, and make that which sounds the gravest note, and is the longest, twelve inches in length; the short or octave string must be six inches long, or one-halſ of twelve; the diapente must be eight inches, or two-thirds of twelve; and the diatessaron must be nine inches, which is three- ſourths of twelvee If we now compare the diapente, not with the gravest string, but with the octave of six inches, we see that they are in the ratio of 4 to 3, or the ratio of diatessaron. And if we compare the diatessaron vith the octave, we see that their ratio is that of 9: 6, or of 3: 2, or the ratio of diapente. Thus is the octave divided into a fifth and a fourth, do sol, and sol do, in succession. Also the ſourth do fa, and the ſifth fu do, make up the octave. The note which stands as a fiſth to one of the extreme sounds of the octave, stands as a fourth to the other. And, lastly, the two fourths do fa, and sol do, leave an interval, fa sol between them; which is also determined by nature, and the ratio corresponding to it is evidently that oſ 9 to 5. 352. This is all that was known oſ the connection of music with mathematical ratios. It is indeed said by Inmblichus, that Pythagoras did not make this discovery by means of strings, but by the sounds made by the hammers on the anvil in a smit's shop. He observed the sounds to be the key, the diatessaron, and the diapente oſ music; and he found, that the weights of the hammers were in this proportion; and as soon as he went home, he tried the sounds made by cords, when weights, in the proportions above- mentioned, vere appended to them. But the whole story has the THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 401 make much use oſ that instrument without perceiving the pleasure of concordant sounds. 362. The discovery oſ the pleasures oſ harmony occasioned a total change in the science of musiec. During the dark ages of Europe, it was cultivated chiefly by the monks: the organ was soon introduced into the churches, and the choral service was their chieſ and almost their only occupation. The very construction oſ this instrument must have contributed to the improvement of music, and instructed men in the nature oſ the scale The pipes are all tuned by their lengths; and these lengths are in the ratios of the strings which give the same notes, when all are equally stretched. This must have revived the study of the musical ratios. The tuning of the organ was performed by consonance, and no longer depended on the nice judgment of sounds in succession. The dullest ear, even vith total ignorance of musie, can judge, without the smallest error, oſ an exact octave, fifth, third, or other concord; and a very mean musician could nov tune an organ more accurately than Timotheus could tune his Iyree Other keyed instruments, resembling our harpsichord, were invented, and instruments with fretted finger boardss. These soon supplanted the lyres and harps, being much more compendious, and allowing a much greater variety and rapidity oſ modulation. All these instruments were the fruits of harmony, in the modern sense oſ that word. The deficiencies oſ the old diatonic scale were now more apparent, and the necessity of a number of intercalary notes. The finger- board oſ an organ or harpsichord, running through a series of octaves, and admitting much more than the accompaniment of one note, pointed out new sources oſ musical pleasure arising ſrom the fulness of the harmony; and, above all, the practice oſ choral singing suggested the stantine Copronymus sent one to Pepm king of France in 757, and that his sor Charlemagne got another from the Emperor Michael Paleologus. But they ap Pear io have been known in the English churches beſore that time. VOL IV. cC ;SE-;Y 402 TEMPERAMENT OF possihility oſ a pleasure altogether new While a certain number of the choir perſormed the Cantus or Air of the music, it was irksome to the others to utter mere sounds, supporting or composing the harmony of the Cantus, without any melody or air in their ovn parts. It was thought probable that the harmonic notes might be so portioned out among the rest of the choir, that the succession of sounds uttered by each individual might also constitute a melody not unpleasant, and perhaps highly grateful. On trial it was found very practicable Canons, motets, fugues, and other harmonies, were composed, where the airs performed by the diſferent parts were not inferior in beauty to the principal. The notes which could not be thrown into this agreeable succession, were leſt to the organist, and by him thrown into the bass. 363. By all these practices, the imperſections oſ the sale of fixed sounds became every day more sensible, especially in full harmony. Scientific music, or the properties oſ the ratios, now recovered the high estimation in which they were held by the ancient theorists; and as the musicians vere now very ſrequently men of letters, chiefly mons, of sober characters and decent manners, music again became a respectable study. The organist was generally a man of science, as vell as a perſormer. At the first revival of leaming in Europe, we find music studied and honoured vith degrees in the universities, and very soon we have learned and excellent dissertations on the principles of the science The inventions oſ Guido, and the dissertations of Salinas, Zarlno, and Xoni, are among the most valuable publications that are extant on music. The improvements intrduced by Guido are founded on a very reſined examination oſ the scale; and the temperaments proposed by the other two have scarcely been improved by any labours of modem date. Both these authors had studied the Greek vriter vith great care, and their improvements proceed on a cnplete knowledge of the doctrines of Pythagoras anũ Ptolemy- THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 405 duced to 360, the sound was more mellow than any mans voicœ at the same pitch. Various changes were made in the form oſ the cock, with the intention oſ rendering the primitive noise more analogous to that produced by a vibrating string. Sounds were produced which were pleasant in the extreme. The intelligent reader will see here an opening made to great additions o practical music, and the means of producing musical sounds, of which we have at present scarcely any conception; and this manner of producing them is attended with the peculiar advantage, that an instrument so constructed can never go out of tune in the smallest degree. But oſ this enough at present. 365. This discovery oſ Galileo's completed the Pythagorean theories, by supplying the only thing wanted for procuring confidence in themm. We now see that the music of sounds depends on principles as certain and as plain as the elements oſ Euclid, and that every thing relating to the scale of music is attainable by mathematios. It is very true that we do not perceive the ratio 3: 2 in the diapente, as having any relation to the numbers 3 and 2 But we perceive the sweetness of sound which characterises this concord. This is undoubtedly the perception of a certain physical ſact involving this ratio, as much as the sweetness on our tongue is the perception of a certain manner of acting on the particles of sugar during their dissolution in the saliva. The pleasure arising from certain consonances, such as do sol, is not more distinctly perceived than is the disagreeable feeling which other consonances produce, such as do re; and ĩt was a fair field of disquisition to discover why the one pleased and the other displeasedl We cannot say um this question has been completely decided. It has been ascribed to the coincidence oſ vibrations In the octave, every second vibration of the treble nole may be made to coincide with every vibration of the bass But the pleasure arising from the different consonances does by no means ſollow the proportions oſ those colncidences of vibrations; ſor vhen two B THE SCALE OF MUSIO. 411 oſ any sound, and the imperſection oſ any concord, may be discovered with the utmost precision; and by this method may concordant sounds he produced, which are absolutely perfect in their harmony, or having any degree of imperfeetion or temperament that we pleasee An instrument may generally be tuned to perfect harmony, in some of its notes, without any diſſiculty, as ve see done by every blind Crouder. But if a cerlain determinate degree of imperſection, diſferent perhaps in the different concords, be necessary for the proper perſormance of musical compositions on instruments of ſixed sounds, such as those oſ the organ or harpsichord kind, we do not see how it can be disputed that Dr. Smith's theory of the beating of imperſect consonances is one of the most important discoveries, hoth for the practice and the science of music, that have been oſſered to the publIic. We are inclined to consider it as the most important that has been made since the days of Galileo. The only rivals are Dr. Brook Taylors mechanical demonstration oſ the vibrations of an elastic cord, and its companion, und of the undulations of the air in an organ pipe, and the beautiful investigations of Daniel Bernoulli of the harmonic sounds vwhich frequently accompany the fundamental note The musical theory oſf Rameau we consider as a mere whim, not founded in any natural law; and the theory of the grave harmonics by Tartini or Romieu is included in Dr. Smith's theory oſ the beating oſ imperfect consonances. This theory enables us to execute any harmonic system oſ temperament with precision, and certainty, and ease, and to decide on its merit when done. We are thereſore surprised to see this work of Dr. Smith greatly undervalued, by a most ingenious gentleman in the Philosophical Transactions for 1800, and called a large and obscure volume, which leaves the matter just as it was, and its results useless and impracticable We are sorry to see this; because ve have great expectations from the future la, bours of this gentleman in the field of harmonics, and his THE SCALE OF MUSIC. A13 give us a method oſ executing any system of temperament which ve may find reason to prefer. But we have another ground of estimation of this theory. By its assistance, we are able to ascertain with certainty and precision the true untempered scale of musie, which eluded all the attempts oſ the ingenious Greeks; and we determine it in a way suited to the favourite music of modern times, of which almost all the excellencies and pleasures are derived from harmony. We do not say that this lotal innovation in the principle of musieal pleasure is unexceptionable; we rather think it very deſective, believing that the thrilling pleasures oſ musie depend more upon the melody or air. We appeal even to instructed musicians, vhether the heart and affections are not more affected (and with much more distinct voriely of emotion) by a fine melody, supported, but not observed, by harmonies judiciously chosen? It appears to us that the effect oſ harmony, alvays filled up, is more uniſormly the same, and less touching to the soul, than some simple air sung or played by a performer of sensibility and powers of utterance. We do not wonder, then, that the ingenious Greeks deduced all their rules from this department of musie, nor at their being s0 satisſied with the pleasures which it yielded, that they were not solicitous of the additional support of harmony. We see that melody has suffered by the change in every country. There is no Scotchman, Irishman, Pole, or Russian, who does not lament that the skill in composing heart-touching airs is degenerated in his respective nation; and all admire the productions oſ their muse of  the days that are past They are  pleasant and mournful to the soul.” But ve still prefer the harmonical method of forming the scale, on account of its precision and ſacility: and we preſer the theory of beats, because it also gives us the most satisfuciory scale of melody; and this, not by repeated correetions and recorrections, but by a direet process By a table of beats, every note may be fixed at once, and ve have no neeasion to return to it and try new combinations; for the beatings of the different concords to one bass being once de 414 TEMPERANEST OF termined, every beating of any on note wũh any other i also fixed. 371. We thereſore request the readers patient attention io the experiment which we have now io propose This experiment is best made with two organ pipes equally voiced, and pitched to the note C in the middle oſ our harpsichords Læet one of them at least be a stopped pipe, its piston being made extremely accurate, and at the same time easily mored along the pipe. Let the shank of it be divided into 210 equal parts The advantage oſ this ſorm of the experiment is, that the sounds can be continued, with perſect uniſormity, for any lengith oſ time, iſ the bellows be properly constructed. In default oſ this apparatus, the experiment may be made with two harpsichord wires in perfect unison, and touched by a wheel rubbed with rosin instead oſ a bow, in the vay the sounds of the vielle or hurdygurdy are produe ed. This contrivance also will eontinue the sounds uniſormly at pleasuree A scale of 240 parts must be adaptæd to one string, and numbered from that end of the string where the wheel or bow is appſed to i. Great care must be taken that the shifting of the moveable bridge do not alter the strain on the wire We may even do pretty well witha bow in place of the wheel; but the sound cannot be long held on in any pitch In deseribing the phenomena, we shall rather abide by the string, because the numbers of the scale, or length of the sounding part oſ the wire, correpond, in ſact, much more exactly with the sounds The deviations oſ the scale oſ the pipe do not in the least affert the conclusions we mean to draw, but would require to be mentioned in every instance, which would greatly complicate the process. Having brought the two open strings into perſect unison, so that no beating whatever is observed in the conænance, slide the moveahle bridge slowly along the string while the wheel is turning, beginning the motion from the end most remote ſrom the bow. All the notes of the octavẽ, THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 415 aund all kinds of concords and discrds, vill be heard; each of the concords being preceded and followed by a ruſfling beating, and that succeeded by a grating discord. Aſter this general view of the whole, let the particular harmonious stations of the bridge be more careſully examined as follows. 372.I. Shiſt the moveable bridge to the division 12. Iſ it has been exactly placed, we shall hear a perfect octave without any beating. It is, however, seldom so exactly set, and ve generally hear some beatingg By gently shiſting the bridge to either side, this beating becomes more or less rapid; and vhen ve have found in which direetion the bridge must be moved, we can then slide it along till the beating cease entirely, and the sounds coalesce into one sound. We can scarcely hear the treble or octave note as distinguishable from the hass or fundamental afforded by the other string. If the notes are duly proportioned in loudness, ve cannot hear the two as distinct sounds, but a note seemingly the same vith the fuudamental, only more brilliant. (N. B. It would be a great improvement of the apparatus to have a micrometer screw for producing those small motions of the bridge.) Having thus produced a fine octave, we can now perceive that, as ve continue to shift the bridge from its proper place, in either direction, the beating becomes more and more rapid, changes to a violent rattling flutter, and then degenerates into a most disagreeable jar. This phenomenon is ohserved in the deviation of every concord whatever from perſect harmony, and must be carefully kept in remembrance. 373. Before ve quit this concord, the octave produced by the bisection of the pipe or string, we must observe, that vith respect to ourselves, the octave c  must beat almost twice in a second, before we can observe clearly any mis-tune in it, by sounding the notes in succession, or as steps in the scale of melody. We never knew any ear so nice as to disover a mis-tuning when it beats but once in three seconds. 416 TEMPERAMENT OF We think ourselves entitled thereſore to say, that we are insensible oſ a temperament in melody amounting to one- third of a comma; and we never knew a person sensible of a temperament half this bulk. When the imperfection oſ the octave is clearly sensible by sounding the notes in succession, it is extremely disagreeable, feeling like a struggle or endeavour to attain a certain note, and a failure in the attempt. This seems owing to the familiar similarity oſ octaves, in the habitual talking and singing of men and vomen together. But when the notes are sounded together, although we are not much more sensible oſ the imperfection of the harmony directly, as a ſailure in the sweetness oſ the concord, we are very sensible oſ this phenomenon of beating; and any person who ean distinguish a weak sound ſrom a stronger one, ean easily perceive, in this indirect manner, any ſraction oſ a comma, however minutee. This makes the tuning by harmony much more exact than by melody alone. It is also much more accommodated to the genius of modern music The ancienis had ſavourite passages, hich were frequently introduced into their airs, and they were solicitous to have these in good tune. It appears from passages in the writiugs of Galen, that different perſormers excelled chiefly in their skill in making those occasional temperaments which their music requiredl. Our music is much more strict, by reason oſ our harmonic accompaniments, which are an abominable noise vhen mis tuned in a degree, vhich would have passed with the ancients for very good melody. Aristoxenus says, that the ear cannot discover the error of a comma. This would now be intolerable. 374. But another advantage attends our method. We obtain, by its assistance, the most perfect scale of melody: perſect in a degree attainable only by ehance by the Greeks This is now to be our business to unfold. 375II. Set the moveable bridge at 158, and sound the two stringss They will beat very disagreeably, heing THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 417 plainly out of tune. Slide it gradually toward 160, and the beats will grow slower and slower; will change to a gentle and not unpleasant undulation; and at last, vhen the bridge is at 160, will vanish entirely, and the two sounds will conlesce into one sweet concord, in which neither of the com. ponent sounds can be distinguished. If the sound given by the short string be now examined as a step in the scale of melody, it will be found a fiſth to the sound of the long string or fundamental note, perſectly satisfactory to the nicest ear. Thus one step oſ the scale has been ascertained. III. Slide the bridge slowly along the string. The beating will recommence, vill become a flutter, and then a jarring noise; and will again change to an angry flutter, beating about eight times in a second, when the bridge stands at 169 nearly. Pushing it still on, but very slowly, the flutter will become an indistinet jarring noise; which, by continuing the motion, ill again become a ſlutter, or beat ahout six in the second. The bridge is now about 17. 376. IV. Still continuing the motion, the flutter becomes a jarring noise, which continues till the bridge is near to 180, vhen the rapid flutter vill again be heard. This will become slower and slover as we approach to 180; and when the bridge reaches that point, all beating vanishes, and ve have a soſt and agreeable concord, but far inferior to the former concord in that cheering sweetness which characterises the fifthh. When this note is compared with that oſ th⸗fundamental string, as a step in the scale of melody, it is found to correspond to the note ſa, or the fourth step in the scale, and in that employment to give complete satisſaction to the ear. 377.V. Still advancing the moveable bridge toward the nut, ve shall hear the beatings return again; and aſter fluttering and degenerating to a jarring noise, by a very small motion of the bridge, they will again be heard, will grow slower, accompanied vith a sort of angry expression, and will cease entirely when the bridge reaches the 199d division oſ vOL. Iv. / D 418 TEMPERAMENT OF our scalee Here ve have another coneord of very peculiar character, being remarkably enlivening and gay. This sound gives perfect satisſaction to the ear, iſ employed as the third step in the scale of melody, being the note mi of tha series, at least in all gay or cheerſul airs. 378.VI. As we move the bridge from 192 to 200, æ hear again the same beatings, which, in the immediate vicinity to 192, have a peevish, fretſul expression, instead oſ the angry waspish expression before mentioned When the bridge has passed that situation which produces only grating discordance, ve hear the beatings agnin, and they beeome slower, and cease altogether when the bridge arrives at 200. Here ve have another consonance, which must be called a concord, because it is rather agreeable thun otherwise, hut strongly marked by a mournful melancholy in the expression. In the scale of melody, it forms the third step in tho airs which express lamentation or grief. It is called the minor third, to distinguish it from the last enlivening concord, which, being a larger interval, is called the major ihird. 379. It is well known, that these two thirds give the distinguishing characters o the only two modes of melodious composition that are admitted into modern musie. The sries containing the major third is colled the major, and that containing the minor third is ealled the minor mode. It ĩs worthy oſ remark, that the fanatical preachers, in their conventicles and field sermons, affeet this mode in their harangues, which are oſten distinetly musical, modulating entirely by musical intervals, and keeping the whole of their chaunt in subordination to a ſundamental or key note. This is not unnatural, vhen we consider the general scope of their discourses, namely to inspire melancholy and humiliating thoughts, awakening sorrow, and the like. It is not so easy to account for the usual whine of a beggur, vho generally craves charity in the major third. This is the case, at least, in the northern paris oſ this island. 360. If we continue to shiſt the bridge still nearer to the end of the string, we shall hear nothing but a succession oſ THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 419 vile diseordant noĩses, somewhat less oſfensive when the bridge is about the divisions 213 and 216, but even there very unpleasant. 381VII. Let us therefore change our manner oſ proceeding a little, and again place the bridge at 160, which vill give us the pleasing concord of the fifth. Imstead of pushing it from that place toward the nut, let it be moved tovard the wheel or bow. Without repeating what. we have said of the appearance of the beãtings, their acceleration, and their degenerating into a jarring discord, to be afterwards suceeeded by another beating, &e. &e. we shall only observe, that when ve place the bridge at 150, we have no heatings, and ve hear à consonance, which is in à slight degree pleasant, and maãy thereſore he called a concord. It has the other marks of a concord which we have been making so much use oſ; ſor the beatings recommence len we shiſt the bridge to either side of 150. This note mãkes the sixth step in the descending seale of mournful melody: that is, vhen we ãre passing from the acute to the graver notes, with the intention of putting an emphasis on the third and the fundnmental. Although not eminent as a concord with the fundamental ãlone, it has a most pleasing eſfect when listened 16 in subordination to the whole series, or when sounded along with other proper accompaniments of the ſundamental. 382VIII. Placing the bridge at 144, we obtain another very pleasing concord, diſſering in its expression from any of the foregoing. We find it diſficult to express its character. It is greatly inferior to the ſifth in sweetness, and to the major third in gaiety, but seems to possess, in a lower degree, both of these qualities. In the scale of cheerful melody, it is the sixth note, which we have distinguished by the syllable la. Tt is also used even in mournful melody, vwhen ve are ascending, with the intention of closing with the octãve. lllll 383. In shiſting the bridge from 144 to 120, we obtain nothing but discordant, or at least disagreeable consonances. 2 420 TEMPERAMENT OF And, lastly, if ve move the bridge beyond 120, to divisions which are respeetively the halves of those numbers which produced the concords already treated of, we obtain the same steps in the scale of the upper octavee. Thus if the bridge be at 80, we have the fiſth to the octave note, or twelſth o the fundamental. If it be at 6GO, ve obtain the double octave, &e. &e. &e 354. We have perhaps been rash in aſfixing certain moral or sentimental characters to certain concords; for we have seen instances of persons who gave them different denominations; but these were never contradictory to ours, but always expressed some sentiment allied to that which we have assignedc We never met with an instance of a person capable of a little diseriminating reflection, who did not acknovledge a maniſest sentimental distinetion among the diſferent concords which could not be confounded. We doubt not but that the Greeks, a people of exquisite sensibility to all the beauties oſ taste and sentiment, paid much attention to these characters, and availed themselves of them in their compositions. We do not think it at all unlikely, that greater effects have been produced by their music, vhich was studied with this express view, than have ever been produced by the modern music, with all the addition of harmony. We have allowed too great a share oſ our attention to mere harmony. Our great authors are much less solicitous to compose an enchanting air, than to construct a ſull score of rich and vell conducted harmony. We do not profess to be nic] judges in musieal composition, but ve may tell what we ourselves experiencee We find our minds worked up by a continuance of fine harmony into a general sensibility; into a ſrame oſ mind which would prepare and ſit us ſor receiving strong impressions oſ moral sentiment, if these were distinctly made. But ve have seldom ſelt any distinet emotions excited by mere imstrumental music. And when the harmonies nave been merely to support the perſormance of a vuice, the words have been either so ſrittered by musical di- THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 421 visions, as to become in some measure ludierousor have been so indistinei, and made so trifling a part oſ the musie, that there was nothing done to give a particular shape to the moral impression on our mind. We have gencrally been strongly affected by some of the anthems which were in vogue in former times and we think that we pereeived the cause of this difference: There was a great simplicity in the voice parts: the syllables ere not dravwled out into long musical phrases, but pronounced nearly according to their proper quantities; so that the sentiment of the speaker was expressed with all the force of good declamation, and the harmony of the accompaniment then strengthened the appropriate effect of the melody. We mean not to offer these observations as oſf much authority, but merely to mention some ſacts, and to assign what we felt to be their causes, in order to promote, in some degree, however insignificant, the cultivation of musical sciencee With this view, we venture to say, that some of the best compositions of Knapp of York uni ſormly affect us more than the more admired anthems oſ Bird and Tallis A cadence, whioh Knapp gives almost entirely to the melody, is laboured by Bird or Tallis with all the rules of art; and you have its characters oſ perſect or imperfect, full or disappointed, cadences, and such an apparatus oſ preparation and resolution of discords, that yon ſorsee it at the distance of several bars, and then the part assigned to the voice seems a very trifle, and merely to fill up a blank in the harmony. Such compositions smell oſ the lamp, and fail of their purpose, that of charming the learned ear. But enough of this digression 385. Thus have ve found a natural relation between certain sounds strongly marked by very precise characters. The concordance of sound is marked by the absence of all undulation, and the deviations from this harmony are shewn to be measurable by the frequency of those undulatigns. We have also ſound, that the notes which are thus harmonious along with the fundamental, are steps in the seale oſ natural 3 422 TEMPERAMENT OF music (for we must acknowledge melody to be the primitive music dietated by nat re) We have got the notesad mi, ſa, sol, lado, ascertained in a way that can no longer be mistaken. 356. Let us now examine what physical or mechanical relations these sounds stand in to each other. Our monochord gives us the lengths oſ the strings; and the discovery of Galileo shews us, that these are also the durations of the aerial pulses which produce the sensations oſ musical notes Their ratios may thereſore be truly called the ratios of the soundss. Now we see that the strings which produce the sounds do sol are 240 and 160. These are in the ratio oſ 3 to 2 In this manner ve may state all the ratios observed in our experiment, vi-. Do: mi have the ratio oſ 240 to 192, or of b to à Do: ſa 0: I8O 4: 3 Do: sol 0: 160 3: 2 Do: la 20: 144 5: 3 Xri: sol 192: 160 6: 5,=do: mis Fa: sol 180: 160 9: 8 Sol: la 160: I44 10: 9 Mi: ſa 192: ISO 16: 1I5 Here ve get the sight of all the ratios which the ingenious and unvearied speculations of the Greek mathematicians enlisted into the service oſ musie, without being able to give a good reason vhy. The ratio b: 4, which their ſastidious metaphysicians rejected, and which others wished to introduce ſfrom motives of mere necessity to fill up a hlank, is pointed out to us by one of the finest concords. The interval between the fourth and fiſth is, very fortunately, a step of the scale. 397. The next step sol la is more important. For the er for melody would have been very well satisſied with an interval equal to ſa sol, or 9: S; but if the moveahle bridge be set at the division 1423, corresponding to such a step, we should have a very offensive fluttering. It is reasonable THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 42” thereſore to conclude, ſrom analogy. that the interval sol la does not correspond to the ratio 9: 8 and that 10: 9, vhich is, at least, equally satisfactory to the ear, is the proper step, even in the scale oſ melody. IF we consider what may be called the scale of harmony, there is no room lefi for doubt. To enjoy the greatest possible pleasure oſ harmony, we must not only take each note as it is related to the fundamental, but also as it is related to other notes oſ the seale. It may chance to be convenient to assume for the fundamental of our occasional seale of modulation, the string of the Iyre which is tuned as fa to its proper fundamental; or it may increase the harmony (and we know that it does), if ve accompany the note do with both of the notes ſu and la. To have the fine concord of the major third, its necessary that the interval ſo la be equivalent to the ratio 5: 2. Now sa is 180, and b: 4 = 180: 144. Therefore, by making the step sol la equal to 9: 8, ve should lose this agreeable concord, and get discord in iĩts place. And thus is evinced, in opposition to Aristoxenus, the propriety of having both a major and a minor tone; the first expressed by 9: S, and the last by 10: 9. The difference between these steps is the ratio 81: 50, called a comma by the Greek theorists. 358. We still want two steps of the seale, and two sounds or notes corresponding to them, namely re and si; and ve vish to establish them on the same authority with the rest. We see that this cannot be done by a concordanee with the fundamental do. The ear suſficiently informs us that the steps do re and la si must be tones, and nol semitones, like mi fa. The sensible similarity of the two tetrachords, do re mi fa and sol la si do, also teaches us that the step si do should be a semitone like mi fa. This seems to be all that mere melody can teach us. But ve have little information whether we shall make lo si a major or a minor tone. If we copy the tetrachord do re mi ſa exaetly, ve shall make the step si do like mi ſa, and equivalent to the ratio IG: I5. 424 TEMPERAMENT OF This requires the moveable bridge to be placed at 128. The sound produced by this division is perſectly satisſactory © the ear as a step of the scale of melody. Moreover, our satisſaction is not confined to the comparison of it with the note do, into which we slide by this gentle step. Tt makes agreeable melody when used as the third to the note sol. If we examine it mathematically, we find it a perfect major third to sol; for sol requires the 160th division. Now 160: 12 =b5: 4, which is the ratio of the pulses of a major third. All these reasons seem enough to make us adopt this determination of the note si. 89. It remains to consider how we shall divide the interval domi. It is a perfeet major third. So is ſa la, and s0 is sol 5i. But in the first of these two, we have seen that it must be composed oſ a major tone with a minor tone above it; and in the second we have a minor tone followed by a uajor tone abovee We are leſt uncertain therefore whether do re shall resemble ſu la or sol si in the position of its to parts. Aristoxenus and his followers declared the ear to be equally pleased with both. Ptolemy's Systema Diatonicum Intensum makes do re a major tone, and other systems make it minor. Even in modern times it has been considered as uncertain; and the only reason which we have to offer for a preſerence of the major tone for the ſirst step is, that, so far as we can judge by our ovn feelings, the sounds in the relation oſ 9: 8 are less discordant than sounds in the relation of I0: 9, and because all the other steps have been determined by means of concords with the key. We reſer, for a more particular examination of the principles on which these arrangements are valued, to Dr. Smiti's Haormonics, Prop. I. where he shews how one is preferable to another, in proportion as it aſfords a greater number of perſect concords among the neighbouring notes, which is the favourite object in all modern musie. Upon this principle our arrangement is by ſar the best, because it admits five more voncords in the octave than the other. But we have con- THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 495 sidered the subject in a different manner merely to avail ourselves of the phenomenon by which all the steps. except one, seem to be naturally ascertained, and by vhich the connection between harmony and melody seems to be pointed out to us. 300. It will be convenient to represent the tones major and minor and the hemitone, by the symbols T, t, and H. Also to mark the notes by the Roman numerals, or by cyphers aceording as they are the extremes of major or minor intervals. By this notation the octave may be represented thus: cC D E F G A B  d e &ec. 58 9 1- 8 9 8 I 8 õ T I6 9 ĩI0 9 T5 ꝗ &eK II III 4V VIVIIVIII IX X &e. The reader vill remark, that the primary divisions which ve assigned to the representation of an octave in Plate V. ſig. I. by the circumference oſ a circle, are in conformity to this Ptolemaic partition of the octavee He will also be sensible, that the division into five equal mean tones and two equal hemitones, which is expressed by the dotted lines, agreeing with the Ptolemaic division only at C and E, is eſfected by hisecting the arch CE; and thereſore the deviation of the sound substituted for the Ptolemaic D is half the difference of CD and DE, that is, half a comma. The deviations thereſore at F, G, A, and B, are each a quarter oſ a comma. It is well known, that if the logarithm of the length of one string be subtracted from that of another, the difſerence is a measure of the ratio between them. Therefore 30103 is the measure of the musical interval called the octave, and then the measures of the Comma . . 540 or 54 Hemitone . . 2803 260 426 TEMPERAMENT OF Minor tone.. 4576 or 458 Major tone.. 5l15 512 8. . : 7918 792 IIId . li 9691 269 4th . . I2494 1249 Vth. . 17609 176:1 6th : .. 2Qo:;12 2041 VIth . . 22Li85 2219 VIIth. : 27300 2780 VIIIth  X0103 3010 This is a very convenient circumstance Iſ we take only the four first figures as integers, and make the octave consist of S010 parts, we have a scale more exact than the nicest harmony requires. The circumſerence of a circle may be so divided into 301 degrees, and the moveable circle have a nonius subdividing each into 10. Or it may be divided into 55,8 degrees, each of which will be a comma. Either of thes divisions will make it a most convenient instrument for expeditiously examining all temperaments of the scale that can be proposed. Or a straight line may be so divided, and repeated thric. Then a sliding ruler, divided in the same manner, and applied to it, will answer the same purpose. We shall see many useſul employments of these instrumenis by and by. 391. Having thus endeavoured to communieate some plain notion of the formation and singular nature of that gradafion of sounds which produces all the pleasures oſ music, and of the manner of ohtaining the steps of this gradation vith certainty and precision, ve proceed to consider how those musical passages may be perſormed on sueh keyed instruments as the organs and harpsichords, as they are noW constructed. These instruments have tvelve sounds and intervals in every octave, in order that an aiv may be performed in any pitch; that ĩs, taking any one of the sounds as a key note It is plain that this cannot be done with accuracy; for we have now seen that the interval mi ſa is bigger THE SCALE OF MUSIC 41 than halfof do re or re mi, &. and therefore the intercalary sound ſormerly mentioned to be inserted between C and D, D and E, &e. vill not do indiscriminately for the sharp of the sound below, and the ſlat of the sound above it. When the tones arę reduced to a mean size, the ear is scarcely sensible of the change in melody, and the harmony of the ſiſths and fourths is not greatly hurtt. But when the halſ notes ure inserted, and employed to make up harmonious intervals, æ⸗ recommended by Zarlino, the harmony is very coarse ndeed. 392. But we must make the reader sensible of the necessity of somę temperament, even independent of those artificial notes. Therefore ILet the scholar tune upwarũs the four Vihs c g, 4 q, d a, Tũ e, all perfeet, admitting no beating whatever. This is easily done, either with the organ or the wheel monochord already deserihed. Then tune downwarũs the perfect octaves e ẽ e Now examine the IIId c e which results from this process. I the instrument be of the pitch hitherto supposed (c making 240 pulses in a second,) this IIId will be heard beating I5 times in a second, which is a discordance altogether intolerable, the noe e being too sharp in ithe ratio of 81 to 80, vhich makes a comma. It is easily found, by calculation, that e makes 303; pulses, instead of 300, required for the IIIdD to e. N. B. It may not be amiss to inform our readers, that if any concord, whose perſect ratio i (n being the greatest termoſ the smallest integers expressing that ratio) be tempered sharp by the fraction : of a comma, and if M and N be the pulses made by the acute and grave notes oſ the concord during any number of seconds, the number b of beats : 2 qmN made in the same time by this concord will be æ 6 42 TEMPERAMENT OF  ſ17q 7 (Smilis Harm. 2u edit. p. 82, &e) 393 It is . imposible. therefore, to have perſect Vihs and perſect IIIds at the same time. And it will be found, that the Sd e g resulting from this process, and the VIth c a, are still more discordant, rattling at an intolerable rate. Now the major and minor thirds, alternately succeeding each other, form the greatest part of our harmonies; and the VIth is also a very frequent accompaniment. It is necessary therefore to sacrifice somewhat of the perfect harmony of the Vihs, in order that we may not be disgusted with the discord of those other harmonies: and it is this mutual accommodation, and not the changes made necessary by the introduetion oſ interealary notes, which is properly called TEMPERAMENT. It will greatly assist us in understanding the effects of the temperaments of the diſferent concords, if we examine all the divisions of the circular representation of the octave and musical scale given in Plate V. ſig. I. by placing the index of the moveable circle on that note of the outer circle for which ve want the proper harmonies, or accompaniments, vhich are either the IIId and Vih, or the 4th and VIth. We shall thus learn, in the ſirst place, the deviations oſ the different perfect notes of the scale from the notes required for this new fundamental; and we musi then study what effect the same temperament produces on the agreeableness of the ha mony of different concords having the same bass or the same treble, taking it for granted that the hurt 10 the harmony oſ any individual concord is proportional to its temperament. 394 It is in this delicate department oſ musical science that we think the great merit ol Dr. Smith's work consists. We see that the deviation from perfect harmony is always accompanicd with beats, and increases hen they increas: THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 429 mn ſrequency—whether it increases in the same proportion may be a question. We think that Dr. Smith's determination of the equality oſ imperſect harmony im his 13th proposition, includes every mathematical or physical circumstance that appears to have any concern in it. What relates immediately to our sensations is, as yet, an impenetrable secret. The theory of beais, as delivered by this author, aſfords very easy, though sometimes tedious, methods of measuring and of insuring all the varieties which can obtain in the heating of imperſect consonances. It appears to us thereſore very unjust to say, with a late writer in the Philosophical Transactions *, that this obscure volume has leſt the matter where it found it. The author has given us eſfective princiPles, although he may have been mistaken in the application; which however ve are ſar ſrom affirming. Our limits will not allow us to give any account of that theory; and indeed our chieſ aim in the present article is to give a method of temperament which requires no scientific knowledge of the subject. But we could not think of losing the opportunity of communicating, by the way, to unlearned persons, some more distinet notions of the scale of musical sounds, and of its foundation in nature, than scholars usually receive from the greater number of mere music masterss. The acknow ledged connection of the musical ratios with the pleasures of harmony and melody, has (we hope) been employed in an easy and not obscure manner; and the phenomena vhich we have ſaithfully narrated, shew plainly that, by diminishing the rattling ungulations of tempered concords, ve are certain of improving the harmony of our instruments. We shall proceed thereſore on this principle for the use of the mere performer, but at the same time introducing some very simple deductions from Smiths theory, ſor which ve * Dr. Thomas Young, to vhom Dr. Rubison here alludes, has published a reply to this, and a preceding part of the present article, in N chulsou's Journal, for August 180I. See also Dr. Young's Lectures on Natural Phitosepty, vol. ĩ. p. 607. 430 TEMPERAMENT OF expeet the thanks of all such readers as vish to see a little of the reasons on which they are to proceed. 395. The experiment, of which we have just now given an aceount, shews that four consecutive fifths compoæe a greater interval than two ootaves and a major third. Yet in the construction of our musical instruments of ſixed sounds, they must be corsidered as of equal extent; sinte we have 7 half intervals in the Vth, and 12 in the oeta; and four n the IIId, four Vths contain 28, and two octaves eontain 24; and these, vith the four which compose a IIũ, make also 258. It is plain; thereſore, that vhatever we ũdo with the IIIds, we must lessen the Vths. If therefore we keep the IſId perſeet, ve must lessen each of the Vihs by th of a comma; for we learned, by the beating of the imperfect IIID e e, that the whole excess of the four Vths was a comma. Therefore the Vth c  must be flattened th oſ⸗ comma. But how is this to be done with aceuracy ? RecolIeet the formula given a little ago, where the number of beats 2 N b in any number of seconds is I e 7 In the present case  =l, m æ3, N = 240 per second, and ꝓ 4 ? x 8 x 2” I4o Therefore the ſormula is =T61 x àF1 õà5 225 in a second, or O beats in ſour seconds very nearly. In like manner, the next Vth & ũ must be flattened ;th of a comma, hy making it beat hal? as fast again, or 137 beats in four seconds (because in this Vth N  360. But as this beating is rather too quiok to be easily counted, it vill be better to tune downwards the perfect octave g G, which vill reduce N to 180 for the Vth G d. This vill give us 1,68 per second, or I0 beats in  seconds very nearly. There is another way of avoiding the employment of too quick beats. Instead of tuning the octave & G, make c G beat as oſten as c ?& This is even morẽ exactly an octare to g than can be estimated by a good ear. Dr. Smith has THE SCALE OE MUSIE. 431 demonstrated, thãt when a note makes à minor eoncord with another note below it, and thereſore a major eoncord with the octave to that note, it beats equally with both; but if the major concord be below, it beats twiee as ſast with the octave àbovee Now in the present case, c g is a Vih, and c G a 4th. For the same reason e f would beat twice as ſast as c F. In the next place, the Vth d  must be made to beat ſflat 15 times in 6 seconds. In like manner, instead of tuning upward the Vth e, tune downvard the octave a ũ, and then tune upward the Vih a e, and ſlatten ĩt till ĩt beat 15 times in 8 seconds. IF we take 15 seconds for the common period oſ all these beats, we shall have The beats of c 34. G d æ25. d a  87. a c2. 396. We shall now find ce to he a fine IIId, without any sensible bealing; and then we proceed in the same way, always tuning upward a perfeet Vth; and when this would lead too high, and therefore produce too quick beating, we should tune downward an octave. Do this till we reach b ⸗, which should be the same vith q, or a perſect octave above c. This vill be a full proof of our aceurate perſormancee But the best process of tuning is to stop vhen we get to ꝗ e. Then vwe tune Vths dovnvard from e; and octaves upward when the Vths would lead us tob low. Thus we get c F, F ſi ſ&; & ũ, & et, and thus complete the tuning of an octavee. We take thiis method, instead of proceeding upwards to b æ; heeause those notes marked sharp or ſlat are, vhen tuned in this wvay, in the best relation to those with which thev are most ſrequently used as IIIds. 397. This process of temperament will be greatly expedited by employing a little pendulum, made of a hall of 432 TEMPERAMENT OF about two ounces weight, sliding on a light deal rod, having at one end a pin hole through it. To prepare this rod, hang it upon a pin stuck into the wainscoating, and. slide the ball downward, till it makes 20 vibrations in 1I, by comparing it with a house clock. In this condition mark the rod at the upper edge of the ball. In like manner, adjust it for 4, 28, 32, 36, 40, 44, 48, vibrations, making marks for each, and dividing the spaces between them by the eye, noticing their gradual diminutionn Then, having calculated the beats oſ the different Vihs, set the ball at the mark suited to the particular concord, and temper the sound till the beats keep pace exactly with the pendulum. 398. But previous to all this, ve must know the number of pulses made in a second by the C of our instrument. For this purpose we must learn the pulses of our tuning ſork. To learn this, a harpsichord wire must be stretched hy a weight till it be unison or octave below our ſork: then, by adding 4 th of the weight to what is now appended, it will be tempered by a comma, and vill beat, when it is sounded along vith the fork; and we must multiply the beats by 50: The produet is the number of pulses required. And hence ve calculate the pulses of the C of our instrument when it is tuned in perfect concord vith the fork. The usual concert pitch and the tuning forks are so nearly consonant to 240 pulses for C, that this process is scarcely necessary, a quarter of a tone never occasioning the change of an entire beat in any of our numbers. 399. The intelligent reader cannot but observe, that this system of tuning with perfect IIIds, which is preferred all others by many great masters, is the one represented by our circular figure of the octavee The IIId is there perfeet, and the Vth CG is deficient by a quarter of a comma. We cannot here omit taking notice of a most valuable observation of Dr. Smiths on this temperament, and, in genetal, on any division of the octave into mean tones and equal limmas. THE SCALE OF MUSIC, 433 400. The octave being made up of five mean tones and two limmas, it is plain that, by enlarging ihe tones, ve diminish the limmas, and that the increment oſ the tone is tvofifths of the contemporaneous diminution of the limma. If therefore, we employ the symbol » to express any minute variation of this temperament, and make the increment of a mean tone 2 v, the contemporaneous variation which this induces on a limma vill be=5 v; and if the tone be diminished by the same quantity 2 vu, the limma vill increase by the quantity 5 ». Let us see what are the contemporaneous changes made on all the intervals of the octave when the tone is diminished by 2 e. I. A Vih is made up of three tones and a limma. Therefore the variation of its temperament is=/ 6 » + b », or is =—nu. That is, the Vth is flattened from its former temperament, whatever that may have been, by the quantity —nb. Consequently the 4th, which is alvays the complement of the Vth to the octave, has its temperament sharpened by the quantity v. 2. A IId, beinga tone distant ſrom the fundamental, has its temperament changed by  2v. Thereſore a minor Tth is raised by 2 ». 3. A minor 3d is made up ofa tone and a limma: thereſore its varation is / 2v + bv. = 3 o. Thereſore a major VIth (its complement) loses 0. 4. A major IIId, or two tones, has its variation /  4 v. Therefore a minor 6th has its variation =4. 5. A major VIIth, the complement oſ a limma, has b v. 6. A tritone, or IVih, must have the variation = 6 v. Therefore the false 5th must have --- 6o. 401. From this observation, Dr. Smith deduces the following simple mathematical construction: In the strait line CE (Plate V. fig. 2) take the six equal parts C g, gd, d a, a E, E b, b t, and draw through the points of division the six parallel lines gG, d D, &c. Le these lines represent s0 many scales oſ the octave, so placed that the poinis VOL. VI. 2æ a4 TEMPERAMENT OF C, 5, d, &e. may represent the points C, g, d, &e. oſ the circular scale in Plate V fig. I. where it is cut by the doited lines representing the system of mean tones and limmas. Then, lst, take a certain length d G on the first line, to the right hand of the line CE, to represent a quarter of a conma. G vill mark the place of the perſeet Vth, while g represents that of the mean or tempered Vth. 2dly, Set off d D, double of 2 G, in like manner, to the right hand on the second paralle This will be the place of the perſect IId to the key note C. Saly, Also st off a 4, on the third parallel, to the leſt hand, equal to  G. This will mark the place of A, the VIth to the key note C. 4thly, Place E on the point e, because, in the system of mean tones represented in Plate V. fig. I. the IIIds were kept perfect. 5thiy, Make b B, to the right hand on the 5th line, equal to 2& G, to mark the place of the perfeet VIth to the key note C. And, 6thly, make t T, to the right hand on the sixth line, equal to twice  G. This will serve for shewimg the contemporaneous temperament oſ the tritone, or IVth, contained between F and B, as also of its complement, the fale 5th in Plate V. fig. l. It is evident that the temperament of all the notes of the octave, according to the above mentioned system, is properly represented in this figuree The Vih is tempered fiai, by the quarter comma G g; the IId is tempered flat by ihe half comma D à; the VIth is tempered sharp by a quarter comma A a; the IIId is perſeet; the VIIth is flat by a quarter comma B b; and the 4th is sharp by a quarter comma G g. 402. Nov, let any other straight Iine C ? be drawn from C across these parallels. This will mark, by the interval g G, d' D. &e. the temperaments of another system oſ mean tones and limmas. For it is evident, that the econtemporaneous variations gg, d d, &e. from the ſormer tem perament, are in the just proportions to each other;  ẽ beingmamn, the variation proper for the Vih, and ihe opposite tempe rament for its complement or 4th. In like manner, a ? is THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 435 S 1, the variation competent to the VIth; and E  is  4æ, the proper variation for the Illd. In like munner, b b isb u, the variation of the VIſth and 2d. And, lastly, t t is the variation 6 ⸗ of the tritone, and its complement, the ſalse fifth. For all these reasons, any straight line C è or C?, drawn ſrom C across the parallels, may justly be called the TæMPERER. 403. This is a very useful construetion: For it is plain, that the sounds which can be placed in our organs and harpsichords, which have only twelve keys for an octave, must approach to a system of mean tones. The division of the oœtave into twelve equal intervals is such a system of mean tones exactly. Nov, in such systems, when a line is dravn from C across the parallels, we see, at one glance, not only all the temperaments of the notes with the key note, but also the temperaments of those concords which the notes employed in full harmony make with each other. Thus, in the harmony of K— IIIV, the III and V make a minor 3d with each other; and in the harmony of K4 VI, the 4 and VI make a major 3d vith each other Now the reader vill easily see, that the first of these eoncords has its interval diminished on hoth sides, when the IIIdD is tempered sharp, but only on one side when it is tempered ſlat. The mathematical reader vill also easily see, that the contemporaneous temperament A a' of the VIth is always equal to the sum g G and E , and that A o/ is equal to the difference of g G and E e?. Therefore the temperament of this subordinate concord, in the full harmony K IIIV, is, in all cases, the same with the contemporaneous temperament of the VIth. In like manner, he will perceive that the temperament oſ the subordinate IId, in the harmony of E4VI, is equal to the contemporaneous temperament of the III. We alo see, in general, that the whole harmony is more hurt when the temperer lies in the angle ECK, with the IIId THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 497 that, in ſact, the pleasantness oſ any individual concord increases as the undulations called beats diminish in frequency. It is probable that we shall not deviate very ſar from the truth, if we suppose the harmoniousness of an individual tempered concord to be proportional to the slowness oſ these undulationss. But it by no means follows, that a tempered Vih and IIID are equally pleasant, each in its kind, when they beat equally slow. There is a difſerence in kind in the pleasures of these concords: and this must arise from the peculiar manner in vhich the component pulses of each concord divide each other. We are certain that this is all the difference that obtains between them in Nature But the harmoniousness here spoken of is the arrangement which produces this pleasuree We are entitled to say, that this ĩs equal in two given instances, when the arrangements are precisely similar; and when the things arranged are the same, nothing seems to remain in which the instances can diſfer. At any rate, it is of consequence to be able to proportion and distribute these undulations at pleasure. They are unpleasant; and when reinforced by uniting, must be more s) The theory puts it in our pover to prevent this union; perhaps by making them very unequal; or, iſ this should give a chance of periodical accumulation, we may find it better to make them all equal. Surely to have all this in our power is very desirable; and this is obtained by the theory of the beats of imperfect consonances. 406. But we are forgetting the process oſ tuning, and have only tuned three or four notes of our octavee We must tune the rest by considering their relation to notes already tunedlc Thus, if ꝗc makes 36 beats in 16 seconds, F c should make one third less, or about 24 in the same time: because N in the formula is now 160 instead of 240. Proceeding in this way, we shall tune the octave C c most accurately as a system of mean tones with perſect ITlds, by making the notes beat as followss. A point is put over the note that is to be tuned ſrom the other, and a +, or a, 438 TEMPERANENT OF means that the concord is to be tempered sharp or ſlat. Thu g is tuned from c, Make eg beat 46 times in 16 seconds G ES 36 G d 27, i. e. àths of ge s 48 cã + 6 times in 16 seconds cè O, i. e. a perſect IIId d ſi æ 0 e g x 0 Tæ 0 b ſdownward  24. i. e. 3ths oſ e & v ĩ O, i. e. a perfect octave Tbet downwardA43, i. e. ſths of c” cc O an octave. Other processes may be followed, and perhaps some them better than the process here proposed. Thus, ĩ and eb may be tuned as perfect IIIds to d and & downvaris Also, as we proceed in tuning, ve can prove the notes, by comparing them vith other notes already tuned, &e &e & We have direeted to tune the two notes à and æ by tſing the leading Vth downwardss. We should have om æ the same pipes in the character of ax and dæ in the proæ of tuning upwards by Vthss. But this would not have ꝑm duced precisely the same sounds, although, in our mperẽæ instruments, one key must serve for oæ and . By tææ them as here directed, they are better fitted for the plææ in which they will be most ſrequently employed n ow æſ modulations. 407. It may reasonably be asked, Why s much  æ⸗ficed in order to preserve the IIIds perfect? Weræ òæ àIowed to retain some part of the sharp tempær23æ: 'æ æ necessary for preserving the Vths perfect, we sbœuĩ gqæT- THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 430 improve the harmony. And since enlarging the Vih makes the tone greater, and thereſore the limma mi ſu much smaller, it will bring it nearer to the magnitude of a halſ tone; and this will be better suited for its double service of the sharp of the note below, and the ſlat of the note above. Accordingly, such a temperament is in great repute, and indeed is generally practised, although the VIths and the subordinate chords of full harmony are evidently hurt by it. Even Dr. Smith recommends it as well suited to our defective instruments, and gives an extremely easy methoil of executing it by means of the beats. His method is to make the Vth and ITId beat equally fast, along with the key, the Vih flat, and the third sharp. He demonstrates (on another occasion), that concords beat equally fast with the same bass when their temperaments are inversely as the major terms of their perfect ratios. Thereſore draw EG, and divide it in ꝑ, so that E ꝓ may be to p G as 3 to 5. Then draw C ꝑ, cutting G in g, and EX in ?; and this temperer will produce the temperament we want. It will be found, that E  and Gę' are each of them 32 of their respective scales. Therefore make e g beat 32 times in 16 seconds .40 TEMPERAMENT OF DIt may be proper to add to all these isntructions a caution about the manner oſ counting the clock while the tuner is counting the beatss If this is to continue for 16 seconds, let the person who counts the clock say one at the beat he begins with, and then telling them over to himself, let him say done instead of 17. Thus 16 intervals vill elapse while the tuner is counting the heats Were he to begin to count at one, and stop when he hears sixteen, he would get ihe number of heats in 15 seconds only. 408. We do not hesitate i0 say, that this method of tuning by beats is incomparably more exact than by the mere judgment of the ea¥n We cannot mistake more than one beatt. This mistake in the concord oſ the Vth amounts io no more than , th of a comma; and in the IIII ĩt is only ⸗ . 409. It may be ohjeeted that it is fit only for the organ and instruments of continued sounds, hut will not do for the quickly perishing sounds oſ the harpsichord. True, it is the only method worthy of that noble instrument, and this alone is a title to high regard. But farther; the accuracy attaiable by it, renders it the only method fit for the examination oſ systems oſ temperament. Even ſor the harpsichord it is much more exact, and more certain in its process, than any other. It does not proceed, by a random trial ofa ſflatened series of Vihs, and a comparison with the resulting ITId, and a second trial, if the ſirst be unsatisſactory. It says at once, let the Vth beat so many times in 16 seconds Even in the second method, without counting, and merely by the equality of the beats of the Vih and IIId. the prgress is eassy Both are tuned perſect The Vth is then ſlattened a lintle, and the IIId sharpened; iſ the Vth beat ſaster than the IIId, alter it first. All difficulty is obviated by the simple contrivance oſ a variable pendulum, already deseribed. This may be made exact by any person that will take a litile pains; and when once made, vill serve ſor every 6ria. When the ball is set THE SCALE OF MUSIE. 441 to the proper number, and the pendulum set a swinging, we can come very near the truth by a very few trials. N. B. In tuning a piano forte, which has always two strings to a key, wve must never attempt tuning them both at once; the hack unison oſ hoth notes of the concord must be damped, by sticking in a bit of soft paper behind it. We hope that the instructions now given, and the application of them to two very respectable systems of temperament, are suſficient ſor enabling the attentive reader to put this method of tuning successſully in practice, and that he pereeives the efſicieney of it ſor attaining the desired end. But beſore we take leave oſ it, ve beg leave to mention another circumstance, which evinces the just value oſ the general theory of ihe beats of imperſect consonances as delivered by Dr. Smith. 410. These reinſorcements of sound, which are called beatings, are noises. I any noise whatever be repeated, with suſficient ſfrequency, at equal intervals, it becomes a musical note, of a certain determinate pitch. If it recur 60 times in a second, it becomes the note C ſfa ut, or the double otave below the middle C of our harpsichords, or the note of an open pipe eight feet long. Now there is a similar (ve may call it the very same) reinforcement of sound in every concord. Where the pulse of one sound of the concord hisects the pulse of the other, the two sounds are more uniformly spread: but where they coincide, or almost coincide, the condensation of one undulation combines with that of the other, and there comes on the ear a stronger condensation, and a louder sound. This may be called a noise; and the equable and ſrequent recurrence of this noise should produce a musical note. If, for instance, c and a are sounded together: There is this noise at every third pulse of c, and every filth pulse of u; that is, 80 times in a second. This should produce a note which is a 12th below e, and a 17th major below a; that is, the double octave below ſ, which makes 320 vibrations in a second. That is to say, along THE SCALE OF MUSIC. M48 ment vhich renders them equally harmonious, each in its kind, gives a system oſ temperament which he calls æavAL nanuoNY. Each concord, (excepting the octave) is temperæd in the inverse proportion of the produet oſ the terms oſ its perſect ratioo. It is very nearly equivalent to a division of the octave into 50 equal parts We do not give any farther account oſ,it here, although we think its harmony preferable to any thing that we have ever heard. We heard it, as executed for him, and under his inspection, by the celebrated harpsichord- maker Kirkmann, both when the instrument was yet in the hands oſ the maker, and aſterwards by the ingenious author. We have also heard some excellent musicians deelare, that the organ of Trinity college chapel at Cambridge vas greatly improved in its harmony by the change made on its temperament under the inspection of Dr. Smith. When we name Stanley, we presume that the authority will not be disputedc We mention this, because the riter in the Philosophical Transactions speaks of this system, vith ſlattened major thirds, as of no value But we do not give any farther account of it, because it is not suited to our insttuments, which have but twelve sounds in the oetave. 412. The reader will plense to recolleet, that the great object of temperament is twoſold. First, to enable us to transpose music from one pitch to another, so that ve may make any note of the organ the fundamental oſ the piecee This undoubtedly requires a system approaching to one oſ mean tones, because the harmony must be the same in every key. This requires temperament, because a sound must be oecasionally considered, either as the sharp of the note below it, or the flat of the one above This canmot produee perſect harmony, because the limma of the perfect diatonic scale is greater than a half tonee. Thus a temperament is necessary merely for the sake oſ the melody. But, secondly, the nature of modern musie requires every note to be accompanied, or onsidered as accompanied. with full harmony. This is, in THE SCALE OF MUSIG. 445 temperament on different concordss. Much of this, wve apprehend, arises ſrom disposition. Persons oſ a gay disposition relish the harmony of the IIId, and preſer a sharp toa flat temperament of this concord. Persons oſ a more pensive disposition, prefer such temperaments as allow the minor thirds to be more perfect. 414. But there are many, eminent both as perſormers and as theorists, vho reject any system which gives the same harmonies on every note of the octave. They observe, that in the progress oſ the cultivation of music in Europe, the melodies of all nations have gradually approached to a certain uniformity. Certain cadences, closes, strains, and phrases, are becoming every day more common; and even in the conduct of a considerable piece oſ music, and the gradual but slow passage of the modulation from one key into another, there is a certain regularit. Nay, they add, that this cannot be greatly deviated from without becoming very offensivee We may remain ignorant oſ the eause of this uniſormity; but its existence seems to prove that it arises from some natural principle; and thereſore it ought to be complied with, and our temperaments should be accommodated to itt. The result oſ this uniformity in the music oſ our times is, that the modulation on some keys is much less frequent than on others, and this ſrequency decreases in a certain order. Supposing that ve begin on C. A piece of plain music seldom goes farther than G and F. A little more fancy and refinement leads the composer into D, or into Bè, &c. &e. It would iherefore be desirable to adjust our temperaments so, that the harmonies in C shall be the best possible, and gradually less perfect in the order oſ modulation. Thus ve shall, in our general practice, have finer harmony than if it were made equal throughout the octave; because the unavoidable imperſections are thrown into the least ſrequented places of the sealee The practical musicians add to this, that by such a temperament the different keys acqquire characters, which fit each of them more particularly 2446 TEMPERAMENT OF ſor the expression of different sentiments, and for exciting different emotions. This is very perceptible in our harpsichords as they are generally tuned. The major key oſ A is remarkably brilliant; that of F is as remarkably simple, &&e. We cannot say that we are altogether convinced by thes arguments. The violin is unquestionably the instrument oſ the greatest powers A concert of instruments oſ this kind, unembarrassed by the harpsichord, or any imstroments incapable oſ occasional temperament, is the finest music ve havee The perſormers make no such degradations of harmony, but keep it as perſect as possible throughout; and a violin perſormer is sensible of violence of constraint when he accompanies a keyed instrument into thes unfrequented pathss. Let him play the same music alone, and he will play it quite difſerently, and much more io his own satisfaction, We imagine, too, that much of the uniformity spoken of is the result of imitation and ſashion, ani even oſ the temperaments that ve have preferred. There is an evident distinetion in the native musie of diſferent nations. An experienced musician will know, from a ſew ban, whether an air is Irish, Scotch, or Polis. This distinction is in the modulation, which, in those nations, follows diſſerent courses, and should therefore, on the same principle, lead to different temperaments. With respect to the variety oſ characters given to the diſſerent keys, ve must acknowledge the ſactt. We have tuned a piuno forte in the usual manner; but instead of beginning the process with C, we began it with D. An excellent perſormer oſ voluntaries sat down to the instrument, and began to indulge his rich fancy; but he was confounded at every step: he thought the insirument quite out of tune. But when he vas informed how it had been tuned, and then tried a known plain air on iĩt, he declared ĩt to be perſectly in tune. It is still very doubtful, however, whether æe should not have much finer musie, by equalising the har- THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 44% mony in the different keys, and trusting for the different expression so much spoken oſ to a judicious mixture oſ vther notes called discords. 415. Afſter all, the great uncertainty about the must proper temperament has remained so long undetermined, hecause ve had no method oſ executing with certainty any temperament that was offered to the public Whai signifies it on what principle it may be proper io flatten a Vth one-fifth oſ a comma, and sharpen a VIth one seventh of | comma, unless ve are able to do both the one and the other? Till Dr. Smith published the theory oſ beats, the monochord was the only assistance we had: but however nicely it may be divided, it is scarcely possible to make the moveable bridge so stendy and so accurate in its motion, that it vill not sensibly derange the tension of the string. We have seen some very nice and costly monochords; but not one of them could be depended on to one-æight of a comma. Even if perſect, they gave but momentary sounds by pinchingg. The bow eannot be trusted, because its pressure changes the tension. Mr. Watt's experiments with his monochord of continued sound sheved this evidently. A piteh- pipe with a sliding piston promises the greatest aceuracy; but we are sadly disappointed, because the graduation of the piston cannot be performed by any mathematical rule. It must be pushed more than half way down to produce the octave, more than one- third to produce the Vih, &e. and this without any rule yet discoveredlc Thanks to Dr. Smith we can nov produce an instrument tuned exactly, according to any proposed system, and then submit ĩt to the fair examination of musicians. Even the speculatist may now form a pretty just opinion of the merits of a system, by calculating, or measuringy such scales as ve have proposed, the beats produced by the tempered concords in all parts of the octavee No one who has listened with attention to the rattling beats of a full organ, with its twelſth and sesquialter stops all sounding, vill deny that they are hostile to 448 TEMPERAMENT OF all harmony or good music. We cannot he much mistaken in preſerring any temperament in proportion as it diminishes the number oſ those heats We should thereſore examne them on this principle alone; attending more particularly to the beats oſ the third major, because these are in ſact the loudest and most disagreeable; and we must not content ourselves with the beats of each concord with the fundame: tal of the full harmony, whether K—IIIV, or & AVI, or Es8V, or 4—6, which sometimes occurs. We must attend equally to the beats of the two notes of accompaniment with each other: these are generally the most faulty. 416. This examination is neither difficult nor tedious. I. Write down, in one column, the lengths of the strings or divisions of the monochord. 2. In another write their logarithms; in a third the remainders, aſter subtracting each ſrom the logarithm of the ſuudamental. 3. Have at hand a similar table for the perfect diatonie scalee 4. Compare these, one by one, and note the difference,  or, in a 4th column. These are the temperaments of each note of the scalee 5. Compare every eouple of notes which will compose a major or minor third, or a ſiſth, by subtracting the logarithm oſ the one note from that of the othe. The differences are the intervals tempered. 6. Compare these with the perfect intervals of the diatonic seale, and note the differences, + or —, and set them down in a ſiſth column. These are all the temperaments in the system. 7. If we have used logarithms consisting oſ five decimal places, which is even more than suſficient, consider these numeral temperaments as the q oſ the formula given in § 399, ſor calculating the beats, and then ꝓ is alvays = 50. Or we may make another column, in which the temperaments are reduced to some easy fraction of a comma. 417. We shall content ourselves vith giving one example: the temperament proposed by Mr. Young in the Philosophi- THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 449 eal Transaetions ſor 1800. It is contained in the following table: l. 2. S. 4. 5. lIIds upward on 100080 5.00000 C 135 x 94728] 4.97645 2355  G. 150 89304] 4.95087 4913 D. Bb 45 b  88810 4.92380] T60] A. Eb 306  8 E 719752 490174] 9820 E. Ab 448] F F 74921] 4.87461  12589] B. Cæ 494 æ5  71041] 4.85151  1a839 Fæ 540 66829 4.82 192  17508  8ds upward on x 68188 4.80036 19964] A. E. 256 A 59676 4.77580  22420] D. B. 291 B ] 56181] 4.7491] 25079] G. Fæ 346 B ] 532004 4.720610] 27890 C. Cx 418ſ8 C] 50000] 4.69897 ] 30108] F. Gœ 494 Bb Eb 540 Vths upward on Eb. Gꝶ. Cx. Fæ perſect F. Bb. E. B ãſm C. G. D. A 116 Interval oſ a comma . . 540 minor third ſ . I918 major third 9691 fifth . . . 17609 The first column of the above table contains the ordinary designations of the notess. The second contains the corresponding lengths of the monochord. The third contains the logarithms of column second. The fourth contains the difference of each logarithm ſrom the first The next column contains, first, the temperaments oſ all the major thirds, having for their lowest note the sound corresponding to the 494 lette. Thus 494, or Iꝗ oſ a comma, is the temperament of the IIId, B Dx, and Cu F. Secondly, it contains all the minor thirds ſformed on the notes represented by the letterss. The column below contains the temperaments oſ voL 1v. r THE SCALE OF MUSIC. 451 great partiality for this work, having got more information from it than from all our patient study of the most celebrated writings of Ptolemy, Huyghens, Euler, &e. It is our duty also to say, that ve have got more information concerning the music of the Greeks from Dr. Wallis's appendix to his edition of Porphyrius's Commentary on Ptolemy's Harmonics, than from any other work. TRUMPET. 453 The Articulute TRuuPET, comprehending both the speaing and the heoring trumpet, is by much the most valuable instrument, and has, in one of its forms, been used by people among vhom we should hardly have expected to find such Improvements. That the speaking trumpet, of which the object is to increase the force of articulate sounds, should have been known to the ancient Greeks, can excite no wonder;. and thereſore we easily admit the accounts which we read of the horn or trumpet, with which Alexander addressed his army, as vell as oſ the whispering caverns of the Syracusan tyrant. But that the natives of Peru were acquainted with this instrument, will probably surprise many of our readers. The fact however seems incontrovertible. In the History of the Order of Jesuits, published at Naples in 1601 by Beritaria, it is said, that in the year 1595, a small convent of that order in Peru, situated in a remote corner, was in danger of immediate destruction by famine. One evening the superior Father Samaniac, implored the help of the cacique; next morning, on opening the gate oſ the monastery, he found it surrounded by a number of vomen, each of vhom carried a small basket of provisions. He returned thanks io Heaven for having miraculously interposed, by inspiring the good people with pity for the distress of his ſriars. But when he expressed to them his wonder how they came all to be moved as if by mutual agreement with these benevolent sentiments, they told him it was no such thing; that they looked on him and his countrymen as a pack of infernal magicians, vho by their sorceries had enslaved the country, and had bevitched their good eacique, who hitherto had treated them with kindness and attention, as became a true worshipper of the sun; but that the preceding evening at sunset, he had ordered the inhabitants of such and such villages, about six miles off, to come that morning with provisions to this nest of wizzards. TRUMPET. 455 denly spreading at the very mouth to a greater width. Their eſſect was really vonderful. They vere tried in St. James's park; and his Majesty K. Charles II. speaking in his ordinary colloquial pitch of voice through a trumpet only 5 ſeet long, was clearly and most distinctly heard at the distance of a thousand yards Another person, selected we suppose for the loudness and distinetness of his voice, was perſectly understood at the distanee of four miles and a halſ. The fame of this soon spread; Sir Samuel Morland's principles were reſined, considering the novelty of the thing, and differ considerably ſfrom Father Kircher'ss The aerial undulations (ſor he speaks very accurately concerning the nature of sound) endeavour to difſfuse themselves in spheres, but are stopped by the tube, and therefore redundulate towards the axis like vaves from a bank, and, meeting in the axis, they ſorm a strong undulation a little farther advanced along the tube, which again spreads, is again reſlected, and so on, till iĩt arrives at the mouth of the tube greatly magniſied, and then it is diffused through the open air in the same manner, as iſ all proceeded ſrom a very sonorous point in the centre of the wide end of the trumpet. The author distinguishes with great judgment between the prodigious reinforcement of sound in a speaking trumpet and that in the musical trumpet, bugle-horn, conch shell, &e.; and shows that the difference consists only in the violènce oſ the first sonorous agitation, which can be produced by us only on a very small extent of surfacee. The mouth-piece diameter thereſore oſ the musieal trumpet must be very small, and the force oſ blast very considerable Thus one strong but simple undulation will be excited, which must be subjected to the modifications of harmony, and will be augmented by using a conical tube*. But a speaking trumpet must make * Accordingly the sound of the bugle- horn, oſ the musical trumpet, or the French hom, is prodigiously loud, when we consider the ànall pasinge through which a moderate blast is sent hy the trumpeter. TRUMPET. 457 Ple oſ construetion, and thus enable us to say which is most agreeable to the procedure of natureVYet there is hardly any difference in the performance of trumpets of equal dimensions made after these diſferent methods. The propagation of light and that of elastic undulations seem to require very different methods of management. Yet the ordinary phenomena of echoes are perfectly explicable by the acknowledged laws either of opties or acousties; still however there are some phenomena of sound which are very unlike the genuine results of elastic undulations. If sounds are propagated spherically, then what comes into a room by a small hole should diffuse itselſ from that hole as round a centre, and it should be heard equally well at twelve feet distance from the hole in every direction. Yet it is very sensibly louder vhen the hearer is in the straight line drawn from the sonorous body through the hole A person can judge of the direction of the sounding body with tolerable exactness. Cannon discharged from the difſerent sides of a ship are very easily distinguished, which should not be the case by the Newtonian theory; ſor in this the two pulses on the ear should have no sensible difference. The most important ſact for our purpose is this: An echo from a small plane surface in the midst of an open field is not heard, unless ve stand in such a situation that the angle of reflected sound may be equal to that of incidencee But by the usual theory of undulations, this small surface should become the centre ofa new undulation, which should spread in all directions. IF we make an analogous experiment on watery undulations, by placing a small ſlat surſace so as to project a little above the water, and then drop in a small pebble at a distance, so as to raise one circular vave, ve shall observe, that when this vave arrives at the projecting plane, it is disturbed by it, and this disturbance spreads ſrom it on all sidess. It is indeed sensibly stronger in that line which is drawn from it at equal angles with the line drawn to the place where the pebble was dropped. But in the TRUMPET. 459 the larynx; the second echo along with the third vibration, and so on. It is evident that this will produce the same eſfeet. The only difference will be, that the articulations of the voice vill be made indistinet, iſ the echoes come from very diſferent distances. Thus if a man pronounce the syllable taw, and the IO successive echoes are made ſrom places which are I0 feet farther oſf, the 10th part oſ a second (nearly) vill intervene between hearing the first and the last. This vill give it the sound of the syllable thaw, or perhaps raw, because r is the repetition of . Something like this occurs vhen, standing at one end oſ a long line of soldiers, we hear the muskets oſ the whole line discharged in one instant. It seems to us the sound of a running-fire. The aim thereſore in the construction of a speaking trumpet may be, to cause as many echoes as possible to reach a distant ear without any perceptible interval of time. This vill give distinctness, and something equivalent to loudness. Pure loudness arises ſrom the violence oſ the single aerial undulation. To increase this may be the aim in the construetion oſ a trumpet; but we are not suſſiciently acquaintd vith the mechanism of ſhese undulations to bring this about vith certainty and precision; whereas we can procure this accumulation of echoes without much trouble, since ve know that echoes are, in ſuet, reflected like light. We can form a trumpet so that many of these lines of refleeted sound shall pass through the place of the hearer. We are indebted to Mr. Lambert of Berlin ſfor this simple and popular view of the subject; and shall here give an abstract oſ his most ingenious Dissertation on Acoustie Instruments, published in the Berlin Memoirs for 1763. Sound naturally spreads in all directions; but ve know that echoes or reflected sounds proceed almost strietly in certain ſimited directions. If thereſore we contrive a trumpet in such a way that the lines of echo shall be confined within a certain space, it is reasonable to suppose that the sound will become more audible in proportion as this diſfusion is TRUMPET. 461 equal to the angles FHD and FCH; that is, the angle of incidence CFD exceeds the next angle of incidence FHC, by the angle FCD; that is by the angle of the conee. In like manner, FDH exceeds CFD by the same angle FCD. Thus every succeeding angle, either oſ incidence or refleetion, exceeds the next by the angle of the cone. Call the angle of the cone a, and let b be the first angle of incidence PDC. The second, or DFC, is b a. The third, or FHC, is b2 a, &e.: and the nth angle of incidence or reflection is bn a, aſter n reſlections. Since the angle diminishes by equal quantities at each subsequent reſlection, it is plain, that whatever be the ſirst angle of incidence, it may be exhausted by this diminution; namely, vhen n times a exceeds or is equal to 5. Thereſore to know how many reſlections of a sound, whose first incidence has the inclination b can be made in an infinitely extended cone, whose angle is a, divide b by a; the quotient will give the number n of reflections, and the remainder, if any, will be the last angle oſ incidence or reflection less than a. It is very plain, that when an angle of refleetion IHA is equal to or less than the angle BCA oſ the cone, the refſlected line HI will no more meet vith the other side CB of the cone. We may here observe, that the greatest angle of incidence is a right angle, or 9°. This sound would he reflected back in the same line, and would be incident on the opposite side in an angle=90  a, &e. Thus we see that a conical trumpet is well suited ſor confining the sound: for by prolonging it suſficiently, we can Eeep the lines of reflected sound wholly within the cone. And when it is not carried to such a length as to do this, when it allows the sounding line GH, for example, to escape without ſarther reflection, the divergency ſrom the axis is less than the last angle of reſlection BFH by halſ the angle BCA of the cone. Let us see what is the connection between the length and angle of ultimate reflection. 462 ACOUSTICS. We have sin. 5.2a: sin. 5 = CD: CF, and CF æCD x sin. b 42, and sin. FZB2 a: sin. 5a = CF: CH, and sin. 5a CH = CF sm. ba cD sin. b sin.ha in 52 a x in. a ãin.26 Thereſore if ve suppose Xto be the length which will give us n reſections, ve shall have X  CD x sin b sin. bn a Hence we see that the length increases as the angle n a diminishes: but is not infinite, unless æ a is equal o  In this case, the immediately preceding angle of reſleetion must be a, because these angles have the common diſference o Thereſore the last reſleeted sound was moving paraliel to the opposite side of the cone, and cannot again meet itt But though we camot asign the length which will give the ath reſlection, we can give the length which will give the one immediately preceding, vhose angle with the side oſ the cone is . Let Y be this length. We have Y  CD x . This length uill allow every line oſ sound to be reflected as oſten, saving once, as ĩſ the be were inſinitely long. For suppose a sonorous line to be traced backwards, as i a sound entered the tube in the direction ĩ , and vere reflected in the poinis à, ſ. à. à D, the angles will be continually augmented by the constant apgle . But this augmentation can never go ſarther than 0 + ; a. Forũũt reaches that value at D, for mstance, the reflected line DK uill be perpendicular  the æxE CN: æ3d the angle ADK =l be equal v the angle DEB. and the sound will come out a;gmim Thæ remark is of portanc on another accoum Nou rp- the ; t0 bæ eut of at D by a plane perpeRdæula he axE) ED æũ be the diameter oſ its mouth pce 22d ũ ææ PEP 2 nouth mpletely occu- TRUMPET. 468 pying this circle, and every point oſ the circle to be sonorous, the reflected sounds will proceed from it in the same manner as light wvould ſrom a flame which completely occuPies its area, and is reflected by the inside of the cone. The angle FDA will have the greatest possible sine when it is a right angle, and it never can be greater than ADE, which is  90 + 2 a. And since between 90° + 3 a, and 90 2 a, there must ſall some multiple of a; call this multiple b. Then, in order that every sound may be reflected as oſten as possihle, saving once, we must make the length of it X æ CD x Now since the angle of the cone is never made very great, never exceeding 10 or 12 degrees, b. can never diſfer from 90 above a degree or two, and its sine cannot differ much CD from unity. Therefore X will be very nearly equal to ę, vwhich is also very nearly equal a because a is small, and the sines of small arches are nearly equal and proportional to the arches themselves There is even a small compensation of errors in this formula. For as the sime of 90° is somevwhat too large, which would give X too great, 2 S, à a is also larger than the sine ofa. Thus let a be 12: then the nearest multiple of a is 84 or 969, both of which are as far removed as possible from 90°, and the error is as great as possible, and is nearly ſth of the vhole. This approximation gives us a very simple construction. Let CM be the required length of the trumpet, and draw ML perpendicular to the axis in O. It is evident that S, MO , 5 MCO: rad. Z/ MO: CM, and CM; or X LM CD EELL but X =g5, and therefore LM is equal to CD. TRUMPET. 465 : DK this ve must cut off the part CD, which is = Ei5 3 nearly S ꝗ  a measured in inches, and ve must 3 make the mouth of the same width 5 i 2S8, a On the other hand, if the length of the trumpet is ſixed on, we can determine the angle of the cone. For let the 3 length (reckoned from C) be L; we have 2 8, ? a L, or 3 S,  o9ſ- and s, a= n : Thus let 6 ſeet or 72 inches be chosen for the length of 3 l the cone, ve have S, a 2 113 V 5 =0, 14434, sin. 8 I7 for the angle of the cone; and the width at the 3 mouth is 25. a = 10,4 inches. This being taken ſrom T2, leaves GI, 8 inches ſor the length of the trumpet. And since this trumpet confines the reflected sounds to DTq a cone of 16 34, we have its magnifying power D\ũ DT): S, 2 45° = GDE) æS, 5: 96 nearly. It thereſore condenses the sound about 96 times; and if the distribution vere uniſorm, it would be heard & ũ6, or nearly IO times ſarther oſfFor the loudness of sounds is supposed to be inversely as the square of the distance from the centre of undulation. But before we can pronounce with precision on the perſormance oſ a speaking trumpet, we must examine into the manner in which the refleeted sounds are distributed over the space in which they are all conſined. Let BEDA (Plate VI. fig. .) be the section of a conical trumpet by a plane through the axis: let C be the vertex of the cone, and CW its axis; let TEV be the section oſ a VOL. IV. ”c TRUMPET. 467 from all these through A and B must lie within the tangents TA and VB. 8. Thus the centres oſ reflection oſ all the sonorous lines which lie in planes passing through the axis, will be found in the surface oſ this sphere; and it may be considered as a sonorous sphere, vhose sounds first concentrate in W, and are then diſſfused in the cone » Wt. It may be demonstrated nearly in the same manner, that the sonorous lines whioh proceed from P, but not in the plane passing through ſhe axis, also proceed after various reflections, as if they had come from points in the surface oſ the same spheree The only difference in the demonstration is, that the centres Q, R, S of the successive reflections are not in one plane, but in a spiral line winding round the surface of the sphere according to fixed laws. The foregoing conclusions are therefore general for all the sounds whiclr come in all directions from every point in the area of the mouth-piece. Thus it appears, that a conical trumpet is well fitted for inereasing the foree of sounds by diminishing their final divergence. For had the speaker's mouth heen in the open ũir, the sounds which are now conſined within the cone » Wt would have been diſfused over a hemisphere: and we see ſhat prolonging the trumpet must confine the sounds still more, because this will make the angle BWA still smaller; a longer tube must also oceasion more refleetions, and consequently send more sonorous undulations to the ear at a distance placed within the eone » W t. We have now obtained a very connected view of the whole eſfect of a conieal trumpet. It is the same as if the whole segment TEDV vere sounding, every part of it with an intensity proportional to the density of the points Q, R, S, &e. corresponding to the diſferent points P oſ the mouth-picee. It is easy to see that this cannot be uniſorm, but must he much rarer towards the margin of the segment. It would require a good deal of discussion to show the density of these 468 ACOUSTICS. ſietitious sounding points; and we shall cntænt ourselves with giving a very palpable view oſ the distribution of the sonorous rays, or the density (so to speak) oſ the echoes, in the different situations in which a hearer may be placed We may observe, in the mean time, that this substitution oſ a sounding sphere for the sounding mouth-piece has an exact parallel in Orrics, hy which it will be greatly ĩllustraied. Suppose the cone BEDA to be a tube polished in the inside, fixed in a wall B æ, perſorated in BA, and that the mouth-piece DK is occupied completely by a flat flame The eſfect of this on a spectator will be the same iſ he is properly placed in the axis, as iſ he were looking at a flame as big as the whole spheree This is very evident It is easy to see that the line ſ eS is equal to the line l e fa P; therefore the reflected sounds also come io the ear in the same moments as if they had come from their respective points on the surface of the substituted sphere Unless, thereſore, this sphere be enormously large, ‘the distinetnes of articulation will not be sensibly aſſected, because the interval between the arrival oſ the diſſerent echoes oſ the same snap will be insensible. Our Iimits oblige us to content ourselves with exhibiting this evident similarity oſ the progress of echo ſrom the surface of this phonie sphere, to the progress oſ light from the same luminous sphere shining through a hole oſ which the diameter is AB. The direct investigation oſ the intensity of the sound in dierent directions and distances would take up much room, and give no clearer concæption of the thing. The intensity oſ the sound in any point is precisely similar to the intensity of the illumination of the same point; and this is proportional to the porſion oſ the luminous surface seen from this point through the hole directly, and to the square oſ the distance inversely. The intelligent reader vill acquire a distinct concœption of this matter from Plate VI. fig.  which represents the distribution oſ the sonorous lines, m TRUMPET. 469 and by consequence the degree of loudness which may be expected in the different situations oſ the hearer. As we have already observed, the efſſect of the cone of the trumpet is perſectly analogous to the reſlection of light from a polished concave, conical mirror. Such an instrument would be equally fitted for illuminating a distant object. We imagine that these vould be much more poverful than the spherical or even parabolic mirrors commonly used for this purposee These last, having the candle in the ſocus, also send ſorward a eylinder of light oſ equal width with the mirror. But ĩt is well known, that oblique reflections are prodigiously more vivid than those made at greater angles. Where the inclination of the reflected light to the plane of the mirror does not exceed eight or ten degrees it reflects about three-ſourths of the light which falls on it. But vhen the inclination is 50, it does not reflect one-fourth part. We may also observe, that the density oſ the reflected sounds by the conical trumpet ABC (Plate VI. fig. 4.) is precisely similar to that of the illumination produced by a luminous sphere TDV, shining through a hole AB. There will be a space circumseribed by the cone formed by the lines TB t and VA 5, which is unifſormly illuminated by the vwhole sphere (or rather by the segment TDV), and on each side there is a space illuminated by a part of it only, and the illumination gradually decreases towards the borderss A spectator placed much out of the axis, and looking through the hole AB, may not see the whole sphere In like manner, he vill not hear the vhole sounding sphere: He may be so far ſrom the axis as neither to see nor hear any part oſ it. Assisting our imagination by this comparison, we perceive that beyond the point & there is no place where ull the reflected sounds are heard. Thereſore, in order to preserve the magnifying power of the trumpet at any distance, it is necessary to make the mouth as wide as the sonorous sphere. Nay, even this would be an imperſect instrument, because 470 ACOUSTICS. its power would be confined to a very narrow space; and if it be not accurately pointcd to the person listening, its power will be greatly diminished. And we may observe, by the vay, that we derive from this circumstance a strong confirmation oſ the justness of Mr. Lamberts principles; ſor the effects of speaking trumpets are really observed to be limited in the way here deseribed.Parabolic trumpets have been made, and they fortify the sound, not only in the cylindrical space in the direction of the axis, but also on each side of it, whieh should not have been the case had their effeet depended only on the undulations ſormed by the parabola in planes perpendicular to the axiss But io proceed. Let BCA (Plate VI. fig. 5.) be the cone, ED the mouthpiece, TEDV the equivalent sonorous sphere, and THAV the cireumseribed cylinder. Then CA or CB is the length oſ cone that is necessary for maintaining the magniſying pover at all distaneess We have two conditions to be fulfilledlc. The diameter ED of the mouth-piece must be of a certain ſixed magnitude, and the diameter AB oſ the outer end must he equal to that of the equivalent sonorous sphere. These conditions determine all the dimensions oſ the trumpet and its magniſying power. And, fſirst, with respect to the dimensions oſ the trumpet. The similarity of the triangles ECG and BCF gives CG: ED æ CF: AB; but CG =æ BF, æ AB, and CF = CG + GF,  GF +7 AB; therefore  AB: ED GF + 3 AB: AB, and AB: ED m2GF + AB: AB; thereſore 2 GF X ED AB xX ED æ AB?, and 2 GF X ED=AB:, AB X ED, = AB x ABED, and GF = AB X SrD And, on the other hand, because AB: AB X ED  2 GF xX ED, we have AB22 AB x ED +2 ED:=2GF x ED +3 ED?, or ABED' =2GF xX ED +ED: and AB=VGF X EDV ED+2 ED. TRUMPET- 471 Let x represent the length of the trumpet, v the diameter at the great end, and m the diameter of the mouth-piece. Then x vxr  and v=væm+:m +m Thus the length and the great diameter may be had reciprocallyThe useful case in practicę, is to find the diameter for a proposed length, which is gotten by the last equation. Nov if we take all the dimensions in inches, and fix m at an inch and a half, ve have  a m =3 æ, and 2 m? æ 0,5625, and ? m = 0,75; so that our equation hecomes y 8 F 0.568 + 0,75. The ſollowing table gives the dimensions of a suſficient variety of trumpetss. The ſirst column is the length oſ the trumpet in feet; the second coIumn is the diameter of the mouth in inches; the third coIumn is the number of times that it magniſies the sound; and the fourth column is the number of times that it increases the distance at which a man may be distinetly heard by its means; the ſifth contains the angle oſ the cone. - Magniſying.  Extending. 42,6 6,5 8 8,8 1124 10,6 146,6 12,1 180,4 138,4 214,2 14,6 2%97,7 15,7 281,3 16,8 314,6 17,7 347,7. 18,6 880,9 19,5 414,6 20,4 513,6 22,7 612,3 247 711,2 26,6 810,1 28,5 ED in all is æ1,5. l 2 3 4 5 6 T 8 9 r õ -1-1 &% O 472 ACOUSTICS. The two last columns are constructed on the following considerations: We conceive the hearer placed within the cylindrical space whose diameter is BA. In this situation he receives an echo coming apparently from the whole surface TGV; and ve account the effect oſ the trumpet as equivalent to the united voices of as many mouths as would cover this surſacee Thereſore the quotient obtained by dividing the surſace oſ the hemisphere by that of the mouthpiece will express the magniſying power of the trumpet. If the chords 2 E, gT, be drawn, ve know that the spherical surfaces, T V, E  D, are respectively equal to the cireles described with the radii T g, E g, and are therefore as T g° and E g2 Therefore the audibility of the trumpet, vwhen compared with a single voice, may be expressed by Now the ratio of T? to Eg? is easily obtained. For if Ef he drawn parallel to the axis, it is plain that BA—ED . . Bf/m 4 and that Eſ is to f B as radius to the tangent of BCF; which angle ve may call . Thereſore m i :i tn a =5; , and thus we obtain the angle . But if the radius CE be accoumed I, T gis= 2, and E ”5 is = 2 sin. v Thereſore &8 E& Ssu ? and the magniſying ] I pover of the trumpet =4:  T? The num2 : bers, thereſore, in the third column of the table are each J 26n. But the more usual vay oſ conceiving the pover of the trumpet is, by considering how much ſarther it will enable us to hear a voice equally wel. Now we suppose that the audibility of sounds varies in the inverse duplicate ratio oſ TRUMPET. 413 the distancee Thereſore iſ the distance d, at which a man may be distinetly heard, be increased to æ, in the proportion of EG to T g, the sound vill be less audible, in the proportion of T g8 to EG? Therefore the trumpet will be as well heard at the distance ? as the simple voice is heard at the distance d. Thereſore b vill express the exę tending power of the trumpet, which is thereſore = 2 In this manner were the numbers computed for the fourth column oſ the table. When the angle BCA is small, which is always the case in speaking trumpets, ve may, vithout any sensible error, i ED m consider E g as=5, 5. And Tg=TC x V 2, AB AB v 2 =Tæ]F æ; This gives a very easy computation of the extending and magniſying powers of the trumpet. The extending pover is= ?r v The magniſying power is = 27. We may also easily deduce from the premises, that iſ the mouth-piece be an inch and a halſ in diameter, and the length  be measured in inches, the extending pover is very nearly = /5 æ] and the magnifying power =3 x. An inconvenience still attends the trumpet of this construction. Tts complete audibility is conſined to the cylindrical space in the direction of the axis, and it is more ſaintly heard on each side oſ it. This obliges us to direct the trumpet very exactly to the spot where we wish it to be heard. This is confirmed by all the accounts we have oſ the performance of great speaking trumpets. It is evident, that by lengthening the trumpet, and therefore enlarging 474 ACOUBTICS. its mouth, we make the lines TB? and VA b expand Plate VI. fig. 4): and thereſore it will not be so difficult to direet the trumpet. But even this is conſined within the limits of a few degrees. Even if the trumpet were continued without end, the sounds cannot be reinſorced in a wider space than the cone oſ the trumpet. But it is always advantageous to increase ĩts length; for this makes the extreme tangents embrace a greater portion oſ the sonorous sphere, and thus increases the sound in the space where it is all reſlected And the limiting tangentis TB, VA, expand still more, and thus the space oſ ſull effect is increased. But either of these augmentations is very small in comparison of the augmentation oſ size. Iſ the trumpet of Plate VI. fig. 5. were made an hundred times longer, its power would not be inereased one half. We need not therefore aim at much more than to produce a cylindrical space of full effect; and this will always be done by the preceding rules, or table of construetions. We may give the trumpet a third or a ſourth part more length, in order to spread a little the space of its full eſſect, and thereby make it more easily directed to the intended ohject. But in doing this we must be careſul to increase the diameter oſ the mouth as much as we increase the length; otherwise we produce the very opposite efſect, and make the trumpet greatly inferior to a shorter one, at all distances beyond a certain point. For by increasing the length while the part CG remains the same, we cause the tangents TH and VA to meet on some distant point, beyond which the sound diffuses prodigiously. The construetion oſ a speaking trumpet is therefore a problem of some nicety; and as the trials are alvays made at some considerable distance, it may frequently happen that a trumpet, which is not heard at a mile's distance, may be made very audible two miles oſſf by cutting oſf a piece at its wide end. TRUMPET. 475 Aſter this minute consideration of the conical trumpet, we might proceed to consider those of other forms. In particular, the hyperholie, proposed by Cassegrain, and the parabolie, proposed by Haase, seem to merit consideration. But if we examine them merely as reflectors of echoes, we shall find them inferior to the conical With respect to the hyberbolic trumpet, its inaptitude is evident at ſirst sightt. For it must dissipate the echoes more than a conical trumpet. Indeed Mr. Cassegrain proceeds on quite different principles, depending on the mechanism of the aerial undulations: his aim was to increase the agitation in each pulse, so that it may make a more forcible impulse on the ear But we are too imperfectly acquainted vith this subject to decide a priori; and experience shows that the hyberbola is not a good ſorm. With respect to the parabolic trumpet, it is certain that if the mouth-piece were but a point, it would produce the most favourable reflection of all the sounds; for they would all proceed parallel to the axis- But every point of an open mouth must be considered as a centre of sound, and none of it must be kept out of the trumpet. If this be all admitted, it will be ſound that a conical trumpet, made by the preceding rules, will dissipate the refleeted sounds much less than the parabolie. Thus far have we proceeded on the ſair consequences oſ the well known fact, that echoes are reflected in the same manner as light, without engaging in the intricate investigation of aerial undulationss Whoever considers the Newtonian theory of the propagation of sound with intelligence and attention, will see that it is demonstrated solely in the case oſ a single row of particles; and that all the general corollaries respecting the lateral diffusion of the elastic undulations are little more than sagacious guesses, every way worthy oſ the illustrious author, and beautifully confirmed by what we can most distinetly and accurately observe in the cireular waves on the surface of still water But they 476 ACOUSTICS. are by no means fit for becoming the foundation of any doctrine which lays the smallest claim to the title of accurate science. We really know exceedingly little of the theory oſ aerial undulations; and the conformity of the phenomena of sound to these guesses of Sir Isaac Newton has always been a matter of wonder to every eminent and candid mathematician; and no other should pretend to judge oſ the matter. This wonder has always been acknowledged by Daniel Bernoulli; and he is the only person who has made any addition to the science of sounds that is worth mentioning. For such we must always esteem his doctrine oſ the secondary undulations of musical cords, and the secondary pulses oſ air in pipess Nothing thereſore is more unwarrantable, or more plainly shews the precipitant presumption oſ modern sciolists, than the familiar use oſ the general theory oſ aerial undulations in their attempts to explain the abstruse phenomena oſ nature (such as the communieation of sensation ſrom the organ to the sensorium by the vibrations oſ a nervous ſluid, the reciprocal communication of the vlitions ſrom the sensorium to the muscle, nay, the whole phenomena oſ mind), by vibrations and vibratiunculæ. Those vho have endeavoured to improve the speaking trumpet on mechanical principles, have generally aimed at increasing the violence of the elastic undulations, that they may make a more forcible impulse on the ear. This is the object in view in the parabolic trumpet. All the undulations are converted into others which are in planes perpendicular 1o the axis oſ the instrument: s0 that the same litile mass oſ æair is agitated again and agãin in the sume direction From this it is obvious  nclude, that the total agitation vill be more violent. But, in the first place, thes violent agitations must difuse themselves laterallv as soon as they get out oſ the rumpet. and thus he weakened n a proportion that is perhaps impossible for the mos æxper? ænlys n determine But, moreover. ve are not suſiclently acquæinod wĩth the mechænm oſ the very ſirst agãæœs, 1o be able TRUMPET. 4a77 to perceive what conformation of the trumpet will cause the reſlected undulations to increase the first undulations, or to check them. For it must happen, during the produetion of a continued sound in a trumpet, that a parcel oſ air, which is in a state of progressive agitation, as it makes a pulse of one sound, may be in a state of retrograde agitation, as it is part oſ a pulse oſ air producing another sound. We cannot (at least no mathematician has yet done it) diseriminate, and then combine these agitations, with the intelligence and precision that are necessary for enabling us to say what is the ultimate accumulated efſect. Mr. Lambert therefore did wisely in abstaining from this intricate investigation; and ve are highly obliged to him ſor deducing such a body of demonstrable doctrine from the acknowledged, but ill understood, ſact of the reſlection of echoes. We know that two sounds actually cross each other without any mutual disturbance; ſor we can hear either of them distinctly, provided the other is not so loud as to to stun our ears, in the same manner as the glare oſ the sun daæzles our eyes. We may therefore depend on all the consequences which are legitimately deduced ſrom this ſact, in the same manner as ve depend on the science of catoptries, which is all deduced ſrom a fact perſectly similar, and as little understood. But the preceding propositions by no means explain or comprehend all the reinſorcement of sound which is really obtained by means oſf a spealing trumpet. In the first place, although ve cannot tell in what degree the aerial undulations are increased, we cannot doubt that the refleetions which are made in directions which do not greatly deviate ſrom the axis, do really increase the agitation oſ the particles of airr. We see a thing perſeetly similar to this in the waves on waterr. Take a long slip of lead, about two inches broad, and having bent it into the ſorm oſ a parabola, set it into a large ſlat trough, in which the water is about an inch deep. Let a quick succession of small drops oſ vater TRUMPET. 479 than when ve speuk in a different piteh. These observations shew, that the loudness of a speaking trumpet arises from something more than the sole reflection oſ echoes conridered by Mr. Lambertthe very echoes are rendered louder. In the next place, the sounds are inoreased by the vibrations of the trumpet itselſ. The elastic matter of the trumpet is thrown into tremors by the undulations which proceed from the mouth-piece. These tremors produce pulses in the contiguous air, both in the inside of the trumpet and on that which surrounds it. These undulations within the trumpet produce original sounds, which are added to the reſlected sounds: for the tremor continues for some little time, perhaps the time oſ three or four or more pulsess. This must increase the loudness of the subsequent pulsess. We cannot say to vhat degree, because ve do not know the force oſ the tremor which the part oſ the trumpet acquires: but ve know that these sounds will not be magniſied by the trumpet to the same degree as if they had eome ſrom the mouthpiece: ſor they are reflected as if they had come from the surface of a sphere which passes through the agitated point of the trumpet, In short, they are magniſied only by that part of the trumpet which lies without them. The whole sounds of this kind, therefore, proceed as iſ they came from a number of concentric spherical surſaces, or ſrom a solid sphere, whose diameter is twice the length of the trumpet cone. All these agitations arising ſfrom the tremors of the trumpet tend greatly to hurt the distinctness of articulation; because, coming ſrom different points of a large sphere, they arrive at the ear in a sensible succession; and thus change a momentary articulation to a lengthened sound, and give the appearance of a number of voices uttering the same words in suCcession. It is in this way that, when we elap our hands together near a long rail, ve get an echo from æach post, which produces a chirping sound of some continuance. For TRUMPET. 481 precisely to that quantit. What part of the cone should be cut off may be determined by the former principles. CA sin. a Call the angle ACD, a. We have C e sin. n+1) when the sound gets the last useful reflectionn. Then we have the diameter of the mouth AB  2 CA sin. a, and that of the other end &f = C e 2 sin. . Thereſore the sounds will be constipated in the ratio of CA? to C æ, and the trumpet ill bring the speaker nearer in the ratio of CA to Ce. When the lines of reflected sound are thus brought together, they may be received into a small pipe perfectly cylindrical, hich may be inserted into the external ear. This vill not change their angles of inclination to the axis nor their density It may be convenient to make the internal diameter of this pipe  of an inch. Thereſore C  sin. a is = of an inch. This circumstance, in conjunction vith the magnifying power proposed, determines the other dimensions of the hearing trumpet. For C e n a CA sin. a sin. @n + ) a sn  n F I) q, and CA=V6mæa Thus the relation of the angle of the cone and the length of the instrument is ascertained, and the sound is brought nearer in the ratio of CA to C., or of sin.  n +1) a tosin. a. And seeing that we found it proper to make  n +1) a = 90°, we obtain this very simple analogy. I: sin. a CA: Ce. And the sine of  the angle of the cone is to radius as  to the approximating power of the instrument. Thus let it be required that the sound may be as audible EH ., CA as iſ the voice were twelve times nearer. This gives T 12. l This gives sin. a = ſ5, and a =4 47, and the angle of 1 l 144 the cone =9e 34'. Then CA= ꝗ4 =6 x 5].6 VOL. IV. H TRUMPET 483 14th inches diameter at the big end. Such amall instruments may be very exactly made in the paraholic form, and are certainly preferable to the conical. But since even these are of a very moderate size when intended to approximate the sound only a few times, and as they can be accurately made by any tin-man, they may be of more general usee One of 12 inches long, and 3 inches wide at the big end, should approximate the sound at least 9 times. A general rule for maling themDLet m express the approximating power intended for the instrument. The length . m xm1I i of the instrument in inches is V, and the diameter m ; at the mouth is 7 The diameter at the small end is always ; of an inch. In trumpets for assisting the hearing, all reverberation oſ the trumpet must be avoided. It must be made thick, of the least elastic materials, and covered with cloth externally. For all reverberation lasts for a short time, and produces new sounds which mix with those that are coming in. We must also observe, that no acoustic trumpet can separate those sounds to which ve listen from others that are made in the same direetionn. All are received by it, and magniſied in the same proportion. This is frequently a very great inconvenience. There is also another imperfection, wlſich we imagine cannot be removed, namely, an odd conſusion, which cannot bhe called indistinetness, but a feeling as if we were in the midst of an echoing room. The cause seems to be this: Hearing gives us some perception of the direction o the sounding object, not indeed very precise, but suſficiently so for most purposes. In all instruments which we have deseribed for constipating sounds, the last reflections are made in directions very much inclined to the axis, and inclined in many different degreess Thereſore they have the appearance of coming from diſferent quarters; and instead oſ the perception of a single speaker, we have that of a sounding TRUMPET. 485 rantal arch TEG round the axis CG-(Plate VI. fig. 4), is equally sonorous We are assured that it is not: For æven if we should suppose that each of the points Q, R, and S (Plate VI. fig. S.), are equally sonorous with the point P, these points of reflection do not stand so dense on the surface of the sphere as on the surface of the mouth- piece. Suppose them arranged at equal distances all over the mouth-piece, they ill be at equal distances also on the sphere, only in the direction of the arches of great cireles which pass through the eentre of the mouth-piece. But in the direction perpendicular to this, in the circumference of small circles having the centre oſ the mouth-piece for their pole, they must be rarer in the proportion of the sine of their distance from this polee. This is certainly the case with respeet to all such sounds as have been reflected in the planes which pass through the axis of the trumpet; and we do not see (for we have not examined this point) that any compensation is made by the reflexion which is not in planes passing through the axis We thereſore imagine, that the trumpet does not increase the sound in the proportion of 2 E: to g T? (Plate E: T VL. fig. 5.), but in that of 5r to & Mr. Lambert seems aware of some error in his calculation, and proposes another, which leads nearly to this conclusion, but ſounded on a principle which we do not think in the least applicable to the case of sounds. MARINE TRUMPET. Tuis is a stringed instrument, invented in the 16th century by an Italian artist Marino or Marigni, and called a trumpet, because it takes only the notes of the trumpet, with all its omissions and imperfections, and can thereſore execute only such melodies as are ſitted ſor that instrument. It is a very curious instrument, though of small musical powers, because its mode of performance ĩs totally unlike that of other stringed instruments; and it deserves our very particular attention, because it lays open the mechanism of musical sounds more than any thing we are acquainted with; and ve shall therefore make use of it in order to communicate to our readers a philosophical theory of music, vhich we have already treated in detail as a liberal or scientiſic art The trumpet marine is commonly made in the form of a long triangular pyramid, ABCD, (late VI. fig. 5.) on which a single string EFG is strained over a bridge F by means of the finger pin L. At the narrow end are several ſrets 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, &e. between E and K, which divide the length EF, MARINE TRUMPET. 487 into aliquot parts Thus E l is 5 oſ EF, E 2 is , and 50 onn. The bov is drawn lightly across the cord at H, and the string is stopped by pressing it with the finger immediately above the ſrets, but not so hard as to make it touch the frett. When the open string is sounded, it gives the fundamental note. If it be stopped, in the way now described, at 3d of its length from E, it yields the I2th of the fundamental; if stopped at th, it gives the double octave; if at zth, it gives the 17th major, &e. In short, it always gives the note corresponding to the length of the part between the ſret and the note E The sounds resemble those of a pipe, and are indeed the same with those known by the name harmonics, and now executed by every performer on instruments of the viol or violin species. But in order to increase the noise, the bridge F is constructed in a vory particular manner. It does not rest on the sound-board of the instrument through its whole breadth, but only at the corner a, vhere it is firmly fixedc The other extremity is detached about Z-th of an inch from the sound- board; and thus the bridge, being made to tremble by the strong vibration of the thick cord, rattles on the sound-board, or on a bit of ivory glued to it. The usual way in which this motion is procured, is to have another string passing under the middle of the bridge in such a manner that, by straining it tight, we raise the cormer b from the sound- board to the proper height. This contrivance increases prodigiously the noise of the instrument, and gives it somevhat of the smart sound oſ the trumpet, though very harsh and coarsee But it merits the attention of every person who vishes to know any thing of the philosophy of musical sounds, and we shall thereſore say as much on the subject as will conduce to this eſfect. Galileo, as we have observed in the article TEMPERAMENT, was the first ho discovered the real connection between mathematios and music, by demonstrating that the times oſf the vibrations oſ elastic cords oſ the same matter and size, 458 ACOUSTICS. andstretched by equal weights, are proportional to the lengthi of the stringss He inferred from this that the musical pitch of the sound produced by a stretched cord depended solely on the frequency of the vibrations. Moreover, not being able to discover any other cireumstanee in which those sounds physically resembled each other, and reflecting that all sounds are immediately produced by agitations of air acting on the ear, he concluded that each vibration of the eord produced a sonorous pulse in the air, and thereſore that the piteh of any sound whatever depended on the frequency of the aerial pulses. In this way alone the sound of a string, of a bell, of an organ pipe, and the bellow of a bull, may have the same pitch. He could not, however, demonstrate this in any case but the one above mentioned. But he was encouraged to hope that mathematicians would be able to demonstrate it in all cases, by his having observed that the same proportions obtained in organ pipes as in strings stretched by equal weights. But it required a great progress in mechanical philosophy, from the state in which Galileo found it, before men could speculate and reason ooncerning the pulses of air, and discover any analogy between them and the vibrations of a stringg. This analogy, however, was discovered, and its demonstration completed, as we shall see by and by. In the mean time, Galileos demonstration of the vibrations of elastio cords became the foundation of all musical philosophy. It must be thoroughly understood before we can explain the performance of the trumpet marine. The demonstration of Galileo is remarkable for that beautiſul simplicity and perspicuity which distinguish all the ritings of that great mechanician, and it is the elementary proposition in all mechanical treatises of music. Fev oſhem indeed contain any thing more; but it is extremely imperfeet, and is just only on the supposition that all the matter of the string is collected at its middle point, and that the rest of it has elasticity without inertia. This did not suit the MARINE TRUMPET. 480 accurate knowledge of the 17th century, aſter TIuyghens and Newton had given the world a taste oſ what might be done by prosecuting the Galilean mechanics. When a musical cord has its middle point drawn aside, and it ĩs strained into the shape oſ two strait lines, iſ it be let go, ĩt will be observed not to vibrate in this form. It may easily be seen in the extremity oſ its excursions, where it rests, heſore it returns by its elasticity. The reason is this (se Plate VI. fig. .9 When the middle point C oſ the cord is drawn aside, and the cord has the form of two straight lines AC, CB, this point C, heing pulled in the directions CA, CB, at once, is really accelerated in the direction CD, which hisects the angle ACB; and ĩſ it were then detached ſrom the rest oſ the material cord, it would move in that direction. But any other point ſ between C and B has no accelerating force whatever acting on it. It is equally pulled in the directions f C and ſ B. The particle C thereſore is obliged to drag along vwith it the inert matter of the rest oſ the cord; and when it has come to any intermediate situation f, the cord cannot have the ſorm of two straight lines A e, c B, with the particle f situated in  This particle will be left somewhat behind, as in 4, and the cord will have a curved form Acę BB; and in this form it will vibrate, going to the other side, and assuming, not the rectilineal ſorm ADB, but the curved form A B. That every purticle oſ the curve A ecſ B is now accelerated toward the axis AB is evident, because every part is eurved, and the whole is strained toward A and B, which tends to straiten every part oſ it. Hut in order that the whole may arrive at the axis in one moment, and constitute a straight line AB, it is evidently necessary that the accelerating force on every particle be as the distance of the particle from that point oſ the axis at which it arrives. It is well known to the mathematician that the accelerating ſorce by which any particle is urged towards a reetilineal position, with respect to the adjoining particles, i proportional to the curvature. Our readers, who are not 490 ACOUSTICS. familiar with such discussions, may see the truth of this fundamental proposition by considering the whole oſ A c B as only a particle or minute portion of a curve, magniſfied by a microscope. The foree which strains the curve may be represented by c A or AE. Nov it is well known (and is the foundation of Galileo's demonstration) that the straining force is to the force with which c is aceelerated in the direction c E as A ctoc D, or as AE to c D, or as AE to twice c E. Nowc E is the measure oſ the curvature of A c B, being its deſlection from a right linee. Therefore when the straining force is the same all over the curve, the accelerating force, by which any portion of it tends to become straight, is proportional to the curvature oſ that portion. And if r be the radius oſ a cirele passing through A, c, and B, and coinciding with this element of a curve, it is plain that e D: c A =c A: r, or that the radius of curvature is to the element c A as the extenda ing ſorce to the accelerating force; and c D a ; and is inversely as r, or directly as the curvature. Hence we see the nature of that curve which a musical cord must have, in order that all its parts may arrive at the axis at oncee. The curvature at c must be to the eurvature at ſas E c to g ſ- But this may not be enough. It ĩs ſarther necessary that when c has got half way to E, the curvature in the different points of the new curve into which the cord has now arranged itself, be also, in every point, proportional to the distance ſrom the axis. Now this uill be the case if the extreme curve has been such. For, taking the cord in any other suecessive shape, the distance which each point has gone in the same moment must be proportional to the ſorce hich impelled it; therefore the remaining distances of all the points ſfrom the axis will have the same proportions as beſore. And the geometrical and evident consequence oſ this is, that the curvatures vill also be in the same proportion. MARINE TRUMPET. 491 Thereſore a cord that is onee arranged in this form vill always preserve it, and vill vibrate like a eyceloidal pendulum, performing its oillations in equal times, whether they be wide or narrow. Thereſore since this perſect isochronism oſ vibrations is all that is wanted for preserving the same musical pitch or tone, this cord will always have the same note. This proposition was the discovery oſ Dr. Brooke Taylor, one oſ the ornaments oſ our eountry, and is published in his celebrated work Methodus Incrementorum. The mvestigation, however, and the demonstration in that work, are s0 ohscure and so tedious, that few had patience to peruse them. It was more elegantly treated aſterwards by the Bernoullis and others The curve got the name of the Taylorean curve; and is considered by many eminent mathematicians as a trochoid, viz. the curve deseribed by a pont in the nave or spoke of a wheel while the w heel rolls along a straight Ime. But this is a mistake, although it is allied to the trochoid in the same manner that the figure of sines is allied to the cycloid. Its physical property intitles it to the name of the HARMONICAL cURVE. As this curve is not only the foundation of all our knowledge of the vibration oſ elastic cords, but also furnishes an equation which will lead the mathematician through the whole labyrinth oſ aerial undulations, and be of use on many other occasions; and as the ſirst mathematicians have, through inattention, or through enmity to Dr. Taylor, aſſected to consider it as the trochoid already well known to themselvese shall give a short account oſ its construetion and chieſ properties, simpliſied ſrom the elegant description given by Dr. Smith in his Harmonies. Let SDTV, QERP (Plate VI. ſig. 10.), be cireles deserihed round the centre C. Draw the diameters QUR, ECP, cutting each other at right angless. From any poiut G in the exterior cirele draw the radius GC, cutting the interior circle in F, drav KHFI parallel to QCR, and make HIL 492 ACOUSTICS. HE, each equal to the arch EG. Let this be done ſor every point of the quadrantal arch EGR. The points I, K, are in the harmonie curve; that is, the curve AKDIB passing through the points  and I, determined by this construetion, has its curvature in every point  proportional to the distance KN from the base AB. To demonstrate this, draw FL perpendicular to the axis, and join EL. Take another point  in the outer circle indefinitely near to G. Draw g c, cutting the inner circle in ſ, and f h and fl perpendicular to DC, CT, and join E L Then suppose two lines Km &m perpendicular to the curve in K and æThey must meet in m, the centre oſ the equicurve cirele Drav EN æ perpendicular to the hase, and m n parallel to it, and join æ? n. Lastly, drav XL æ perpendicular to EL. It is plain that æ O, the difference of HK and hE, is equal to G g, the diſference of GE and g E, and that KO is equal to F r, and L I to r f. Also, because ELX is a right 2 angle, EX . We have F r: F 7=CL: CF, æ CL: CD. Fſ:Ggæ CD: CE. Therefore F r: G &, or KO: OF = CL: CE. The triangles ECL and æ OK are thereſore similar, as are also è OK and K n m, and consequently ECL and Knn; and because EC is parallel to K a, EL is parallel to Km For the same reason k m is parallel to El, and the triangles E læ and m are similar, and Læa: Ke=LE: m and Læ: K æ=EC: K n. But farther, Læ: LI=CE: EL LI: F f /EN: CD, being=FL: FC Fſ: Gg=QCcCD: CE, being=Ff: O Gg: K =CE: EL, being m kO: K©. Thereſore L æ:  k= ENXCE: EL3, = EN: EX. MARINE TRUMPET. 495 EXLE Therefore KN: EX = LE: Km, and Km 2/F]N EXCE nd EN: EX =CE: Kn, and Kn =4 In the very narrow vibrations of musical cords, CD is exceedingly small in comparison with CE, so that EXEL, or EXCE, may, vithout sensible error, be taken for CE?, and then we obtain m or X n (which hardly differ) CE? =5N: and thereſore the curvature is proportional to KN. The small deviation from this ratio would seem to shew that this construction does not give the harmonie curve with accuracy. But it is not so. For it will be found, that although the curvature is not as KN, it is still proportional to the space which any particle K must really describe in order to arrive at the axiss These paths are lines whose curvatures diminish as they approach to DC. We see lst, that the base ACB oſ the curve is equal to the semicircular arch QER. 2d, Also that the tangent KZ in any point K is perpendicular to EL. Sd, We learn that the curvature at A and B is nothing, for in these two points KN is nothing. 4ih, The radius of curvature at D is precisely Therefſore, as the string approaches the axis, and CD diminishes, the curvature diminishes in the same proportion. The vibrations thereſore are perſormed like those of a pendulum in a cycloid, and are isochronous, whether wide or narrow, and thereſore the musical piteh is constant. This is not strictly true, because in the wide vibrations the extension or extending force is somewhat greater. Hence it is that a string when violently twanged sounds a little sharper at the beginning. Dr. Long made a harpsichord vhose strings were stretched by weights, by which this imperſection was removed. It is proper to exhibit the curvature at D in terms oſ the MARINE TRUMPET. 495 That is, a musical chord, extended by a force E, perſorms one vibratiga DCV in the time that a heavy body describes a space S, which is to the length of the cord as its weight is to twice the extending force. Now let g be the space through which a heavy hody falls in one second, and let the time of vibration (estimated in parts oſ a second) be T We have AB: S 22 E: W S: 5]T: I' Therefore AB: 3/22 ET?: W And AB Xx WT? x 2E x⸗ Therefore T: m0 and T JABx W s44 Let n be the number of vibrations made in a second. x ſæ g. E 2gE ] n=T w-VE IF the length of the cord be measured in feet, 2 g is very nearly 32. If in inches, 2 g is 386, more nearly. Therefore n = Ju or v. This may easily be compared with observation. Dr. Smith hung a weight of 7 pounds, or 49,000 grains, on a brass wire suspended from a finger pin, and shortened it till it was in perfect unison with the double octave below the open string D of a violinn. In this state the wire was 35,55 inches long, and it weighed SI grains. Novw 35.55 5 8T 5 ; 5T 130,7  n. This wire, therefore, ought to make 130,7 vibrations in a second. Dr. Smith proceeded to ascertain the number of aerial pulses made by this sound, availing himselſ oſ the theory of the beats of tempered consonances invented by himself. On his fine chamber organ he tuned upwards the perfeet fifths DA, Ae, e b, and then tuned downward the perſect Gth e d. Thus he obtained an octave to D, which vas too sharp by a 496 ACOUSTICS. comma, and he ſfound that it beat 65 times in 20 seconds. 65 Therefore the number of vibrations was 55 51, or 263,25. These were complete pulses or motions from D to V and back again, and thereſore contained 5263 such vibrations as we have now been considering The double octave below should make ãth of this, or 131,6, which is not a complete vibration more than the ahove theory requires: more accurate coincidence is needless *. This theory is therefore very completely established, and it may be considered as one of the finest mechanical problems vhich has been solved in the last centuryy. We mention it with greater minuteness, because the merit of Dr. Taylor is not sufficiently attended to. Mr. Rameau, and the other great theorists in music, make no mention of him; and such as have occasion to speak of the absolute number oſ vibrations made by any musical note, always quote Mr. Sauveur oſ the French academy. This gentleman has written some very excellent dissertations on the theory oſ musie, and Sir Isac Newton in his Principia oſten quotes his authority. He has given the actual determination of the number of vibrations of the note C, obtained in a manner similar to that practised by Dr. Smith on his chamber organ, and which agrees extremely well with that measure But Mr. Sauveur has al80 given a mechanical investigation of the problem, which gives the same number of vibrations that he observed. We presume that Rameau and others took the demonstration ſor good; and thus Mr. Sauveur passes on the Continent for the discoverer oſ this theorem. But it was not published till 1716, though read in 1713; whereas Dr. Taylor's demonstration was read to the Royal Society in May 1714. But this demonstration of Mr. Sauveur is a mere paralogism, vwhere errors compensate errors;: and the assumption on which he proceeds is quite gratuitous, and has nothing to  The coincidence will appear still more accurate iſ the proper number 8à be used instead of 354  IZ2X 32 iu the calculation. MABINE TRUMPET. 497 do vith the subject. Yet John Bernoulli, from enmity to Taylor and the English mathematicians, takes not the least notic]e oſ this sophisticated demonstration, accommodated to the experiment, and so devoid of any pretensions to argument, that this severe critic could not but see its ſalsity. Sauveur was one of the first who ohserved distinetly that remarkable ſact which Mr. Rameau made the ſoundation oſ his musical theory, riz. that a full musical note is accompanied by its octave, its twelſth, and its seventeenth major. It had been casually observed before, by Marsennus, by Perrault, and others; but Sauveur tells distinetly how to make the observation, and aſfirms it to be true in all deep notes Rameau asserts it to be universally and necessarily true in all notes, and the foundation oſ all musical pleasure. It had been discovered beſore this time, that not only a full note caused its unison to resound, but also that a 12th, being sounded near any open string, the string resounded to this 12th. It does the same to a l5th, a 17th major, a 22d, &e. Dr. Wallis added a very curious circumstance to this observationn. Two oſ his pupils, Mr. Noble and Mr. Pigott, in 1673, amusing themselves with these resonances, observed, that if a small bit of paper be laid on the string of a violin which is made to resound to its unison, the paper is throvn off: a prooſ that the string resounded by really vibrating, and that it is thrown into these vibrations by the pulses of the air produced by the other string. In like manner the paper is thrown off vhen the string resounds to its octave. But the young gentlemen observed, that when the paper was laid on the middle point of the string, it remained without agitation, although the string still resounded. They found the same thing vhen they made the string resound to its I2th: papers laid on the two points of division lay still, but were thrown off when laid on any other placee In short, voL Iv. 21 y 498 ACOUSTICS. they found it a general rule, that papers laid on any points of division corresponding to the note which was resounded, were not agitated. Dr. Wallis (the greatest theorist in musie of the 17th eentury) justly concluded that these points of the resounding string were at rest, and that the intermediate parts were vibrating, and producing the nutes corresponding to their lengths. From this Mr. Sauveur, vith great propriety, deduced the theory of the performance of the trumpet marine, the vielle, the clavichord, and some other instruments. When the string of the trumpet marine is gently stopped at 2, and the how drawn lightly across it at H (Plate VI. fig. 8), the ſull vibration at the finger is stopped, but the string is thrown into vibrations of some kind, which vill either be destroyed or may go on. It is of importanœ o see what circumstance will permit their continuance. Suppose an elastic cord put nto the situation ABCDE (Plate VI. fig. 11.) such that AB, BC, CD, DE, are all equal, and that BCD is a straight line. Let the point C be made fast, and the two points B and D be let go at onæ It is evident that the two parts will immediately vibrate in two harmonical curves ABC and CDE, whieh will change o Ab C and C d E, and so on alternately. It is also evident that if a line FCõG be drawn touching the curve ABC, it will also touch the curve CDE; and the line which touches the curve A b C in C, will also touch the curve Cd E. In every nstant the two halves oſ the cord vill be eurves which have a common tangent in the point CC. The undoubied consequence oſ this is, that the point C vill not be affected by these vibrations, and its fixture may be taken away. The cord will continue to vibrate, and ill give the sound of the octave to its ſundamental note. The eondition, then, which must be implemented, in order that a string may resound io its octave, or take the sonad of its octave, is simply this, that its to parts may vibrate MARTRE TRUMPET. a4599 equally in opposite directions This is evidently possible; and when the bow is drawn across the string oſ the trumpet muarine at H, and irregular vibrations are produced in the whole string, those which happen to be in one direction on both sides of the middle point, where it is gently stoppeũ by the finger, will destroy each other, and the ennspiring ones will be instantly produced, and then every succeedmg netion of the how vill inorense them. The same thing must happen iſ a strimg is gently stopped at one-third of its length; for there will be the same equilibrium of ſoroes at the two pomnts oſ division, so that the fixtures oſ these points may be removed, and the string vill vibrate in three parts, sounding the 12th of the fundamental We may observe, by the way, that if the bow be dravn across the string at one of the pots of division, corresponding io the stopping at the other end of the string, it ill hardly give any distinct notee It ratiles, and is intolerably harsh. The reason is plain: The bow takes some hold of the point C, and drags ĩt along vith it. The cord on each side of C is left behind, and thereſore the two curves cannot have a common tangent at CC The vibrations into which ĩt ĩs thus jogged by the how destroy each other. We now see why the trumpet marine will not sound ævery note. It will sound none but such as correspond to a division oſ the string into a number of equal parts, and its note will be in unison with a strmg equal to one of those parts. Thereſore it will ſirst oſ all sound the fundamental, by its whole length; 2. Its octave, corresponding to - E ĩts length. S. The I2h, - - - - H 4. The 15th, or double octave, - i 5. The ITth, - - - - : 6. The 19th, - - T7. The 2lst, which is not in the diatonic scale of our musie, - H Ul i . The triple octave, or 229 500 ACOUSTICS. 9. The 234, or 2d in the sæle of the triple octave, - - 3 its length 10. The 24th, or Sd in this scale, 5 1l. The 25th, a false 4th of this seale, 12. The 26th, a perfect 5th of this scale, /æ 13. The 2ſth, a false 6th of ditto, 5 à; or à% 14. The 28th, a false T7th minor, Ln 15. The 28th, a perfect Tth major, a% 16. The quadruple octave, - ⸗ Thus ve see that this instrument will not execute all music, and indeed will not complete any octave, because it vill neither give a perfect 4th nor 6th. We shall presently see that these are the very deſects of the trumpet. This singular stringed instrument has been described in this detail, chiefly with the view of preparing us for understanding the real trumpet. The VIELLE, SAVYARDE, Or HURDYGURDY, performs in the same manner. While the wheel rubs one part of the string like a bow, the heys gently press the strings, in points of aliquot division, and produce the harmonic notes. It is to prevent such notes that the part of harpsichord vires, lying between the bridge and the pins, are wrapped round vith lis. These notes would frequently disturb the music. Lastly on this head, the olian harp derives its vast variety oſ fine sounds from this mode of vibrationn Seldom do the chords perform their fundamental or simple vibrations They are generally sounding some of the harmonies of their fundamentals, and give us all this variety from strings tuned in unison. - MUSICAL TRUMPET. Tur Musical Trumpet is a wind instrument which sounds by pressing the closed lips to the small end, and forcing the vind through a very narrow aperture between the lips. This is one of the most ancient of musical instruments, and has appeared in all nations in a vast variety of ſorms. The conch of the savage, the horn of the cow-herd and of the postman, the bugle horn, the lituus and tuba of the Romans, the military trumpet, and the trombone, the cor de chasse or French hornrare all instruments winded in the same manner, producing their variety of tones by varying the manner and force of blowing. The serpent is another instrument oſ the same kind, but producing part of its notes by means of holes in the sides. Although the trumpet is the simplest oſ all musical instruments, being nothing but a long tube, narrow at one end and wide at the other, it is the most diſſicult to be explained. To understand how sonorous and regulated undulations can be excited in a tube without any previous vibration of reeds to form the waves at the entry, or of holes to vary the notes, requires a very nice attention to the mechanism of aerial undulations, and we are by no means certain that we have as yet hit on the true explanationn. We are certain, however, that these aerial undulations do not differ from those produced by the vibration of strings; for they make strings resound in the same manner as vibrating cords do. Galileo, however, did not know this argument 3 502 ACOUSTICS. for his assertion that the musical pitch of a pipe, like tha of a cord, depended on the frequency alone oſ the aeril undulations; but he thought it highly probable, from hs observations on the structure of organs, that the notes of pipes were related to their lengths in the same manner those of wires, and he expressly makes this remark. Neuton, having discovered that sound moved at the rate of about 960 feet per second, observed that, according to the experments of Mr. Sauveur, the length of an open pipe is halſ th] length of an aerial pulse. This he could easily ascertain by dividing the space described by sound in a second by the number of pulses. Daniel Bernoulli, the celebrated promoter of the Ne⸗tonian mechanics, discovered, or at least was the first who attentively marked, some other circumstances of reænblance between the undulations of the air in pipes and the vibrations of wires. As a wire can be made, not only © vibrate in its full length, sounding its fundamental note, but can also be made to subdivide itself, and vibrate like a portion of the whole, with poinis of rest between the vibrating portions, when it gives one of its harmonic notes; so a pipe can not only have such undulations of air going on vithin it as are competent to the production of its fundamental note, but also those which produce one oſ its harmonic notes Every one knows that vhen we force a ſlute, by bloving too strongly, it quits its proper note, and gives the otare above. Forcing still more, produces the 12th. Then v can produce the double octave or 15th, and the I7th major, &c. In short, by attending to several cireumstances in the manner of blowing, all the notes may be produced from one very long pipe that we produce ſrom the trumpet marine, and in precisely the same order, and vith the same omisions and imperſectionss. This alone is almost equivalent to a prooſ that the mechanism of the undulations of air ina pipe is analogous to that of the vibrations oſ an elaste cord. Having with so great success investigated the mchanism of the partial vibrations of wires, and also another MUSICAL TRUMPET. 503 kind of vibrations vhich we shall mention aſterwards, incomparably more eurious and more important in the philosophy of musical sounds, Mr. Bernoulli undertook the investigation of those more mysterious motions of air which are produced in pipes; and in a very ingenious dissertation, published in the memoirs of the Academy of Paris for 1762, &e. he gives a theory of them, which tallies in a wonderful manner with the chieſ phenomena which we observe in the wind instruments of the ſlute and trumpet kind. We are not, however, so vell satisſied with the truth of his assumptions respecting the state of the air, and the precise form oſf the undulations vhich he assigns to it; but we see that, notwithstanding a probability oſ his being mistaken in these cireumstances (it is with great deference that we presume to suppose him mistaken), the chief propositions are still true; and that the changes from note to note must be produced in the order, though perhaps not in the precise manner, assigned by him. It is by no means easy to conceive, with clearness, the way in which musical undulations are excited in the various kinds of trumpetss. Many who have reputation as mechanicians, suppose that it is by means of vibrations oſ the lips, in the same manner as in the hautboy, clarionette, and reed pipes of the organ, where the air, say they, is put in motion by the trembling reedl. But this explanation is wrong in all its parts; even in the reed pipes of an organ, the air is not put in motion by the reeds. They are indeed the occasions of its musical undulation, but they do not immediately impel it into those waves. This method (and indeed all methods but the vibrations of wires, bells, &e.) of producing sound is little understood, though it is highly worthy of notice, being the origin of animal voice, and because a knovwledge of it would enable the artists to entertain us with sounds hitherto unknown, and thus add considerably to this giſt of our Bountiful Father, ho has shewn, in the structure of the larynx oſ the human species, that he intended that we should enjoy the pleasures 504 ACOUSTICS. oſ music as a loborum dulce lenimen. He has there placed a micrometer apparatus, by which, after the other museles have done their part in bringing the glottis nearly to the tension which the intended note requires, we can easily, and instantly, adjust it with the utmost nicety. We trust, thereſore, that our readers will indulge us vhile we give a very cursory view of the manner in which the tremulous motion of the glottis, or of a reed in an organ pipe, produces the sonorous undulations with a constant or uniform frequency, so as to yield a musical note. If we blow through a small pipe or quill, ve produce only a whizzing or hissing noise. If, in blowing, we shut the entry with our tongue, we hear something like a solid blow or tap, and it is accompanied with some faint perception of a musical piteh, just as vhen we tap with the finger on one of the holes of a flute when all the rest are shu. We are then sensible of a difſerence of piteh, according to the length oſ the pipe; a longer pipe or quill giving a graver sound. Here, then, is like the beginning of a sonorous undulation. Let us consider the state oſ the air in the pipe: It was fſilled by a column oſ air, which was moving ſorward, and would have been succeeded by other air in the same statee This air was therefore nearly in its state of natural density. When the entry is suddenly stopped by the tongue, the included air, already in motion, continues its motionn. This it cannot do without growing rarer, and then it is no longer a balance for the pressure of the atmosphere. It is thereſore retarded in its motion, totally stopped (being in a rarefied state), and is then pressed back again. It comes back with an accelerated motion, and recovers its natural density, while the state of rareſaction goes forward through the open air like any other aẽrial pulse. Its motions are somewhat, but not altogether, like that of a spiral wire, which has been in like manner moving uniſormly along the pipe, and has been stopped by something eatching hold of its hindermost extremity. This spring, when thus catched behind, stretches it- MUSICAL. TRUMPET. 505 selſ a little, then contracts beyond its natural state, and then expands again, quivering several times. It ean be demonstrated that the column of air will make but one quiver. Suppose this accomplished in the hundredth part of a second, and that at that instant the tongue is removed ſor the hundredth part of a second, and again applied to the entry of the pipe. It is plain that this will produce such another pulse, which will join to the former one, and force it out into the air, and the two pulses together will be like two pulses produced by the vibration of a cord. If, instead of the tongue, ve suppose the flat plate of an organ reed to be thus alternately applied to the hole and removedq, at the exact moments that the renevals of air are wanted, it is plain that we shall have sonorous undulations of uni ſorm frequeney, and thereſore a musical notee This is the way in which reeds produce their effect, not by impelling the air into alternate states of motion to and fro, and alternate strata of rarefied and condensed air, but by giving them time to acquire this state by the combination oſf the ai?s elasticity with its progressive motion. The adjustment of the succeeding puſf oſ air to the pulse which precedles it, so that they may make one smooth and regular pulse, is more exact than we have yet remarked; ſor the stoppage oſ the hole not only nccasions a rarefaction before it, but by checking the air which vas just going to enter, makes a condensation behind the door (so to speak); so that, when the passage is again opened, the two pareels of air are fitted ſor supporting each other, and forming one pulse. Suppose, in the next place, that the reed, instead oſ completely shutting the hole each time, only half shuts it. The same thing must still happen, although not in so remarkable a degree When the passage is contracted, the supply is diminished, and the air now in the pipe must rareſy, by advancing vith its former velocity. It must thereſore retard; by retarding, regain its former density; and the æair, not yet 500 ACOUSTICS. got into the pipe, must condense, &e. And if the passage be again opened or enlarged in the proper time, ve shall have a complete pulse of condensed and rarefied air;: and this must be accompanied by the heginning oſ a musical note, vwhich may be continued like the ſormer. This will be a softer or more mellow note than the other; for the condensed and the rarefied air vill not be so suddenly changed in their densities. The difference vill be like the difference of the notes produced by drawing a quill along the teeth of a comb, and that produced by the equally rapid vibrations of a wiree. For let it be remarked here, that musical notes are by no means confined, as theorists commonly suppose, to the regular cycloidal agitations oſ air, such as are produced by the vibrations of an elastic cord; but that any cerack, snap, or noise vhatever, when repeated with suſficient frequency, becomes ipso fucto a musical sound, of which we can tell the piteh or note What can be less musical than the solitary cracks or snaps made by a stiſf door when very sloly opened ? Do this briskly, and the creak changes to a chirꝑ, of which we can tell the note:. The sounds will be harsh or smooth, according as the snaps of which they are composed are abrupt or gradual. This distinetion of sounds is most satisſactorily conſirmed by experiment. If the tongue of the organ reed is quite ſlat, and if, in its vibrations, it apply itself to the whole margin of the hole at once, 50 as completely to shut iĩt (as is the case in the old-fashioned regal stop oſ the organ), the note is clear, smart, and harsh or hard: but if the lips of the reed are curved, or the tongue properly bent backward, s0 that it applies itself to the edges of the hole gradatim, and never completely shuts the passage, the note may have any degree of mellow sweetness. This remark is worth the attention of the instrument-makers or organ-builders, and enables them to vary the vorcꝶ of the organ at pleasure We only mention it here as introductory to the explanation of the sounds of the trumpet. MUSICAL TRUMPET. 507 We trust that the reader now perceives how the air, proseeding along a pipe, may be put in the state of alternate strata of condensed and rarefied air, the particles, in the mean time, proceeding along the pipe with a very moderate velocity; while the state of undulution is propagated at the rate oſ eleven or twelve hundred feet in a second; just as 7e may somelimes see a stream of water gliding gently down a canal, while a wave runs along its surſace with much greater rapidity. It vill greatly assist the imagination, if we compare these aærial undulations with the undulations of water in an open canal. While the water is floing smoothly along, suppose a sluice to be thrust up from the bottom quite to the surſace, or beyond itt. This will immediately cause a depression on the lower side oſ the sluice, by the water's going along the canal, and a heaping up of the water on the other side. By properly timing the motion of this sluice up and down, we can produce a series of connected waves. If the sluice be not pushed up to the surface, but only one- half vay, there will be the same succession of waves, but much moother, &e. &e. It is in this state, though not by such means, that the air is contained in a sounding trumpet. It is not brought into this state by any tremor of the lips. The trumpeter sometimes feels such a tremor; but whenever he feels it, he can no longer sound his notee His lips are painſully tickled, and he must change his manner of winding. When blowing with great delicacy and care, the deepest notes oſ a French horn, or trombone, we sometimes can feel the undulations of the air in the pipe distinetly fluttering and beating against the lips; and it is diffieult to hinder the lips from being affected by it: but we ſeel plainly, that it is not the lips which are fluttering, but the air beſore them. We ſeel a curious instance of this vhen we attempt to whistle in concert. If our accompanier intonates with a certain degree of incorrectness, we feel something at our own lips 508 ACousTIOS. vwhich makes it impossible to utter the intended note. This happens very ſrequently to the person who is whistling the upper note oſ a greater third. In like manner, the undulations in a pipe re-act on the reed, and check its vibrations For if the dimensions oſ a pipe are such that the undulations formed by the reed canmot be kept up in the pipe, or do not suit the length of the pipe, the reed will eĩther mot play at all, or will vibrate only in startss. This ĩs finely illustrated by a beautiful and instructive experiment. Take a small reed of the vox humana stop of an organ, and set it in a glass foot, adapted to the windbox of the organ. Instead of the ecommon pipe above it, fix on it the sliding tube oſa small telescope. When all the joints are thrust down, touch the key, and look attentively to the play oſ the reed. While it is sounding, draw out the joints, making the pipe continually longer. We shall observe the reed thrown mto strange fits of quivering, and sometimes quite motionless and then thrown into wide sonorous vibrations, according as the maintainable pulse is commensurate or not with the vibrations of the reedlc This plainly shews that the air is not impelled into its undulations by the reed, but that the reed accommodates itselſ to the undulations in the pipe. We acknowledge that we cannot explain with distinetness in what manner the air in a trumpet is first put into musical undulations We see that it is only in very long and slender tubes that this can be done. In short tubes, of considerable diameter, like the cow-herds horn, ve obtain only one or two very indistinct notes, of which it is difficult to name the pitch; and this requires great force of blast; whereas, to bring out the deep notes of the French horn, a very gentle and vell- regulated blast is necessary. The ſorm of the lips, combined with the force of the blast, form all the notess. But this is in a way that eaunot be taught by any deseription. The perſormer learns it by habit, and fels that the instrument leaps into ĩts note without him, when he gradually varies his blast, and continues sounding the MUSICAL TRUMPET. 509 ume note; although he, in the mean time, makes some small change in his manner of blowing. This is owing to vhat Mr. Bernoulli observedl. The tube is suited only to such pulses, and can only maintain such pulses as corre⸗pond to aliquot parts of its length: and when the embouchure is very nearly, but not accurately, suited to a particular note, that note ſorms ilself in the tube, and, resting on the lips, brings them into the form which can maintain it vith eas. We have a prooſf of this vhen we attempt to sund the note corresponding to one- seventh of the length. Not having a distinct notion of this note, vhich makes no prt of our scale of melody, we cannot easily prepare for it in the way that habit teaches us to prepare for the oſhers: vhereas, from what we shall see presently, the notes oneiisth and one-eighth are both familiar to the mind, and easily produced. When, thereſore, ve attempt to produce the note one-seventh, we slide, against our will, into the one- sixth or one-eighth. Nor can we completely illustrate the formation of musital pulses by waves in water. A canal is equally susceptible of every height and length of progressive waves; whereis we see that a certain length of tube vill maintain only certain determined pulses of air. We must therefore content ourselves for the present with having learned, by means of the reed pipes, how the air may exist progressively in a tube, in an alternate state of condensation and rareſaction; and we shall now proceed to consider how this state of the air is related to the length oſ the tubee. And here we can do no more than give an outline of Mr. Bernoulli's beautiful theory oſ ſlutes and trumPets, but without a mathematical examination oſ the particular motions. We can, however, shew, vith suſficient evidence, how the different notes are produced ſrom the same tube. It requires, however, a very steady attention ſrom the reader to enable him to perceive how the diſferent por- 510 ACOUSTIOS. tions of this air act on each otherr. We trust that this will now be given. The conditions which must be implemented, in order to nãintain a musical pulse, are two: I. That the vibratio: of the diſferent plates oſ air be perſormed in equal times, otherwise they would all mix and confound each other. 2. That they move altogether, all beginning and all ending at the same instant. It does not appear that any other state of vibration ean exist and be maintained. The column of air in a tube may be considered as a material spring (having weight and inertia)] This spring is compressed and coiled up by the pressure oſ the atmosphere. But in this coiled state it ean vibrate in its diſferent parts, as a long spiral wire may do, though pressed a little together at the ends. It is evident that the air within a pipe, shut at both ends, may be pluced in such a situation, in a variely of ways, that it will vibrate in every part, in the same manner as a chord of the same length and weight, strained by a foree equal to the pressure of the atmosphere. Thus, n a shut pipe AB (Plate VII. fig. 1.), suppose a harmonie curve ACB, or a vire of the same weight with the air, throwing itselſ into the form of this curvee The force vwhich impels the point C to the axis is to that which impels the point c as CE to c . Now, suppose the air in this pipe divided into parallel strata or plates, crossing the tube like diaphragms. In order that these may vibrate in the same manner (not across the tube, but in the direetion of its axis), all that is necessary for the moment is, that the excess of the pressure of the stratum d d above that oſ the stratum ff may be to the exeess of the pressure of DD above that of FF as c e to CE. In this case, the stratum è e will be accelerated in the direetion e f, and the stratum EE is accelerated in the same direetion, and in the due proportionn. Now this may be done in an infinite variety oſ ways for a single moment. It depends, not on the absolute density, but on the voriation of density; because the pressure MUSICAL TRUMPET. 511 by which a particle oſ air is urged in any direction arises from the diference of the distances oſ the adjoining particles on each side of it. But in order to continue this vibration, or in order that it may obtain at once in the whole pipe, this variation of density must continue, and be according to some connected law. This circumstance greatly limits the ways in which the vibration may be kept up. Mr. Bernoulli finds that the isochronism and synehronism can be maintained in the following manner, and in no other that he could think of: Let AB (Plate VII. ſig. 2.) be a eylindrical pipe, shut at A, and open at B. Then, in whatever mammer the sound is produeed in the pipe, the undulations of the contained air must be perſormed as follows: Let æ a be a plate oſ air. This plate will approach to0, and recede ſrom, the shut end A, vibrating between the situations b b and e e, the whole vibration being b c, and the plate will vibrate like a penduIum in a cycloid. The greater ve suppose the excursions a b, a e, the louder vwill the sound be; but the duration oſ them all must be the same, to agree with the fact that the tone remaãins the same. The motion vill be aceelerated in approaching to o a ſrom either side, and retarded in the recess from it. Let us next consider a plate æ æ, more remote from A. It must make similar vibrations ſrom the situation à à to the situation v7. But these vibrations must be greater in proportion as the plate is farther ſrom A. It camot be coneeived otherwise: For suppose the plate æ æ to make the sume excursions with a a, and that the rest do the same. Then they vill all retain the same distanees ſrom each other; and thus there vill be no foree whatever acting on any particles to make them vibratee But if every purtiele make excursions proportional to its distanee from A, the variation of density will, in any instant, be the same through the whole pipe, and each particle in the vibrating plate a à will be accelerated or retarded in proportion to its distance ſrom A; vhile the accelerations and retardations over all 512 ACOUSTICS. vill, in any instant, be proportional to the distance of each particle from its place oſ rest. All this will appear to the mathematician, who attentively considers any momentary situation of the purticles. In this manner all the particles vill support each other in their vibrations. It follows ſrom this deseription that the air in the tube is alternately rareſied and condensed. But these changes are very diſferent in different parts of the tube. They must hæ greatest oſ all at A; because, hile all the plates approach to A, they concur in condensing the air immediately adjoining to A; while the air in a a and æ æ is less condensed by the action of the plates beyond it. The air at B is always oſ its natural density, heing in equilibrio with the surrounding air. At B, therelore, there is a small parcel oſ air, of its natural density, which is alternately going in and out This account is confirmed by many ſacts. If the hottom oſ the pipe be shut by a fine membrane, stretched across it like a drumhead, with a wire stretched over it, either externally or internally, in the same manner as the catgut ĩs stretched across the bottom of a drum, it will be thrown into strong vibrations, making a very loud noise, by rattling against the cross wiree The same thing happens if the membrane be pasted over a hole close to the bottom, leaving a small space round the edge of the hole without paste, s0 that the membrane may play out and in, and rattle on the margin of the hole. This also makes a prodigious noise Nov, iſ the membrane be pasted on a hole far from the bottom, the agitations will be much ſainter;: and when the hole is near the mouth of the pipe, there will be noneWhnhen a pipe has its air agitated in this manner, it is giving the lowest note of which it is susceptible. Let us next consider a pipe open at both ends. Let CB (Plate VII. fig. 8.) be this pipe. It is plain that, if there be a partition A in the middle, ve shall have two pipes AB, AC, each oſ which may undulate in the manner now described, iſ the undulations in each be in opposite directions. MUSICAL TRUMPET. 513 It is evidently possible, also, that these undulations may be the same in point of strength in both, and that they may begn in the same instantt. In this case, the air on each side of the partition vill be in the same state, vhether of condenstion or rareſaction, and the partition A itself will alvays be in equilibrio. It will perſectly resemble the point C oſ the musical cord BFECGH (Plate VII. fig. ũ.), which is in equilibrio between the vibrating forces of its two parts. In the pipe, the plates of air on each side are either both approaching it, or both receding from it, and the partition is cither equally squeezed from both sides, or equally drawn outwards. Consequently this partition may be removed, and the parcels oſ air on each side vill, in any instant, support each other. There seems no other way of conceiving these vibrations in open pipes which will admit of an explanation by mechanical lavs. The vibrations of all the plates must be obtained without any mutual hindrance, in order to produce the tone which we really hear; and thereſore sueh vibrations are impressed by Nature on each plate of air. But if this explanation be just, it is plain that this pipe CB must give the same note with the pipe AB (Plate VII. ſig. 2.) of half the length, shut at one end. But the sound, being doubled, with perfect consonance, must be clear, strong, and mellow. Now this is perfectly agreeable to observation; and this fact is an unequivocal confirmation of the justness of the theory. If we take a slender pipe, about iix inches long and one half of an inch wide, shut at one end, and sound it by blowing across its mouth, as we whislle on the pipe of a key, or across a hole that is close to the mouth, and formed with an edge like the sound-hole of a German flute, ve shall get a very distinct and clear tone ſrom it. If we now take a pipe oſ double the length, open at both ends, and blow across its mouth, ve obtain the same note, but more clear a2nd strong. And the note produced by blowing across the mouth is not changed by a hole made VOL. IV. Px 514 AcoUTICS. exactly in the middle, in respeet of ĩts musical piteh, although it is greãtly hurt in point of clearness and strength. Also a membrane at this hole is strongly agitatedl. All this is im perfeet conformity to this mechanism. Thus we have, in a great measure, explained the effect oſ an open and a shut pipe. The shut pipe is always an octave, graver than an open pipe of the same longth; because the open pipe is in unison with a shut pipe of half the length. Let AC (Plate VII. fig. 4.) be a pipe shut at both ends We may consider it as composed of two pipes AB, BC, stopped at A and C, and open at B Undulations may be performed in ench half, precisely as in the pipe AB of fig. 2.; and they will not, in the smallest degree, obstruct each other, if we only suppose that the plates in each halſ are vibrating at once in the sume direction. The eondensation in AB will correspond with the rarefaction in BC, and the middle parcel B will maintam its natural density, vibrating to and again, across the middle; and two plates a a,  æ, which are equally distant ſrom B, will make equal excursions in the same direction. We may produce sound in this pipe by making an opening at B. Its note vill be found to be the same with that of BC of ſig. 3. or of AB of fig. 2. In the next place, let a pipe, shut at one end, be considered as divided into any odd number of equal parts, and let them be taken in pairs, beginning at the stopped end, s that there may be an odd one left at the open end. It ĩs plain that each oſ these pairs may be considered a a pipe stopped at both ends, as in fig. 4. For the partitions will, of themselves, be in equilibrio, and may be removed, and vibrations may be maintained i in the whole, consistent with the vibration of the da part at the open end; and these vibrations vill all support each other, and the plates of air vhich are at the points of division will MUSICAL TRUMPET. 515 remain at rest. Conceive the pipe AB of fig. 2. to be added to the pipe AC of fig. 4. the part A of the ſirst being joined to A of the other. Now, suppose the vibrations to be performed in both. in such a manner that the simultaneous undulations on each side of the junetion may be in opposite directions. It is plain that the partition will be in equilibrio, and may be removed; and the plate of air will perſorm the same office, being alternately the middle plate oſ a condensed and of a rarefied parcel of air. The two pipes CA, AB will together give the same note that AB would have given alone, but louder. In like manner may another pipe, equal to AC, be joined to the shut end of this compound pipe, as in fig. 5. and the three will still give the same note that AB would have done alone. And in the same manner may any number of pipes, each equal to AC, be added, and the whole will give still the same note that AB would have given alone. Hence it legitimately ſollows, that iſ the undulations can be once begun in this manner in a pipe, it may give either the sound competent to it, as a single pipe AB (Plate VII. fig. 2.); or it may give the sound competent to a pipe oſ àd, th, àth, &e. oſ its length; the undulations in each part AB, BC, CD, maintaining themselves in the manner alrendy described. This seems the only way in which they can he preserved, both isochronous and synchronous. It is known that the gravest tones of pipes are as the lengths of the pipes, or the frequency of the undulations are inversely as their lengthss (This will be demonstrated presently). Thereſore these accessory tones should be as the odd numbers 3, 5, 7, &c. and the whole tones, including the fundamental, should ſorm the progression of the odd numbers 1, S, 5, 7, &e. This is abundantly conſirmed by experiment. Take a German ſlute, and stop all the finger-holes The ſlute, by 516 ACOUSTICS. gradually forcing the blast, ill give the fundamental, the 12%th, the I7th, the 2lst, &c. * Again, let AD (Plate VII. fig. 6.) represent the length oſ a pipe. Construet on AD an harmonic curve AEBFC GHD, in such a manner that HD may be ? AB, =# BC, =4 CH. The small ordinates m n will express the total excursion of the plates of air at the points m m, &e. and those ordinates which are above the axis will express excursions on one side of the place oſ rest, and the ordinates below will mark the excursions in the opposite directions, in the same manner as if this harmonic curve vere really a vibrating cord. These excursions are nothing in the points A B, C, H, and are greatest at the points E, F, G, D, vhere the little mass oſ air retains its natural density, and travels to and again, condensing the air at B, or rareſying it, according as the parcels E and F are approaching to or receding from each other. The points A, B, C, H, may he called NobES, and the parts E, F, G, D, may be called BionTs or Loors. This represents very vell to the eye the motion of the plates oſ air The density and velocity need not be minutely considered at present. It is enough that we see that when the density is increasing at A, by the ap# A little reflection will teach us that these tones ill not be perſæctly in the scale. A certain proportion between the dinmeter and length of the pipe produces a certain tone. Making the pipe wider or smaller ſlattens or sharpens this tone a little, and also greatly changes its clearness. Organ- builders, vho have tried every proportion, have adopted what they found best. This requires the diameter to be about y7th or 7æth of the length. Thereſore, when we cause the same pipe to sound different notes, we neglect this proporſion; and the notes are false, and even very coarse, when we produce one corresponding to a very small portion oſ the pipe. For a similar reason, Mr. Lambert found that, in order to make his pitch- pipe sound the octave to any of its notes, it was not suſficient to shorten its capacity one-halfby pushing down the piston; he found that the part remaining must be less than the part taken oſſ by a ſixed quantity I4% inches. Or, the length which gave any notæ being æ, the r 15r 7 lengih ſor its octave must be MUSICAL TRUMPET. 517 proach of the parcel E, it is diminishing at B by the recess of E and F; and increasing at C, by the approach of F and G, and diminishing at H by the recess of G. In the next vibration it will be diminishing at A and C, and increasing at B and HAnd thus the alternate nodes vill be in the same state, and the adjoining nodes in opposite states. The reader must carefully distinguish this motion from the undulatory motion of a pulse, investigated by Newton. That undulation is going on at the same time, and is a result of what we are now considering, and the cause of our hearing this undulationn. The undulation we are now considering is the original agitation, or rather it is the soUNDING BODY, as much as a vibrating string or bell is; for it is not the trumpet that we hear, but the air trembling in the trumpet. The trumpet is performing the office, not of the string, but of the pin and bridge on which the string is strained. This is an important remark in the philosophy of musical sounds. There is yet another set of notes producible from a pipe besides those which ſollow in the order of frequency 1, S, 5, 7, &e. Suppose a pipe open at both ends, sounding by blowing across the end, and undulating, as already described, with a node in the middle A (Plate VII. fig. 3.) If we still express the fundamental note of the pipe AB of Plate VII. fig. 2. by I, it is plain that the fundamental of an open pipe of the same length will have the frequency oſ its undulations expressed by 2; because an open pipe of twice the length of AB (Plate VII. fig. 2.) will be I, the two pipes AB (fig. 2.), and CB (ſig. 3), being in unison. But this open pipe may be made to undulate in another manner; ſor ve have seen that AB of Plate VII. ſig. 2. joined to CA of fig. 4. may sound altogether when the partition A is removed, still giving the note of AB (ſig. 2) Let such another as AB (fig. 2.) be added to the end C, and let the partition be removed. The whole may still undu- 5I8 ACOUSTICS. late, and still produce the same note; that is, a pipe open at both ends may sound a note which is the fundamental of a pipe like AB (fig. 2), but only one fourth of its length. The pipe CB of ſig. S. may thus be supposed to be divided into four equal parts, CE, EA, AF, FB, of which the extreme parts EC and FB contain undulations similar to thos in AB (fig- 2); and the two middle parts contain undulations like those in CA (fig. 4). The partitions at E and P may be removed, because the undulations in EC and EA will support each other, if they are in opposite directions; and those in FB and FA may support each other in the same manner. It must here be remarked, that in this state of undulation the direction of the agitations at the two extremities is the same; for in the middle piece EF the particles are moving one way, condensing the air at E, while they rarify it at F. Therefore, while the middle parcel is moving from E towards F, the air at B must be moving towards F, and the air at C must be moving from E. In short, the air at the two extremities must, in every instant, be moving in the opposite direction to that of the air in the middle. In like manner, if the pipe CB of Plate VII. fig. S. b divided into six parts, the two extreme purts may undulate like AB of ſig. 2. and the four inner parts may undulate like two pipes, such as CA of fig. 4. and the whole will give the sound which makes the fundamental of a pipe of one-sixth of the length, or having the frequency 6. We may remark here, that the simultaneous motion oſ the air at the extremities is in opposite directions, whereas in the last case it was in the same directionn. This is easily scen; for as the partition which is between the two middle pieces must always he in equilibrio, the air must be coming in or going out at the extremities together. This circumstance must give some sensible difference of character to the sounds 4 and 6. In the one, the agitations at each end oſ the tube are in the same direction, and in the other they MUSICAL TRUMPET. 519 are in the oppositee. Both produce pulses of sound which are conveyed to the ear. Thus ve see that the air in a pipe open at both ends may undulate in two vayss It may undulate with a node in the middle, giving the note of AB (Plate VII. fig. 2.), or oſ its 3d, 5th, Tth, &e. past; and it may undulate vith a loop or bight in the middle, sounding like à, à, à, &e. of AB, ſig. 2. In like manner may this pipe produce sounds whose ſrequency are expressed by 8, 10, &. and proceed as the even numbers. This state of agitation may be represented in the same vay that we represented the sounds I, 3, 5, &e. by constructing on AM (Plate VII. fig. 7.) an harmonic curve, vith any number of nodes and loops. Divide the ports AF, FD, DE, EM, equally in C, O, P, B. CB vill correspond to the pipe, and the ordinates o the curve GFHDLEN vill express the excursions oſ the plates of air. If the pipe gives its ſundamental note, its length must be represented by CO, and the undulations in it will resemble the vibrations of part CO of a cord, whose length AD is ęqual to 2CO, and which has a node in F. If the pipe is sounding its octavæ, it will be represented by CP, and its undulations will resemble the vibrations of a cord CP, whose length AE is à oſ CP, having nodes at F and D, &e. &e. We can now see the possibility of such undulations existing in a pipe as will be permanent, and produce all the variety of notes by a mere change in the manner of blowing, and why these notes are in the order oſ the natural numhers, precisely as we observe to happen in winding the trumpet or French hor. We have, lst, the fundamental expressed by I; then the ocetave 2; then the 12th 3; the double octave 4 then the third major of that octave 5, or 17th oſf the fundamental; then the octave of the I2th, or the 5th of this double ootave, /6. We then jump to the 520 AcousTics. triple octave 8, without producing the intermediate sound corresponding to 7 th of the pipe. With much attention we can hit it; and it is a fact that a person void of musical ear stumbles on it as easily as on any othe. But the musician, finding this sound begin with hum, and his ear being grated with it, perhaps thinks that he is mistaking his embouchure, and he slides into the octave. Aſter the triple otave, we easily hit the sounds corresponding to 7 and, vhich are the 2d and Sd of this octavee The next note , is sharper than a just th. We easily produce the note 12, vhich is a just 5th; 13 is a false 6th; 14 is a sound oſ no use in our music, hut easily hit; 15 and 16 give the exact Tth and Sth of this octave. Thus, as we ascend, we introduce more notes into every octave, till at last we can nearly complete a very high oetave; but in order to do this with success, and tolerable readiness, ve must take an instrument of a very low piteh, that we may be able nearly to fill up the steps of the octave in which our melody lies Few players can make the French horn or trombone sound its real fundamental, and the octave is generally mistaken for itt. The proof of this is, that most players can give the 5th of the lowest note that they are able to produce; whereas the 5th of the real fundamental cannot be utteredl. Therefore that lowest note is not the fundamental, but the octave to the fundamental. Few perſormers can sound even this second octave on a short instrument, such as the ordinary military trumpet; and vhat they imagine to be the fundamental sound of this instrument is the double octave above it. This appears very strange; and it may be asked, how we know what is really the fundamental note of a trumpet? The answer to this is to be obtained only by demonstrating, on mechanical principles, what is the frequency oſ undulation corresponding to a given length of pipe This is a proposition equally fundamental vith its corresponding one in the theory of musical cords; but we have reserved it till now, becaus MUSICAI. TRUMPET. 521 many readers would stop short at such an investigation, vho are able to understand completely what we have now delivered concerning the musie of the trumpet. Suppose therefore a pipe shut at both ends, and that the whole weight oſ the contained air is concentrated in its middle point, the rest retaining its elasticity without inertia; or (vhich is a more accurate conception), let the middle point be conceived as extending its elasticity to the two extremities of the pipe, being repelled from each by a ſorce inversely as the distance. Let the length of this pipe be L. This may also express the weight of the middle plate of air, which vill always be proportional to the lengihi oſ the pipe, because all is supposed to be concentrated theree Let E be the elasticity oſ the air This must be measured by the pressure oſ the atmosphere, or by the weight of the column of mercury in the barometer. Perhaps the rationale of this vill be better conceived by some readers by considering E us the height of a homogencous atmosphere. Then it ĩs plain that E is to L as the weight of this atmospheric column to the weight oſ the column of the same air which fills the pipe whose length is L. Then it is also plain that E is to L as the external pressure, and consequently, as the elasticity which supports that pressure is to the weight or inertia of the matter to be moved. Let this middle plate or diaphragm be withdravn ſrom its place of rest to the very small distance a. The elasticity or repulsion will be augmented on one side and diminished on the other; and the difference between them is the only force which impels the diaphragm toward the middle point, and causes it to vibrate, or produces the undulation. It is plain that the repulsion on one 7L side is a x E,  53 E ſr Laua:;L= H : q3L E: . 2. and the repulsion on the other side is LFa L x E, or T E. The diſſerence of these repulsions is 522 ACOUSTICS. E x L x m But as we suppose a exceedingly small in comparison with L, this difference, or the accelerat4 E ing force, may saſely be expressed by E v or4a 7. Hence ve deduce, in the first place, that the undulations vill be isochronous, vhether wide or narrow; because the accelerating force is always proportional to the distance ⸗ from the middle point. Nov, let a pendulum, whose quantity of matter is L, and length a, be supposed to vibrate in a eycloid by the fore: 4 4 E TE or a. It must perſorm its vibrations in the same time with the plate of air; because the moving forc, the matter to be moved, and the space along which they ar to be similarly impelled, are the same in both cases. Let another pendulum, having the same quantity of matter L, vibrate by its weight L alonee. In order that these two pendulums may vibrate in equal times, their lengths must be as the accelerating forces. Therefore we must have aæ al. L. a: L=u: TEa,& Vhich is therefore the length of the synchronous pendulum. Nov, a cord without weight and inertia, but loaded vith the weight L at its middle point, and strained by a weight E, and dravn from the axis to the distance a, is precisely similar in ĩts motion to the diaphragm we are now considering, and must make its oscillations in the same time. This is applicable to any number oſ plates of air, by substituting in the cord a loaded point for each of the plates; ſor when the ease is thus changed, both in the pipe and the cord, the space to be passed over by the plate of air bears the same proportion to a, which is passed over by the whole air concentrated in the middle point, which the space to be passed over by the corresponding loaded point of the cord MUSICAL TROUMPET. 5239 bears to that passed over by the whole matter of the cord concentrated in the middle point; and the same equality of ratios obtains in the accelerating forces oſ the plate of air and the corresponding loaded point of the cord. Suppose, then, a pipe divided into 2, 8, 4, &c. equal parts, by I, ẽ, 3, diaphragms, each of which contains the air of the intervening portion of the pipe, the whole weight L being equally divided among them. If there be but one diaphragm, its weight must be L; if two, the weight of each must be 2 L: if three, the weight of each must be 7 L; and so on for any number. By considering this attentively, ve may infer, without farther investigation, vhat will be the undulations of all the different plates of air in a pipe stopped at both endss We have only to compare it with a cord similarly divided and loaded. Increase the number of loaded points, and diminish the load on vach, continuallyit is evident that this terminates in the case of a simple cord, with its matter uniformly diffused; and a simple pipe, with its air also uniformly diffused over its whole length. Thereſore, if we take an elastic cord, and stretch it by such a weight that the extending weight may bear the same proportion to the accelerating foree acting on the whole matter concentruted in its middle point, which the elasticity of the air bears to its accelerating force acting on the whole matter concentrated at the mouth of an open pipe, sounding its fundamental note, the cord and the air will vibrate in the same time. Moreover, since the proportion between the vibrations of a cord so constituted, and those of a cord having its matter uniſormly diffused, is the same with the proportion between the undulations in a pipe so constituted, and those of a pipe in whieh the air is uniformly diſfusedit is plain that the vibrations of the cord and of the pipe in their natural state will also be performed in equal times. We look on this as the easiest way of obtaining a distinct perception of the authority on which we rest our knovledge 5%4 ACOUSTICS. oſ the absolute number of undulations of the air in a pipe of given length. It may be obtained directly; and Daniel Bernoulli, Euler, and others, have given Very elegant solutions of this prublem, without having recourse to the analogy Of the vibrations of cords and undulations of a column oſ air. But it requires more mathematical knowledge than many readers are possessed oſ who are fully able to follo out this analogical investigation. Let us therefore compare this theory with experiment. What ve call an open pipe of an organ is the same which we, in this theory, have considered as a pipe open at both ends; for the opening at the ſoot, which the organ-builders call the vorcE oſ the pipe, is equivalent to a complete openingg. The aperture, and the sharp edge which divides the vind, may be continued all round, and the wind admitted by a cireular slit, as is represented in Plate VII. fig. 10. We have tried this, and it gives the most brilliant and clear tone we ever heard, far exceeding the tones of the organ. An open organ pipe, thereſore, vhen sounding its fundamental note, undulates with one node in its middle, and its undulations are analogous, in respect of their mechanism, to the vibrations of a wire of the same length, and the same weight, vith the column of air in the pipe, and stretched by a weight equal to that of a column of the same air, reaching to the top of a homogeneous atmosphere, or equal to the weight of a column of mercury as high as that in the barometer. Dr. Smith (see Harmonics, 2d edit. ꝑ. 193.) found that a brass wire, whose length was 35,55 inches, and weight S1 troy grains, and stretched by 7 pounds avoirdupois, or 9000 grains, was in perfect unison with an open organ pipe whose length was 56,4 inches. Nov 56,4 inches oſ this wire weighs 75, 34 grains. When the barometer stands at S30 inches, and the thermometer at 550 (the temperature at the time oſ the experiment), the height of a homogeneous atmosphere is 332640 inches. This has the same proportion to the length oſ the pipe which the MUSICAL TRUMPET. 595 pressure oſ the atmosphere has to the weight oſ the column oſ air contained in the pipe. Nov 56,4: 332640  75,34: 290060. This vire, therefore, should be stretched (if the theory be just) by 200060 grains, in order to be unison with the other wire, and we should have... 385,55: 86,4  49000: 290060 But, in truthb,... iũũ 86,4° = 49000: 289430 The difference is. ... 63 The error searcely exceeds - 55 and does not amount to an error of one vibration in a second. We must thereſore account this theory as accurate, seeing that it agrees with experiment with all desirable exactness. We may also deduce from it a very compendious rule for determining the absolute number of aerial pulses made by an open pipe of any given length. When considering the vibrations of cords, we found that the number of vibrations made in a second is & r, vwhere E is the extending veight, W the weight of the cord, and L its length. Let H be the height of a homogeneous atmosphere. We have HW .. HW its weight /3, = E. Therefore substitutingſ for E in the above formula, we have the number oſ aerial pules made p ma æ /æe8 or Y5ę5H Now /356H, computed in inches, is 11331. Therefore, if we also measure the length of the pipe L in inches, the pulses in a second are = ò Thus, in the case beſore us, 331 56.  I31,12, or this pipe produces IS1 pulses in a second. Dr. Smith found by experiment that it produced 130,0, differing only about àth of a pulse*. 5  In the preceding rule, Proſessor Robison considers the number ol pulses as equal to the number oſ vibrations performed hy the air in the pipe, ad determines the number oſ vibrations by extending to an open pipe the 526 ACOUSTICS. We see that the pitch of a pipe depends on the height of the homogeneous atmosphere. This may vary by a change of temperature When the air is warmer it expands, and the weight of the induced column is lessened, while it still carries the same pressuree Thereſore the piteh must rise. Dr. Smith found his organ a full quarter tone higher in summer than in winter The eſfect of this is oſten felt in concerts of wind instruments with stringed instrumentss The heat which sharpens the tone oſ the first flattens the last The harpsichord soon gets out of tune vwith the horns and ſlutes. Sir Isaac Newton, comparing the velocity of sound vith the number of pulses made by a pipe of given length, observed that the length of a pulse was twice the length oſ the open pipe which produced it. Divide the space passed over in a second by the number of pulses, and we obtain the length of each pulse. Now it was found that a pipe of 2L9 inches produced 262 pulses The velocity of sound (as computed by the theory on which our investigation of the undu. . 960 x 12 lations in pipes proceeds) is 960 ſeet. Nov⸗55=8 inches very nearly, the half of which is 22, which hardly diſfers ſfrom 21,9 The difference of this theoretical velocity of sound, and its real velocity 1142 ſeet per second, remains still to be accounted for. We may just observe here, that vhen a pipe is measured, and its length called 21,9, we do really allow it too litlee. The voice-hole is equivalent to a portion, not inconsiderable of its length, as appears very clearly from the experiments oſ Mr. Lambert on a variable formula which he had previously found for the vibrations oſ a string. Noas that formula expresses the single vibrations oſ a striug, the extension of it must express the number oſ single vibrations oſ the air in a pipe, and consequent ly give double the number of pulses. If this rule be applied to the example given iu the second next paragraph, it will be found to give double the number oſ pul;es mentioned there by that philosopher. Enpixavacu ExcrcLoPæDIa, Art. AcousTics, Chap. III. MUSICAL TRUMPET. 527 pitch-pipe, and on the German ſlute, recorded in the Berlin Memoirs for 1775. He found it equivalent to àth; and this is suſficient for reconciling these measures oſ a pulse with the real velocity of sound. The determination vhich wve have given of the undulations oſ air in an organ pipe is indireet, and is but a sketch oſ the beautiſul theory of Daniel Bernoulli, in which he states with accuracy the precise undulation of each plate of air; both in respeet oſ position, density, velocity, and direction of its motion. It is a pleasure to observe how the diſferent equations coincide with those which express the vibrations of an elastic cord. But this would have taken up much room, and would not have been suited to the information of many curious readers, who can easily follow the train oſ reasoning which we have employed. Mr. Bernoulli applies the same theory to the explanation of the undulations in flutes, or instruments whose sounds are modified by holes in the sides of the pipe But this is foreign to our purpose of explaining the music of the trumpet. We shall only observe, that a hole made in that part of a pipe where a node should form itself, in order to render practicable the undulations, competent to a particular note, prevents its formation, and in its place we only get sueh undulations (and their corresponding sounds) as have a loop in that place The intelligent reader vill perceive that this single circumstance will explain almost every phenomenon of flutes with holes; and also the efſects oſ holes in instruments with a reed voice, such as the hautboy or clarionette. We nov see that the sound or musical pitch of a pipe is inversely as its length, in the same manner as in strings. And we learn, by comparing them, that the sound oſ a trumpet has the same piteh with an open organ pipe oſ the same length. A French horn, 16 feet long, has the sound C fu ut, which is also the sound of- an open ſlute-pipe of that length. The TroMBONE, great trumpet, or SACKBUT, is an old instrument described by Mersennus and other authors of 528 ACOUSTICS. the last century. It has a part which slides (air-tight) within the other. By this contrivance the pitch can be altered by the performer as he plays. This is a great improvement when in good hands; because we can thus correct all the false notes of the trumpet, which are very offensive, ?when they occur in an emphatical or holding note of a piece of music. We can even employ this contrivance for filling up the blanks in the lower octaves. We must not take leave of this subject without taking notice of another discovery of Mr. Bernoulli's, which is exceedingly curious, and of the greatest importance in the philosophy oſ music. Artists had long ago observed that the deep notes oſ musical instruments are sometimes accompanied by their harmonie sounds. This is most clearly perceived in bells, some of which give these harmonies, particularly the 12th, almos as strong as the fundamenta. Musicians, by attending more careſully to the thing, seem now to think that this æcompaniment is universal. Iſ one of the ſinest sounding strings oſ the bases of a harpsichord be struck, we can hear the 12th very plainly as the sound is dying away, and the 17th major is the last sound that dies away on the ear. This will be rendered much more sensible, i ve divide the wire into five parts, and at the points of division tiæ round it a thread with a ſast knot, and cut the ends off very short. This makes the string false indeed by the unequal loading: but, by rendering those parts somewhat less moveable by this additional matter, the portions oſ the wire between the points are thus jogged, as it were, into secondary vibrations, vwhich have a more sensible proportion to the fundamental vibratiom. This is still more sensible in the sound of the strings of a violincello vhen 0 loaded; but we must he careful not to load them too much, because this would æ much retard the fundamental vibration, without retarding the secondary vibrations, that both cannot be maintained iogether. (N. B. This experiment alæays produces a heat MUSICAL TRUMPET. 520 in the sound).Listening to a fine sounding flute- pipe of the organ, we can also very often perceive the same thing. Mr. Rameau, and most other theorists in music, now assert that this is the essence oſ a musical sound, and necessarily exists in all of them, distinguishing them from harsh noises. Rameau has made this the foundation of his system of music, asserting that the pleasure of harmony results from the successful imitation of this harmony of Nature. But a little logic should convince these theorists that they must be mistakenn. I a note is musical because it has these accompaniments, and by this composition alone is a musical note, what are these harmonics? Are they musical notes ? This is grantedc. Thereſore they have the same composition; and a musical note must consist at once of every possible sound; yet we know that this would be a jarring noisee A little mathematics, too, or mechanics would have convinced them. A simple vibration is surely a most possible thing, and therefore a simple sound. No, say the theorists; for though the vibration of the cord may be simple, it produces such undulations in the air as excite in us the perception of the harmoniess. But this is a mere assertion, and leaves the question undecided. Is not a simple undulation of the air as possible as the simple vibration of a cord? It is, however, a very curious thing, that almost all musical sounds really have this accompaniment of the octave, 12th, double octave, and 17th major; for these are the harmonics that we hear. The jealousy oſ Leibnitæ and of John Bernoulli, and their unſriendly thoughts respecting all the British mathematicians, made John Bernoulli do every thing in his power to lessen the value oſf Dr. Taylor's investigation of the vibration of a musical cordc. Taylor gave him a good opportunity. Perhaps a little vain oſ his investigation of this abstruse matter, he thought too much of it. He affirmed that the harmonic curve was the essential form of a string vOL. Iv. ?L 532 ACOUSTICS. there can be no accelerating ſorcee This causæd Bernouſũi to attempt a direct investigation, examining minutely the curvatures and accelerating ſorces in the diſferent pomts He had the pleasure of finding that the accelerating ſorce: arising ſfrom the curvature in every point, were precisly such as would produce the accelerations necessary in thos points for performing the motion that was required And he exhibited the equations expressive of the state oſ the cord in all these pointss And, on the ſaith oſ these equations, he restored the Taylorean curve to the rank which its inventor had given it; and he asserted that in every musical vibration the cord was disposed in a harmonical curve either simple or compound. He farther sheved that the equations which Euler and D'Alembert had given for the musical cord (at least in the cases which they had published) were included in his equations, and that their equations only exhibited its momentary states, while his oWn equations shewed the physical connection of them all; which is, that the whole cord forms a harmonic curve between the two fixed pins, while its different portions form subordinate harmonie curves on the ſirst as an axis. Euler and D'Alembert, although they acknowledge this in the particular cases vhich they had taken as examples, on aceount of their simplicity, still insist that no subordinate harmonic vibrations can eorrespond to all the states oſ an elastic cord which their equations exhibit as isochronous and permanent. Mr. Bernoullis death put an end to the controversy, and the ques tion (considered as a general theory) is perhaps still undecided. It may very probably be true, that as a simple vibration may be permanent which never has the form of the simple harmonic deseribed by Dr. Taylor, so a vibration may exist compounded of such vibrations, and therefore not expressible by any equation deduced from the Taylorean curve. But, in the mean time, Mr. Bernoulli has made the most Leautiſul discovery in mechanies which has appeared in the MUSICAL TRUMPET. 533 course of the last century, and has explained the most curious phenomenon of continued sounds, viæ. the almost universul accompaniment of the harmonic notes of any fundamental sound. For this susceptibility oſf compounded variation is not confined to a 12th, but is equally demonstrable of every other harmonic. Nay, it is evident that the same simple vibration of a cord may furnish a moveable axis to more than one harmonic. For as the simple vibration can have a subordinate harmonie vibration superinduced upon it, s0 may this compounded vibration have another superinducer on it, and s0 on to any degree of composition. And farther, as Mr. Bernoulli has shewn the complete analogy between the aceelerations of the difſerent points of an elastic cord and of the corresponding plates of a column of air, it legitimately follows that all the consequences which we can easily deduce, respecting the vibrations of an elastic cord, may be aſſirmed respecting the undulations of a column oſf air in a pipe. Thereſore this accompaniment of the harmonics must not be confined to the music of strings and bells, but equally obtains in the music of wind instruments. And thus the doctrine becomes universal. Mr. Bernoulli did not think it enough to shew that these compound vibrations are possiblee He endeavours to shew that this accompaniment must be frequent. He illustrates this very prettily, by supposing that a toothed wheel is turned round, and rubs with its teeth on an elastic cord. Ifthe successive dropping of the teeth keep exactly pace with such vibrations as the cord can take and maintain by its elasticity, these will certainly be formed on it. If the intervals do not exactly correspond, a little reflection will shew that the agitation which the cord acquires will approximate to those which it can maintain; and, if when they are exactly so in any place of it, the wheel be in that instant removed, this vibration will remain and diffuse itself through the rest of the cord; so that the very last dying quiver (so to speak) vill be a harmonic. Every harmonic agitation tends, by the MUSICAL TRUMPET. 535 sound. All the untaught singers, and all simple nations, are examples. They not only fix on certain intervals as the steps of their tunes, but are disgusted when other steps are taken. Nor do we hesitate, for the very same reasons, to say that the rules of accompaniment are dependent on the cantus or air, and by no means on the fundamental bass of Rumeau. The dependence assumed by him, as the rule of accompaniment, would, if properly adhered to, according to his own notions of the comparative values of the harmonies, lead to the most fantastic airs imaginable, always jumping by large intervals, and altogether incompatible with graceſul musie. The rules of modulation which he has squeezed out of his principle, are nothing but forced; very forced, accommodations oſ a very vague principle to the current practice of his contemporaries. They do not suit the primitive melodies of many nations, and they have caused these national musies to degenerate. This is acknowledged by all vho are not perverted by the prevailing habits. We have heard, and could vrite down, some most enchanting lullabies oſf simple peasant women, possessed of musical sensibility, but ſar removed, in the cool sequestered vale of life, from all opportunities of stealing from our great composers. Some of these lullabies never fail to charm, even the most erudite musician, when sung by a fine flexible voice: but it would pu⸗⸗zle Mr. Rameau to accompany them secundum artem. We conclude this subject by deseribing a most beautiful and instruetive experiment. Mr. Wati, the celebrated engineer, vas amusing himself (about the year 1765) with organ-building, and invented a monochord of continued sound, by which he could tune an organ with mathematical precision, according to any proposed system of temperament. It consisted of a covered string oſ a violincello, sounding by the frietion oſ an ivory wheel. The instrument did not answer Mr. Watt's purpose, by reason of the dead harshness oſ its tone, and a ſflutter in the MUSICAL TRUMPET. 5387 When the string was making very gentle, simple vibrations, and the wheel hardly touching it, iſ a violincello was made to sound the I12th very strongly in its neighboui huod, the string instantly divided itself, and vibrated in unison, frequently retaining its simple vibration and fundamental tonee. We recommend this experiment to every person who wishes to make himself well acquainted with the mechanism of musical sounds. He will see, in a most sensible and convincing manner, how a single string of the Aolian harp gives us all the changes of harmony, sliding from one sound to another, according as it is affected in its different parts by an irregular breeze of wind. The riter of this article has attempted to regulate these sweel harmonic notes, and to introduce them into the organ. His success has been very encouraging, and the sounds ſar exceed in pathetic sweetness any that have yet been produced by that noble instrument. But he has not yet brought them ſully under command, nor made them strong enough for any thing but the soſtest chamber musie. Other necessary oceupations prevent him from giving the attention to this subject that it deserves. He recommends it therefore to the musical instrument-makers as richly deserving their notic. His general method was this: A wooden pipe is made, whose section is a double squaree A partition in the middle divides it into two pipes, along side of each other. One of them communicates with the foot and wind chest, and is shut at the upper end. The other is open at the upper, and shut at the lower end. In the partition there is a slit almost the whole length, and the sides of this slit are brought to a very smooth chamſered or feather edge. A fine catgut is strained in this slit, so as almost to touch the sides. It is evident that when the wind enters one pipe by the foot, it passes through the slit into the other, and escapes at the top, which is open. In its passage it ſorces the eatgut into motion, and produces a musical note, having all the sweetness oſ the ZEolian harp. The strength oſ sound may be increased by 538 AcousTICS. increasing the body of air which is made to undulat Thi: was done by using, instead of catgut, very narron slk tap] or ribband varnished: but the unavoidable raggednes of the edges made the sounds coarse and vheezingg Flat silver wire was not suſficiently elastic; flat wire, used ſor watch balance springs, was better, but still very weak sounded. Other methods were tried, which promised better. A thin round plate of metal, properly supported by a spring, was set in a round hole: made in another plate not  thin, 50 as just not to touch the sides The air foreed through this hole made the spring plate tremble, dancing in and out, and produced a very bold and melloW sound. This, and similar experiments, are highly worth attention, and promisæ great additions to our instrumental music- WVATCH-WORK. Our intention in this article does not extend to the manual practice of this art, nor even to all the parts of the machine. We mean to consider the most important and diſſicult part of the construetion, namely, the method of applying the maintaining power oſ the wheels to the regulator of the motion, s0 as not to hurt its power of regulation. The regulator oſ a clock or wateh is a pendulum or a balance Without this check to the motion of the wheels, impelled by a weight or a spring, the machine would rim down ith a motion rapidly accelerating, till frietion and the resistance oſ the air induced a sort of uniformity, as they do in a kitchen jack. But if a pendulum be so put in the way of this motion, that only one tooth of a wheel can pass it at each vibration, the revolution of the wheels will depend on the vibration of the pendulum. This has long been observed to have a certain constancy, insomuch that the astronomers of the East employed pendulums in measuring the times of their observations, patiently counting their vibra- 540 VATCH-WORK. tions during the phases of an eclipse or the transits oſ the stars, and renewing them by a little push with the finger when they became too small. Gassendi, Riccioli, and others, in more recent times, followed this example The celebrated physician Sanctorius is the first person who is mentioned as having applied them as regulators of clock movements Machines, however, called elocks, with a train of toothed vheels leading round an index of hours, had been contrived long beforee The earliest of which ve have any account is that of Richard of Wallingford, Abbot of St. Alban's, in 1326. It appears to have been regulated by a ſly like a kitchen jack. Not long after this Giacomo Dondi made one at Padau, vhich had a motus succussorius, a hobbling or trotting motion; from which expression ĩt seems probable that it was regulated by some alternate movement. We cannot think that this vas a pendulum, because, once it was introduced, it never could have been supplanted by a balancee The alternate motion of a pendulum, and is seeming uniſormity, are among the most ſamiliar obserrations of common life; and it is surprising that they were not more early thought of for regulating time measurers The alternate motion of the old halance is one oſ the most far-fetched means that can be imagined, and might pass for the invention of a very reflecting mind, while a pendulum only requires to be dravn aside from the plumb-line, to make it vibrate with regularit. The balance must be put in motion by the clock, and that motion must be stopped, and the contrary motion induced; and we must knov that the same ſorce and the same checks will produce uniform oscillations. All this must be previously known before  Proſessor Beckmann, in the ſirst volume oſ his History of Invention, expresses a belieſ that clocks oſ this kind were used in some monasteries so early as the IIth century, and that they were derived to the monks ſrom the Saracens. His authorities, however, are discordant, and seem not completely satisſactory even to himselſ. VATCH-WORK. 511 we can think oſit as a regulator; yet so it is that clocks, reguIated by a balance, were long used, and very common through Europe, beſore Galileo proposed the pendulum, about the year 1600. Pendulum clocks then came into general use, and were found to be greatly preferable to balance clocks as accurate measurers of time. Mathematicians saw that their vibrations had some regular dependence on uniform gravity, and in their writings ve meet with many attempts to determine the time and demonstrate the isochronism of the vibrations. It is amusing to read these attempts. We wonder at the avkwardness and insuſficiency of the explanation given of the motions oſ pendulums, even by men oſ acknovledged eminence Mersennus carried on a most useful correspondence with all the mathematicians oſ Europe, and was the means of making them acquainted with each other; nay, he was himselſ well conversant in the science; yet one cannot but smile at his reasonings on this subject. Standing on the shoulders oſ our predecessors, ve look around us, in grcat satisſaction with our own powers of observation, not thinking how we are raised up, or that ve are trading with the stock leſt us by the diligent and sagacious philosophers of the 17th century*. Riccioli, Gassendus, and Galileo, made similar attempts to explain the motion oſ pendulums; but without success. This honour was reserved for Mr. Huyghens, the most elegant of modern geometers He had succeeded in 1656 or 1657 in adapting the machinery oſ a clock to the maintaining of the vibrations oſ a pendulum. Charmed with the accuracy of its performance, he began to investigate with serupulous attention the theory oſ its motionn. By the most ingenious and elegant application of geometry to mechanical problems, he demonstrated that the wider vibrations of a pendulum employed more time than the narrover, and that the time of a semicircular vibration is to that of a very small one nearly as 34 to 29; and, aided by a new department oſ geo- 542 WATCH-WORK. metrical science invented by himself, namely, the evolution of curves, he shewed how to make a pendulum swing in æ cycloid and that its vibrations in this curve are all performed in equal times, vhatever be their extent. But beſore this time, Dr. Hooke, the most ingenious and inventive mechanician of his age, had discovered the great accuracy of pendulum clocks, having found that the manner in which they had been employed had obscured their real merit. They had been made to vibrate in very lurge arches, the only motion that could be given them by the contrivances then known; and in 1656 he invented another method, and made a clock vhich moved vith astonishing regularity. Using a heavy pendulum, and making it swing in very small arches, the elocks so constructed were ſound to excel Mr. Huyghens cycloidal pendulums; and those vho were unfriendly to Huyghens had a sort of triumph on the occasion But this was the result of ignorancee Mr. Huyghens had shewn, that the error of ,⸗ of an inch, in the formation oſ the parts which produced the cycloidal motion, caused a greater irregularity of vibration than a circular vibration could do, although it should extend five or six degrees on each side of the perpendicular. It has been found that the unavoidable inaccuracies, even of the best artists, in the cycloidal construction, make the performance much inferior to that of a common pendulum vibrating in arches which do not exceed three or four degrees ſfrom the perpendicular. Such clocks alone are now made, and they exceed all expeetation. / We have said that a pendulum needed only to be removed ſrom the perpendicular, and then let go, in order to vibrate and measure time. Hence it might seem, that nothing is wanted but a machinery so connected with the pendulum as to keep a register, as it were, of the vibration. It could not be diſficult to contrive a method oſ doing this; but more i wauted. The air must be displaced by the pendulum. This WATCH-WORX. 513 requires some ſorce, and must thereſore employ some part of the momentum of the pendulum. The pivot on which it swings occasions frictionthe thread, or thin piece of metal by which it is hung, in order to avoid this friction, occasions some expenditure of force by its want of perfect flexibility or elasticity. These, and other causes, make the vibrations grow more and more narrow by degrees, till at last the pendulum is brought to rest We must thereſore have a contrivance in the wheel- work which ill restore to the pendulum the small portion of force which it loses in every vibration The action of the wheels therefore may be called a maintaining power, because it keeps up the vibrations. But we now see that this may aſfect the regularity of vibration. If it be supposed that the action of gravity renders all the vibrations isochronous, we must grant that the additional impulsion by the wheels will destroy that isochronism, unless it be so applied that the sum total of this impulsion and the force of gravity may vary so with the situation of the pendulum, as still to give a series of ſorces, or a law of variation, perfectly similar to that of gravity. This camot be eſſected, unless we know both the law which regulates the action of gravity, producing isochronism of vibration, and the intensity of the foree to be derived from the vwheels in every situation of the pendulum. The necessary requisite for the isochronous motion of the pendulum is, that the force which urges it toward the perpendicular, be proportional to its distance from it; and thereſore, since pendulums swinging in small circular arches are sensibly isochronous, we must infer that such is the lav by which the accelerating action of gravity on them is really aceommodated to every situation in those arches. It ill greatly conduce to the better understanding of the eſfect of the maintaining pover, if the reader keep in continual view the chieſ circumstances of a motion oſ this kind. 514 WATCH-WOEX. Thereſore let AC a (Plate VIII. fig. I.) represent the arch passed over by the pendulum, stretched out into a straight line. Let C be its middle point, when the pendulum hangs perpendicular, and A and a be the extremities of the osxcillationn. Let AD be drawn perpendicular to AC, to represent the accelerating action of gravity on the pendulum when it is at A. Drav the straight line DC 4, and a d, perpendicular to A a. About C, as a centre, describe the semicircle AFH a. Through any points B, &, &, b, &c. of A a, drav the perpendiculars BFE, KLM, &e. cutting both the straight line and the semicirclee. Then, I. The actions of gravity on the pendulum, when in the situations B, K, &e. by which it is urged toward C, are proportional to, and may be represented by, the ordinates BE, KL, be, I I, &. to the straight line, DC d. 2. The velocities acquired at B, K, &c by the acceleration along AB, AK, &e. are proportional to the ordinates BF, KM, &e. to the semicircle AH a; and, therefore, the velocity with which the pendulum passes through the middle point C, is to its velocity in any other point B, as CH to BF. S. The times of describing the parts AB, BE, KC, &e oſ the whole arch oſ oscillation, are proportional to, and may be represented by, the arches AF, FM, MH, &c. of the semicirele. 4. If one pendulum describe the arch represented by AC a, and another describe the arch KC E, they will describe them in equal times, and their maximum velocities (viz their velocities in the middle point,) are proportional to AC and KC; that is, the velocities in the middle point are proportional to the width of the oscillations. The same proportions are true with respect to the motions outwards from C. That is, hen the pendulum describes CA, with the initial velocity CH, its velocity at K is reduced to KM by the retarding action of gravity. It is WATCH- WORE. 545 reduced to BF at B, and to nothing at A; and the times of describing CK, KB, BA, CA, are as HM, MF, FA, HA. Another pendulum setting out from C, with the initial velocity CO, reaches only to X, CK being= CO. Also the times are equalIf we consider the whole oscillation as perſormed in the direction A ę, the forces AD, BE, KL accelerate the pendulum, and the similar forces a d, b e, k I, on the other side, retard itt. The contrary happens in the next oscillation aCA. 5. The areas DABE, DAKL, &e. are proportional to the squares of the velocities acquired by moving along AB, AXL, &e. or to the diminution oſ the squares of the velocities sustained by moving outwards along BA or KA, &e. The consideration of this figure will enable the reader (even though not a mathematician) to form some notion of the eſſect of any proposed application of a maintaining pover by means of wheel- work: For, knowing the weight of the pendulum, ve know the accelerating action of that weight in any particular situation A of the pendulum. We also know what addition or subtraction we produce on the pendulum in that situation by the wheel-work. Suppose it is an addition of pressure equal to a certain number oſ grains. We can make AD to Dà as the first to the last; and thon A 2 will be the whole ſorce urging the pendulum toward C. Doing the same for every point of AC, ve obtain a line 3, C, which is a new scale of forces, and the space DC), comprehended between the two scales CD and C), vill express the addition made to the square of the velocity by the maintaining power in passing along AC by the joint action of that pover and the power of gravity. Also, by drawing a line æ æ perpendicular to AC, making the space C æ æ equal to CAD, the point æ will be the limit of the oscillation outward from C, where the initial velocity HC is extinguished. If the line x æ cut the same circle in ò, one- half the arch  A will nearly express the contraction made in the. time oſ the outward oscillation by the maintaining power. An accurate determinavOL. 1Iv. 2x 546 WATCH-WORE. tion of this last circumstance is operose, and even diſficult; but this solution is not far from the truth, and will greatly assist our judgment of the effect of any proposal, even though x æ be dravn only by the judgment of the eye, making the area leſt out as nearly equal to the area taken in as we can estimate by inspection. This is said from experience. Since the motion of a pendulum or balance is alternate, vhile the pressure oſ the wheels is constantly in one diretion, it is plain that some art must be used to accommodate the one to the otherr. When a tooth oſ the wheel has given the balance a motion in one direction, it must quit it, that it may get an impulsion in the opposite direction. The balance or pendulum thus escaping from the tooth oſ the vheel, or the tooth escaping from the balance, has given to the general contrivance the name of scAPEMENT among our artists, from the French word echappement. We proceed, therefore, to consider this subject more particularly, first considering the scapements which are peculiarly suĩted w the small vibrations of pendulums, and then those which must produce much wider vibrations in balances. This, with some other cireumstances, render the scapements for pendulums and balances very diſferent. I. Of the Action of a Wheel and Pallet. Tuu scapement which has been in use for clocks and watches ever since their first appearance in Europe, ĩs extremely simple, and its mode of operation is too obvious to need much explanation. In Plate VIII. fig. 2. XY represents a horizontal axis, to which the pendulum P is attached by a slender rod, or otherwise. This axis has two leaves C and D attached to it, one near each end, anũ not in the same plane, hut so that when the pendulum hangs perpendicularly, and at rest, the piece C spreads a few degrees o the right hand, and D as much to the left. They commonly make an angle oſ 70, 80, or 90 degrees. These two pieces are called PALLETS. AFB represents a wheel, tuming VATCH- WORK. 547 round on a rerpendicular axis EO, in the order of the letters AFEB The teeth oſ this wheel are cut into the ſorm oſ the teeth of a saw, leaning forvard, in the direction of the motion of the rim. As they somewhat resemble the points oſ an old-fashioned royal diadem, this wheel has got the name oſ the cRoWx winEEL. In watches it is oſten called the balance wheel. The number oſ teeth is generally odd; sO that when one oſf them B is pressing on a pallet D, the opposite pallet C is in the space between two teeth A and I. The ſigure represents the pendulum at the extremity of ĩts excursion to the right hand, the tooth A having just escaped from the pallet C, and the tooth B having just dropped on the pallet D. It is plain, that as the pendulum now moves over to the leſt, in the areh PG, the tooth B continues to press on the pallet D, and thus accelerates the pendulum, both during its descent along the arch PH, and its ascent along the arch HG. It is no less evident, that when the pallet D, by turning round the axis XY, raises its point above the plane of the wheel, the tooth B escapes from it, and I drops on the pallet C, which is now nearly perpendicular. I presses C to the right, and accelerates the motion of the pendulum along the arch GP. Nothing can be more obvious than this action of the wheel in maintaining the vibrations of the pendulum. We can easily perceive, also, that when the pendulum is hanging perpendicularly in the line XH, the tooth B, by pressing on the pallet D, will force the pendulum a little way to the leſt of the perpendicular, and vill force it so much the farther as the pendulum is lighter; and, iſ it be suſſiciently light, it will be forced so far from the perpendicular that the tooth B vill eseape, and then I will catch on C, and ſorce the pendulum hack to P, where the whole operation will be repeated. The same effect will be produced in a more remarkable degree, if the rod oſ the penduliim be continued through the axis XY, and a ball Q put on the other end io balance P. And, indeed, this is the contrivance which was ſirst applied to clocks 2? 548 WATCH-WORK. all over Europe, before the application of the pendulum. They were balance clockss The force oſ the wheel was oſ a certain magnitude, and therefore able, during its action on a pallet, to communicate a certain quantity oſf motion and velocity to the balls of the balancee When the tooth B escapes from the pallet D, the balls are then moving with a certain velocity and momentum. In this condition, the balance is checked by the tooth I catching on the pallet C. But it is not instantly stopped. Tt continues its motion a little to the leſt, and the pallet C forces the tooth I a Iittle backwardd But it cannot ſoree it so far as to escape over the top oſ the tooth T; because all the momentum of the balance vas generated by the force of the tooth B; and the tooth Iĩs equally powerſul. Besides, when I catches on C, and C continues its motion to the leſt, its lower point applies to the ſace of the tooth I, which now acts on the balance by a long and powerful lever, and soon stops its ſarther motion in that direction, and now, continuing to press on G, it urges the balance in the opposite direction. Thus we see that in a scapement of this kind, the motion of the wheel must be very hobbling and unequal, making a great step forward, and a short step backward, at every beat. This has oceasioned the contrivance to get the name of the RECOILING SCAPEMENT, the recoiling palletss This hobbling motion is very observable in the wheel of an alarm. Thus have we obtained two principles of regulation. The first and most obvious, as well as the most perfeet, is the natural isochronous vibration of a pendulum. The only use of the wheel-work here, besides registering the vibrations, is to give a gentle impulsion to the pendulum, by means of the pallet, in order to compensate ſrietion, &e. and thus maintain the vibrations in their primitive magnitude. But there is no such native motion in a balance, to which the motion of the wheels must accommodate itself. The wheels, urged by a determined pressure, and acting through a determined space (the face of the pallet), must generate a ATCEH-wORE. 19 certain determined velocity in the balance: and thereſore the time oſ the oxillation is also determined, both during the progressive and the retrograde motion oſ the wheel. The actions being similar, and through equal spaces, in every oxillation, they must employ the same time Thereſore a balance, moved in this manner, must be isochronous, and a regulator for a timekeeper. By thus employing a balance, the horizontal position oſ the axis XY is unnecessary Accordingly, the old clocks had this axis perpendicular, by which means the whole weight of the balance rested on the point oſ the pivot Y or X, according as the balance PQ was placed above or helow. By making the supporting pivot oſ hard steel, and very sharp, ſriction was greatly diminishedc Nay, it was entirely removed from this part of the machine by suspending the halance by a thread at the end X, instead oſ allowing it to rest on the point of the pivot Y. As the balance regulator of the motion admits oſ every position of the machine, those clocks were made in an infinite variety oſ fanciful forms, especially in Germany, a country famous for mechanical contrivances. They were made oſ all sizes, ſfrom that oſ a great steeple clock, to that oſ an ornament for a lady's toilet. The substitution oſ a spring in place of a weight, as a ſirst mover oſ the wheel- work, was a most ingenious thought. It was very gradual. We have seen, in the Emperors museum at Brussels, an old, (perhaps the first) spring clock, the spring of which was an old sword blade, ſrom the point oſ which a catgut was vound round the barrel oſ the first wheel. Some ingenious German substituted the spiral spring, which both took less room, and produced more revolutions of the first heel When clocks had been reduced to such small sizes, thę wish to make them portable was very natural; and the means oſ accomplishing this were obvious, namely, a ſarther reduotion oſ their sizeæ This was accomplished very early; and thus we obtained pocket vaiche, moved by a spirul spring, 550 WATCH- WORE. and regulated by a balance with the' recoiling scapeiment, vhich is still m use for comnion watchess. The holibſing motion oſ the crown wheel ĩs very easily seen in all of them It is very uncertãin ho fſirst substituted a pendulum ĩn place of the balancee Huyghens, as wè have alreàdy observed, was the first who investigated the motions of pendulums vith success, and his book De Horologio Oscillutorio mãy be considered as the elements of refined meehãnies, and the source of all the improvements that have been made in the construction of scapementss. But it ĩs certain that br. Hooke had employed a pendulum fſor the regulation oſ a clock many years before the pubilication of the abovæ- mentioned treatise, and he claims the merit of the invention of the only proper method of employing it. We imagine therefore that Dr. Hooke's invention was nothing more than a scapement for a pendulum making small vibrations, without making use of the opposite motions oſ the two siũes oſ the crown wheel. Dr. Hooke Had contrived some scãapement more proper for pendulums than the recoiling paſlets, hecause certainly those might bè eployed, ànd are àctually employed as a scapement for pendulum clocks to this day, although they are indeed very ill àdapted to the purpose. He had not only remarked the great superiority oſsuch pendulum clocks as were made beſore Huyghenss publication of the eycloidal pendulum, over the balance clocks, but had also seen their deſects, arising from the ſight pendulums and wide arches of vibration, and ĩinvented a scapement of the nature of those now employed. The pendulum clock which he made in 1658 for Dr. Wilkins, aſterwards Bishop of Chester, is mentioned by the inventor, as peculiarly suited to the moderate swing of a pendulum; and he opposes this circumstance to a general practice oſ wide vibrations and trifling pendulums. The French are not in the practice of uscribing to us any thing that they can claim as their own; yet Lepaute says that the Echappement à ſAncre came from England about the year 1665. It is also admitted by him WATCH-WORK. 5E5l that clock-making flourished in England at that time, and that the French artisis went 1o London to improve in itPutting these and other circumstances together, we think it highly probable that we are indebted to Dr. Hooke for the scapement now in use. The principle oſ this is altogether different from the simple pallets and direct impulse already deseribed; and is so ſar from being obvious, that the manner of action has heen misunderstood, even by men of science, and vriters of systems of mechanies. In this scapement ve employ those teeth of the wheel which are moving in one direction; whereas in the former scapement, opposite teeth were employed moving in contrary directions. Yet even here ve must communicate an alternate motion to the axis of the pallets The contrivance, in general, was as follows: On the axis A (See Plate VIII. fig. 8) oſ the pendulum or halance is fixed a piece of metal BAC, called the cuvTen by our artists, and the axcHOR by the French. It terminates in two faces B b C c of tempered steel, or of some hard stone. These are called the PALLETS, and itis on them that the teeth of the wheel act. The faces B b C c are set in such positions that the teeth push them out of the vay Thus B pushes the pallet to the leſt, and C pushes its pallet to the right. Both push their pallets sidewise outward ſrom the centre of the heel. The pallet B is usually ealled the leading, and C the driving pallet by the artists, although it appears to us that these names should be reversed, because B drives the pallet out of the way, and C pulls or leads it out of the vay They might be oalled the first and second pallet, in the order in which they are acted on by the vhee. We shall use either denomination. The figure is accommodated to the inactive or resting position of the pendulum. Suppose the pendulum drawn aside to the right at Q, and then let go. It is plain that the tooth B, pressing on the face of the pallet, à Bb all the way from ⸗ to b, thrusts it aside outwards, and thus, by the connection of the erutch with the pendulum rod, aids the pendulums mo- 552 WATCH- WORE. tion along the arch QPR. When the pendulum reache⸗ R, the point of the tooth B has reached the angle b of the pallet, and escapes ſrom it. The wheel pressing ſorward, another tooth C drops on the pallet ſace Ce, and, by presing this pallet outward, evidently aids the pendulum in its motion from R to P. The tooth C escapes ſfrom this pallet at the angle c, and now a tooth B' drops on the first pallet, and again aids the pendulum; and this operation is repeated continually. The mechanism oſ this communication of motion iĩs thus explained by several writers of elements. The tooth B Plate VIII. fig. .) is urged forward in the direction BD, perpendicular to the radius MB of the swiN wHEEL. It therefore presses on the pallet, which is moveable only in the direction BE, perpendicular to BA the radius of the pallet Thereſore the force BD must be resolved into two, viæ. BE, in the direction in which alone the pallet can move, and ED, or BF, perpendicular to that directionn. The last of thes only presses the pallet and cruteh against the pivot hole A. BE is the only useſul ſorce, or the force communicated to the pallet, enabling it to maintain the pendulums motion, by restoring the momentum lost by ſrietion and other causes. But this is a very erroneous account of the modus operandi, as may be seen at once, by supposing the radius of the pallets to be a tangent to the wheel. This is a position most ſrequently given to them, and is the very position in Plate VIII. fig. 3 In this case MB is perpendicular to BA, and thereſore BD vill coincide with BA, and there vill be no such force as BE to move the pendulum. It is a truth, deducible from what we know of the mechanical constitution of solid bodies, and confirmed by numberless observations, that when two solid bodies press on each other, either in impulsion or in dead pressure, the direction in which the mutual pressure is exerted is always perpendicular to the touching surſaces, vhatever has been the direction of the WATCH- WORK. 553 impelling body (See InPuLSION and MacHINERY.) Moreover this pressure is mutual, equal, and opposite. Whatever be the shapes of the faces oſ the tooth and pallet, we can draW a plane BN, which is the common tangent to both surfaces, and a line HBI through the point of contact perpendicular to BN. It is farther demonstrated in the article MACHINErY, that the action of the wheel on the pendulum is the same as if the whole erutch were annihilated, and in its stead there were two rigid lines AH, MI, from the centres of the crutch and wheel, perpendicular to HI, and connected by a third rigid line or rod HI, touching the two in H and I. For ifa weight V be hung at », the extremity of the horizontal radius M v of the wheel, it will act on the lever » MI, pressing its point I upwards in the direction IH perpendicular to MI; the upper end of this rod IH ill, in like manner, press the extremity H of the rod HA, and this vill urge the pendulum from P toward R. To vwithstand this, the pendulum rod AP may be withheld by a weight æ, hanging by a thread on the extremity of the horizontal lever A 3, equal to M , and connected with the crutch and pendulum. The weights V and æ may be so proportioned to each other that, by acting perpendiculary on the erooked levers v MI, and ? AH, the pressures at H and I shall be equal, and just balance each other by the intervention of the rod HI. When this is the case, ve have put things into the same mechanical state, in respect of mutual action, as is eſfected by the erutch, pallets, and wheel, which, in like manner, produce equal pressures at B the point of contact, in the direetion BH and BI. The weight V may be such as produces the very same effect at B that is produced by the previous train of wheel work. The weight æ thereſore must be just equal io the force produced by the wheel- work on the point æ of the pendulum rod, because by acting in the opposite direction it just balances it. Let us see there- ibà WATCH-WORX. fore what force is communicated- to the pendulum by the vheels. Let æ be the upward pressure excited at I, and y the æqual opposite pressure excited at H. Then, by the property oſ the lever, we have MI: M o =V: æ, and æ X MI =V X M. In like manner y x AH =Z xX A 2. There fore, because x y, and A ?zmM v, we have V: Z  MI: AH. That is, the force exerted by the tooth of the wheel in the direction of its motion is to the force impressed on the pendulum rod at a distance equal to the radius of the vwheel as MI to AH. The force impressed on the ball of the pendulum is less than this in the proportion oſf AP to Aæ, or M ?. Cor. I. If the perpendiculars MN, AO, be draWn on the tangent plane, the forces at B and æ will be as BN t BO. For these lines are respectively equal to MI and AH. Cor. 2. If HI meet the: line oſ the centres AC inS, the forces will be as SM to SA; that is, V: Z =SM: SA Cor. 3. Iſ the face  B b of the pallet be the evolutrix of æ cirele deseribed with the radius AH, and the face of the 100th be the evolutrix of a circle deseribed with the radius MI, the force impressed on the pendulum by the wheels vill be constant during the whole vibration. But these are not the only forms which produce this constancy. The ſorms of teeth deseribed by diſferent authors, such as De la Hire, Camus, &e. ſor producing a constant forœ in trains of wheel-work, will have the same eſfect here. It is also easy to see that the force impressed on the pendulum may be varied aceording to any lav, by making these faces oſ a proper form. Therefore the face, from B outwards, may be so ſformed that the force communieated to the pendulum hy the wheels, during its descent from Q to P, may be in one constant proportion to the acceleration oſ gravity, and then the sum of the forees will be such as produces isochronous vibrationss If the inner part B b of the WATCH-WORE. 555 ſuce be formed on the same principle, the difference of the forces will have the same law of variation. If the face à b be the evolutrix of a circle, and the tooth B terminate in a point gently rounded, or quite angular, the foree on the pendulum will continually inerease as the tooth slides ſrom 's to b. For the line AH continues of the same magnitude, and MI diminishess. The contrary will happen, if the palIet be a point, either sharp or rounded, and if the face of the tooth be the evolutrix now mentioned; ſor MI vill remain the same, while AH diminishes. I the tooth be pointed, and à b be a straight line, the force communicated 6 the pendulum will diminish, while the tooth slides from  to b. For in this case AH diminishes and MI increases. Cor. 4. In general, the ſorce on the pendulum is greater as the angle MB b increases, and as AB b diminishes. Cor. 5. The angular velocity of the wheel is to that oſ the perdulum, in any part of its vibration, as AH to ML. This is evident, hbeeause the rod IH moving (ſin the moment under consideration) in its own direetion, the points H and I move through equal spaces, and therefore the angles at Aãnd M, must be inversely as the radii. All that hus now been said of the first pallet AB may be applied to the second pallet AC. Tſ the perpendicular C be drawn to the touching plane o Cn, cutting AM in s, e shall have V: 2m/5 M: s A, as ãn Cor. 2. And if the perpendiculars Mi, A h, be drawn on Cs, we have V/Z /M i: Ah, as in the general theorem. The only difference between the action on the two pallets is, that if the faces oſ both are plain, the force on the pendulum increases during the whole of the action on the pallet C, whereas it' diminishes during the progress oſ the tooth along the other pallet. The reader will doubtless remark that each tooth of the vheel acts on both pallets in suecession; and that, during ĩts action on either of them, the pendulum makes one vibration. Thereſore the number of vibrations during one turn 556 WATCH. wORE. of the wheel is double the number of the teeth: consequently, while the tooth slides along one of the pallets, it ad vances half the space between two successive teeth; and when ĩit escapes from the pallet, the other tooth may be just in contact with the other pallett. We say it may be so; in which case there ill be no dropping of the teeth from pallet o pallet. This, however, requires very nice workmanship, and that every tooth be at precisely the same distance ſrom its neighbour. Should the tooth which is just going to apPly to a pallet chance to be a little too far advanced on the wheel, it would touch the pallet before the other had eseaped. Thus, suppose that before B escapes from the point b of the pallet, the tooth C is in contact with the pallet Ce, B cannot escape. Thereſore when the pendulum returns ſrom R towards Q, the pallet ⸗5, returning along with it, will push back the tooth B of the wheel. It does this in opposition to the force of the wheel. Therefore, whatever motion the vheel had communicated to the pendulum, during its swing from P to Q, vill now be taken from it again. The pendulum vill not reach Q, because it had been aided in its motion from Q, and had proceeded further than it would have done vithout this help. Its motion toward Q is further diminished by the friction of the pallet Therefore it will now return again from some nearer point ꝗ and vill not go so far as in the last vibration, but will return through a still shorter arch: And this will be still more contracted in the next vibration, &e. &e. Thus it appears that if a tooth chances to touch the pallet before the escape of the other, the wheel will ad vance no farther, and soon aſter the pendulum will be brought to rest. For such reasons it is necessary to allow one tooth to escape a little before the other reaches the pallet on which it is to act, and to allow a small drop of the teeth ſrom pallet to pallet. But it is accounted bad workmanship to let the drop be considerable, and close scapement is aceounted a mark of care and of good workmanship. It is evidently an advan- WATCH-WORK. 551 tuge, because it gives a longer time of action on each pallet. This freeing the scapement cannot be accomplished by filing something ſrom the ſace of the tooth; because this being done to all, the distance between them is diminished rather than augmented. The pallets must be first scaped as close as possible This obliges the workman to be careſul in making the teeth equidistant. Then a small matter is taken from the point of each pallet, by ſiling off the back br of the pallet. The tooth will now eseape before it has moved through half a space. From all that has been said on this particular, it appears that the interval between the pallets must comprehend a certain number of teeth, and half a space more. The first circumstance to be considered in contriving a scapement is the angular motion that is intended to be given to the pendulum during the action of the wheel. This is usually called the angle of scapement, or the angle of action. Having fixed on an angle o that we think proper, ve must secure it by the position and form of the face oſ the pallets. Enoving the number oſ teeth in the swing- wheel, divide 1800 by this number, and the quotient is the angle b of the vheel's motion during one vibration of the pendulum. In the line AM, joining the centres of the crutch and wheel, make SM to SA, and 5s M to s A, as the angle a to the angle b; and then, having determined how many teeth shall be comprehended between the pallets, call this number n. Multiply the angle b by 2 n + I, and take the half of the produet. Set off this half in the circumſerence of the wheel (at the points of the teeth) on each side of the line joining the centres of the erutch and wheel, as at TB and TC. Through S and ; drav SB and s C, and through B drav à B b perpendicular to SB, ſor the medium position of the face oſ the first pallet; that is, for its position when the pendulum hangs perpendicular. In like manner, draving o C n perpendicular to s C, e have the medium position of the second pallet. 558 WATCH-WOREThe demonstration oſ this construction is very evident from what has been said. We have hitherto supposed that the pendulum finishes is vibration at the instant that a tooth of the wheel exape from a pallet, and another tooth drops on ihę oiher pallet But this is never, or should never be, the case The pendulum is made to swing somewhat beyond the angle oſ sape ment: for if it do not when the clock is clean and n good order, but stop precisely at the drop oſ æ tooth, then, whea it grows ſoul, and the vibration diminishes, the teæth will nt escape at all, and the clock will immediately stop. Thereſore the ſorce communicated by the wheels during the vibration within the limits of scapement, must be increased so æ to make the pendulum throm (as the artists term it) farther out; and a clock is more valued when it throws out considerably beyond the angle oſ scapement. There are good reas0ns for this The momentum of the pendulum, anũd ĩs pover to regulate the clock (which Mr. Harrison significanily called its dominion, ) is proportional to the widih oſ ĩs vibrations very nearly. This circumstance of exceeding the angle oſ scapement has a very great influence on the perſormance of the clock, or greatly aſfects the dominion of the pendulum. It ĩs easy 10 see that, when the face à b of the leading pallet is a plane, if the pendulum continue its motion to the right, from P toward Q, aſter the tooth B has dropped on it, the pallet will push the wheel back again, while the tooth slides outward on the pllet toward . Such pallets thereſore will make a recoiling scæpement, resembling, in this circumstance, the old pullet employed with the croWn wheel, and will have the properties attached to this circumstance: One consequeęꝶce oſ this is, that it is much afſected by any inequalities oſ the maintaining power. ItL is a matter of the most ſamiliar observation, that a common waich goes slower when within a quarter oſ an hour oſ being down, when the ation oſ the VATCH-WORE. 559: spring is very weak, in consequence of its not pulling by a radius oſ the fusee. We ohserve the same thing in the beating of an alarum clock. Also if we at any time press forward the wheel-work oſ a common vatch with the key, we observe ils beats accelerate immediately. The reason of this is pretty plaimm The balance, in consequence oſ the acceleration in the angle oſ scapement, would have gone much farther, employing a considerable time in the excursion. This is checked abruptly, which hoth shortens the vibration and the lime employed in it. In the returu oſ the pendulum, the motion is accelerated the whole way, along an arch which is shorter than what corresponds to its velocity in the middle point; for it is again checked on the other side, and does not make its full excursion. Moreover, all this irregularity of force, or the great deviation from a resistance to the excursion proportional to the distance from the middle point, is exerted on the penduIum when it is near the end of the excursion, where the veIocity being smail, this irregular force acts long upon it, at the very time that it has little force wherevith to resist it. All temporary inequalities of force, thereſore, will be more felt in this situation of the balance than if they had been exerted in the middle of its motion. And although the regulating power of a pendulum greatly exceeds that of the light balances used in pocket watches, something oſ the same kind may be expected even in pendulum clockss. Accordingly this appears by a series of experiments made by Mr. Berthoud, a celebrated watch- maker of Paris. A clock, with a half second pendulum weighing five drams, was furnished vith a recoiling scapement, whose pallets were planes. The angle of scapement was 5 degrees. When actuated vith a weight of two pounds, it swung 89, and lost 15 per hour; vith ſour pounds, it swung 109, and lost ?. Thus it appears that by doubling the maintaining pover, although the vibration was increased in consequence of the greater impulse, the time was lessened 9 per hour, viz. about ĩ⸗- WATCH-WORE. 561 of its vibration; perhaps till the tooth passes from a to e on the circular arch of the pallett. But although it sustains no contrary action from the wheels during this excursion beyond the angle of scapement, it will not proceed so ſar, but will stop when the tooth reaches d; because there must be some resistance arising from the frietion of the tooth along the arch a d, and from the clamminess of the oil employed to lubricate it: but this resistance is exceedingly minute, not amounting to 3th of the pressure on the arch. Nay, we think that it appears from the experiments oſ Mr. Coulomb that, in the case of such minute pressures on a surface covered vith oil, there is no sensible retardation analogous to that produced by friction, and that what retardation we observe arises entirely from the clamminess oſ the oil We are 30 imperfectly acquainted with the manner in which friction and viscidity obstruet the motions oſ hodies, that we cannnot pronounce decisively what will be their effect in the present case. Friction does not increase much, iſ at all, by an increase oſ velocity, and appears like a ſixed quantity when the pressure is given. This makes all motions which are obstrueted hy ſriction terminate abruptly. This will shorten both the length and the time of the outward excursion of the pendulum. The viscidity oſ the oil resists differently, and more nearly in the proportion oſ the velocities. The diminution of motion will not be in this proportion, because in the greater velocities it acts for a shorter timee Were this accurately the case, the resistance of viscidity would also be nearly constant, and it would operate as frietion does. But it does not stop a motion abruptly, and the motions are extinguished gradually. Thereſore, although viscidity must always diminish the extent oſ the excursion, it may so vary as not to diminish the timee We apprehend, however, that it generally does But whatever happens in the excursion, the return vill certainly be slower, and employ more time than if it had not been obstrueted, hecause the velocity in every point is less than if perſeetly iree. The whole arch, voL Iv. 2N 562 WATCH-WORK. consisting of a returning arch and an excursion on the oth side, may be either slower or quicker, according as the compensation is complete or not, or is even overdone. All these reflections occurred to Mr. Graham; and he was persuaded that the time oſ the tooth's remaining on the arch a d, both ascending and descending, would differ very little from that oſ the description of the same arch by a freæ pendulum. The great causes oſ irregularity seemed io removed, viz. the inequalities in the action of the wheels n the vicinity of the extremity oſ the vibration, where the perdulum having little momentum is, long in the same litie space, exposed to their action The derangement producœd by any ſorce depends on the time of its action, and thereſoæ must be greatest vhen the motion is slowest The pendulum gets its impulse in the very middle of ĩts vibration, vhere its velocity is the greatest; and thereſore the nequalities oſ the maintaining power act on it only for a short time, and make a very trifling alteration in the time of its deseriing the arch of scapement. Beyond this, ĩt is nearly in the state of a free pendulum; nay, even though it be aſfected by an inequality oſ the maintaining power, and ĩt be ac lerated beyond its usual rate in that arch, the chieſ eſeet of this will be to cause it to deseribe a larger arch of exeursion The shortening oſ the time oſ this deseription by the ſriction vill be the same as beſore, happening at the very end oſ the excursion; but the return will be more retarded by the ſrition on a longer arch And, by this, a compensation mæ; be made ſor the trifling contraction of the time oſ describing the arch oſ scapement This circumstance oſ giving the impulse in the middle of the vibration, where its time of action is the smallest posible, and whereby the pendulum is so long leſt free from the action of the wheels, is of the very ſirst importancæ in all scapements, and should ever be in the mind oſ the mechanician. When this is adhered to, the ſorm of the ſace abci scarcely oſ any momentt Much has been written on this WATCH-WORE. 56G8 form, and many attempts have been made to make it sueh that the action of the wheel shall be proportional to the action of gruvity. To do this is absolutely impossible Mr. Graham made them planes, not only because of easiest execution, but hecause a plane really conspires pretty well with the change of gravit. While the pendulum moves from Q to P (Plate VIII. fig. 8.), the ſorce of gravity, acting in the direction QP, is continually diminishingg So is the acceleraling power of the pallet ſfrom a to  When the pendulum rises from P to R, a force in the opposite direetion RP continually increases This is analogous to the eontinual diminution of a foree in the direction PRR Now we have such a diminution of such a foree, in the action of the pallet from b to e, and such an augmentation in the action of the other pallet. For all these reasons, this construetion of a scapement appeared very promising. Mr. Graham put it in practice, and it answered his most sanguine expectation, and is now universally adopted in all nice elocks Mr. Graham, however, did not think it prudent to cause a tooth to drop on the very angle a of the pallet. He made it drop on a point f of the arch of exeursionn This has also the advantage of diminishing the angle oſ action, vhich we have proved to be of service. It requires, indeed, a greater maintaining pover; but this can easily be procured, and is less affected by the changes to which it ĩs liable by the effect oſ heat and cold on the oil. Our observations on the effects of frietion and viscidity in the arch a d seem to be confirmed by the observations oſ several artists, who agree in saying that a great increase oſ mantaining power increases the vibrations, but makes them perceptibly slover. When they wrote, much oil vas applied to diminish the friction on the arch of repose; but, since that time, the rubbing parts were made such as required no oil, and this retardation disappeared. In the clock of the transit room oſ the Royal Observatory, the angle oſ action seldom exceeds one- third oſ the swing oſ ] 564 WATCH-WORE. the pendulum. The pallets are oſ oriental ruby, and thæ wheel is oſ steel tempered to the utmost degree oſ hardnes This clock never varies a whole second from equable motion in the course of five days. This contrivance is known by the name oſ the DEAD 2EAT, the DEAD SCAPEMENT; because the seconds index stands still aſter each drop, whereas the index oſ a clock with a re coiling scapement is always in motion, hobbling backward and forward. These scapements, both recoiling and dead beat, har been made in a thousand forms; but any person tolerahly acquainted with mechanies, will see that they are all on the same principles, and differ only in shape or some equally unimportant circumstance. Perhaps the most conveniem of any is that represented in (Plate VIII. fig. 5.) where the shaded part is the cruteh, made of brass or iron, and A and B are two pieces of agate, flint, or other hard stone, cut nto the proper shape for a pallet of either kind, and firmly fixed in proper sockets, They project half an inch, or thereabouts, in ſront of the erutch, so that the swing wheel is also beſore the crutch, distant about 4th of an inch or s. Pallets oſ ruby, driven by a hard steel swing wheel, need no oil, but merely to be once rubbed clean with an oily cloth. Sometimes the wheel has pins instead oſ teeth. They are ranged round the rim of the wheel, perpendicular to its plane, and both pallets are on one side of the wheel, standing perpendicular to its plane. One oſ these pins drops from the first to the second pallet at once The pallets are placed on two arms, as in Plate VIII. fig. 6. in which case the pins are alternately on different sides oſ the wheel; or on one, as n Plate VIII. fiz.  BY the motion of the pendulum to the right, the pin ſin Plate VIII. fig. 7.), aſter resting on the concave arch d a, acts on the ſace a c, and drops from c on the other eoncave arch i g, which continues to move a little way to the rightt It then returns, and the pin slides and VATCH- WORE. 565 acts on the pallet i h, and escapes at h; and the next pin is then on the arch of repose d a. It being evident that the recoiling scapement accelerates the vibrations beyond the rate of a free pendulum, and it also appearing to many of the first artists that the dead scapement retards them, they have attempted to fſorm a scapement which shall avoid both of these deſects, by forming the arches a d, i g, so as to produce a very small recoi. Mr. Berthoud does this in a very simple manner, hy placing the centre of a d at a small distance ſrom that of the cruteh, so as to make the rise of the pallet above the concentric arch about one- third of the arch itsell. Applying such a erutch to the light pendulum mentioned in a ſormer paragraph, he found that doubling, and even trebling the maintaining poer, produced no change in the time of vibratiun, though it increased the width from 5° to 120 and I4. We have no doubt of the efficacy of this contrivance, and think it very proper ſor all clocks which require much oil, such as turret clocks, &e. But we apprehend that no rule can be given for the angle that the recoiling arch should make with the concentric onee. We imagine that this depends entirely on the share which friction and oil have in producing the retardation of the dead beat. Other artists have endeavoured to avoid the inconveniences oſ friction and oil on the arch of repose in another vay. Instead of allowing the tooth of the wheel to drop on the back of the pallet, which we call the arch of excursion, and others call the arch of repose, it drops on a detent o? a (Plate VIII. fig. 8.), of which the part t a is part of an arch whose centre is A, the centre oſ the eruteh, and the part ſ o is in the direction of the radiuss. This piece does not adhere to the pallet, but is on the end oſ an arm o A, which turns round the axis A of the crutch on fine pivots: it is made to apply itselſ to the back of the pallet by means of a slender spring A ), attached to the pallet, and pressing inward on a pin ꝑ, fixed in the arm oſ the detentt. When s0 applied, its arch 3 VATCH- WORK. 567 though easily executed, and susceptible of great precision and steadiness of action, is much practisedl. We presume that the performance has not answered expectations. It has not been superior to the incomparably more simple dead scapement of Graham. Indeed we think that it cannot. A part of the friction still remains, which cannot be removed; namely, while the areh t a is drawn from between the tooth and pallet. Nay, we apprehend that something more than frietion must be overcome heree The tooth is apt to foree the detent outward, unless the part t a be a little elevated at its point a like a elaw, above the concentrie arch, and the face of the toth he made to incline forward, so as to ſit this shape of the detent. This will consume some force, hen the momentum of the pendulum is by no means at its maximum. Should the elock be foul, and the excursions beyond scapement be very small, this disturbance must be exceedingly perniciouss But we have a much greater objection. During the whole exeursion beyond scapement, there is a nev foree of a spring aceting on the pendulum, which deviates eonsiderably from the proportions of the accelerating power of gravity. It does not commence its action till the detent separates from the arm of the erutch. Then the spring of the detent acts as a retarding force against the excursion of the pendulum, now on the other side, bringing it sooner to rest, and then accelerating it in its vay back to the beginning of the arch of scapement. In short, this construetion should have the properties oſ a recoiling scapement. We got a clock-maker to make some experiments on one which he had made for an amateur, which fully confirmed our conjecturee When the detent spring was strong, an increasè of maintaining power made the vibrations both wider and more rapid. The artist redueed the strength of the spring till this effect was rendered very small. It might perhaps Be quite removed by means oſ a still euker spring: But the spring was already so weak, that a hard step on the floor of the room did sometimes disengage the detent from thè VATCH-WORE. 569 ABC (Plate VIII. fig. 9.) represents a portion of the swing wheel, of which O is the centre, and A one of the teeth; Z is the centre of the crutch, pallets, and pendulum. The cruteh or detents is represented oſ a form resembling the letter A, having in the circular cross piece a slit i , also circular, Z being the centre This ſorm is very difſerent from Mr. Cummings, and inferior to his, but was adopted here in order to avoid a long descriptionn. The arm ZF forms the ſirst detent, and the tooth A is represented as locked on it at F D is the first pallet on the end of the arm Z d moveable round the same centre with the detents; but moveable independently of them. The arm d e, to which the pallet D is attached, lies altogether behind the arm ZF oſ the detent, being ſixed to a round piece of brass e ſ ꝗ, which has pivols turning concentric with the verge or axis of the pendulum. To the same round piece of brass is ſixed the horizontal arm e II, carrying at its extremity the ball H, of such size, that the action of the tooth A on the pallet D is just able (but without any risk of ſailing) to raise it up to the position here dravn. ZP) represents the fork, or the pendulum rod, behind both detent and pallet A pin ꝑ projects ſorward, coming through the slit i k, without touching the upper or under margin of it. There is also attached to the ſork the arm m n (and a similar one on the other side,) of such length that, when the pendulum rod is perpendicular, as is represented here, the angular distance oſ n ꝗ from the rod e ꝗ H is precisely equal to the angular distance oſ the leſt side of the pin ꝓ ſrom the leſt end i of the slit i k. The mode of action on this apparatus is abundantly simplee The natural position oſ the pallet D is at à, represented by the dotted lines, resting on the back of the detent F. It is naturally brought into this position by its own weight, and still more by the weight of the ball H. The pallet D, being set on the fore side of the arm at Z, comes into the same plane with the detent F and the swing-wheel. It is 572 WATCH- wORE. bration, would derange it very much, if the addition were susceptible oſ any sensible variation. The irregularity o the action of the wheels may sensibly affect the motion during the unlocking, when the clock is foul, and the pendulum Just able to unlock; for any disturbance at the extremity of the vibration greatly affects the timee. We acknowledę: that the parts which we here suppose to be foul may not bæ s0 in the course of twenty years, these parts being only the pivots of the scapement. The great deſect oſ the scape ment is its liableness to unlock by any jolt. It is more subject to this than the others already mentioned. This rist is much incrensed by the slender make of the parts, in Mr. Cumming's drawings, and in the only clock of the kind æ have seen; but this is not necessary: and ĩt shoulũ be avoided for another reason; the interposing so many slender and crooked parts between the moving power and the pendulum weakens the communication of power, and requires a mueh more powerful wheel- work. All these, however, are slight defects, and only the last can be called a fault. The clocks made on this principle have gone remarkably vell, as may be seen by the registers of his majesty's private observatory But the greatest objection is, that they do not perſorm better than a well- made dead scapement; and they are vastly more troublesome to make and to manage. This is strietly true, and is a serious objection. The ſact is, that the dominion of a heavy pendulum is so great, that if any ore oſ the scapements now described be vell executed with pallets of agate, and a wheel of hard steel. and if the pendulum be suspended agreeably to Mr. Cummings advice, there is hardly any difference to be observed in their perſormancee We shall content ourselves with a single prooſ oſ this from fact. The clock nvented by the celebrated Harrison is at least equal in iĩts performance to any other. Friction is almost annihilated, and no cil is requiredl. It went fourteen years without being touched, and during that time did not vary one complete WATCH-WORK. 573 second from one day to another, nor ever deviated half a minute by accumulation from equable motionn. Yet the scapement, in so far as it respects the lav of the accelerating force, deviates more ſrom the proportion of the spaces than the most recoiling scapement that ever was put to a good clock. It is so different from all hitherto described, both in form and principle, that we must not omit some account of it, and vith it we shall conclude our scapements for clocks. Let GDO (Plate VIII. fig. 10.) represent the swingvheel, of which M is the centree A is the verge or axis of the pendulum. It has two very short arms AB, AE. A slender rod BC turns on fine pivots in the joint B, and has at its extremity C a hook or clav, which takes hold of a tooth D of the swing-wheel when the pendulum moves from the right side to the leftt. This claw, when at liberty, stands at right angles, or, at least, in a certain determinate angle, with regard to the arm AB; and when drawn a little from that position, it is brought back to it again by a very slender springg The arm AE is furnished with a detent EF, which also, when at liberty, maintains its position on the arm by means of a very slender spring. Let us now suppose that the tooth D is pressing on the claw C, while the pendulum is moving to the rightt. The joint B yields, by its motion round A, to the pressure oſ the tooth on the claw. By this yielding, the angle ABC opens a little. In the mean time, the same motion round A causes the point F of the detent on the other side to approach the circumſerence of the wheel in the arch of a circle, and the tooth G at the same time advancess. They meet, and the point of G is lodged in the noteh under the projecting heel J When this takes place, it is evident that any ſarther motion of the point E round A must push the iooth G a little backwards, by means of the detent EF. It cannot come any nearer to the wheel, because the point oſ the tooth stops the heel  The instant that F pushes G back, the 5 VATCH-WORE. tooth D is withdrawn from the elaw C, and C ſlies out, by the action of its spring, and resumes its position at right angles to BA; and the wheel is now ſree from the claw, but is pushing at the detent F* The pendulum, having finished its excursion to the right (in which it causes the vwheel to recoil by means of the detent F,) returns toward the leftt. The wheel now advances again, and, by pressing on F, aids the pendulum through the whole angle of scapement. By this motion the claw C describes an arch of a circle round A, and approaches the wheel, till it take hold oſ another tooth, namely, the one following D, and pulls ĩt back a little. This immediately frees the detent F from the pressure of the tooth G, and it flies out a little from the vheel, resuming its natural position by means of its spring. Soon aſter, the motion of the pendulum to the left ceases, and the pendulum returns; D pulling forward the hook C to aid the pendulum, and the former operation is repeated, ke. &e. Such is the operation oſ the pallets of Harrison and Hindley. Friction is almost totally avoided, and oil entirely t æ The reader may here remark the manner in which the pressure oſ the tooth G on the detent is transſerred o the joint E by the intervention oſ the shank FE, and ſrom the joint E to the pendulum rod, by the intervention oſ the arm EA. This communication oſ pressure is precisely the same that we made use oſ in explaining the common scapement. MG, FE, and EA, in this ſiz. 10. are performing the oſices which we then gave to the lines MI, BH, and HA, in ſig. 3. Harrsons pallet realises the abstract theory. + Mr. Harrison was at first by profession a carpenter in a country place. Reing extremely ingenious and inventive, he had made a variety of curious wnoden clockss. He made one, in particular, for a turret in a gentleman's house. Its exposure made it waste oil very ſast, and the maker was oſten obliged to walk tuo or three miles to renew it, and got nothing for his trouble. In trudging home, not in very good humour, he pondered with himself how to make a clock go without oll. He changed all his pinion leaves into rollers; which answered very well. But the pallets required it more than any other part. AſRter varions other projects, he contrived those now represented, where there was no ſriction, and no oil is vautedl. The turret clock coutiuued to > vithout being touched till Mr. Harrison leſt the couutry. WATCH- WORK. 576 The motion is given to the pendulum by a fair pull or push, and the teeth of the wheel only apply themselves to the detents without rubbing. There is no drop, and the seapement makes no noise, and is what the artists calls a silent scapement. The mechanician will readily perceive, that by properly disposing the arms AB, AE, and disposing the pallets on the circumſerence of the wheel, the law, by which the action of the wheel on the pendulum is regulated, may be greatly varied, so as to harmonize, as far as the nature of scapement, alternately pushing and pulling, will admit, vith the action of gravity. But this is evidently a recoiling scapement, and one of the worst kind; for the recoil is made at the very confines of the vibration, where every disturbance of the regular cycloidal vibration oceasions the greatest disturbance to the motion. Yet this clock kept time with most unexampled precision, far excelling all that had been made beſore, and equal to any that have been made since. This is entirely oving to the immense superiority oſ the momentum of the pendulum over the maintaining pover. II. Of Scapemenis ſfor a Watch. Tur exeeution of a proper scapement for watches is a ſar more delicate and diſficult problem than the foregoing, on aceount of the small size, which requires much more aecurate workmanship, because the error of the hundredih part of an inch has as great a proportion to the dimensions of the regulator as an inch in a eommon house clock. It is much more difficult on another accountt. We have no sueh means of accumulating such a dominion (to use Mr. Harrison's expressive term) over the wheel-work in the regulator oſ a vatch as in that of a clock. The heaviest balance that we can employ, without the certainty of snapping its pivots hy every slight jolt, is a mere triſle, in eomparison with the pendulum of the most ordinary clockk A dozen or twenty WATCH-WORK. 5T1 each side of the perpendicular do not exceed four degrees, that the retardation of the wider arches within that limit will not become sensible, though accumulated for a long time. The common scapement with a plane ſace of the pallet, helps to correct even this small inequality much better than the nicest form of the cycloidal cheeks proposed by Huyghens. In watch-work we assume a similar principle, namely, that the oscillations of a balunce, urged by a spring, and undisturbed by all foreign forces, are performed in equal times, whether they be wide or narrov. This principle was assumed by the celebrated mechanician Dr. Robert Hooke, on the authority of many experiments which he had made on the bending and unbending of springss He ſound that the force necessary for retaining a spring in any constrained position was proportional to its tension, or deſlection from its natural form He expressed this in an anagram, which he published about the year 1660, in order to establish his elaim to the discovery, and yet conceal it, till he had made some important application of it. When the anagram was explained some years afterwards, it was,  Ut tensio, sic vis Dr. Hooke thought of applying this discovery to the regulation of watch movements. For, if a slender spring be properly applied to the axis of a wateh balance, it will put that balance in a certain determinate position. If the balance be turned aside from this position, it seems to follow that it will be urged back towards it by a ſoree proportional to its distance from it. He immediately made the application to an old watch, which he aſterwards gave to Dr. Wilkins, Bishop of Chesterr. This was in 1658. Its motion was s0 amazingly improved, that Hooke was persuaded of the perſection of his principle, and thought that nothing was now wanting for making a wateh of this kind a perfect chro nometer but the hand of a good workman. For his vatch seemed almost perſect, though made in a small country town, in a very coarse manner. Mr. Huyghens also claima vOL. IV. 20 578 WATCH-WORE. this discovery He published his claim about the year 1675, and proposed to make watches for discovering the longitude of a ship at sea. But there is the most unquestionable evidence of Dr. Hookes priority by fiſteen years, and of his having made several watches of this kind. One of them was in the possession of his majesty king Charles II. Dr. Hookes first balance spring was straight, and aeted on the balance in a very imperſect manner. But he soon sav the imperfections, and made several successive alterations; and, among others, he employed the cylindrical spiral now employed by Mr. Arnold; but he gave it up for the ſiat spiral; and the kings watch had one of this kind beſore Mr. Huyghens published his invention. His projeet of longitude watches had been carried on along with Lord Brouncker and Sir Robert Moray, and they had quarreled some years hefore that publication. But both Dr. Hooke and Mr. Huyghens were too sanguine in their expectalions We, by no means, have the evidence for the truth oſ this principle that we have for the accelerating action of gravity on a pendulum. It rests on the nicety, and the propriety of the experiments; and long experience has shewn that it is sensibly true only within certain limits. The demonstrations by which Bernoulli supports the unqualified principle oſ Mr. Huyghens, proceed on hypothetical doctrines concerning the nature of elasticity. And even these shew that the law of elasticity which he assumed was selected, not because founded on simpler principles than any other, but because it was consistent with the experiments of Hooke and Huyghens. Besides, although this should be the true law ofa spring, it does not follow that this spring, applied in any way to the axis of a balance, vill urge that balance agreeably to the same lav; and if it did, it still does not follow that the oscillations of the balance will be isochronous; for the force has to move not only the halance, but also the spring. Part of the restoring force of the spring is employed in restoring it rapidly to its quiescent WATCH-WORE. 519 shape, and thus enabling it to follow and still impel the yielding balance It is therefore only the surplus which is employed in actually moving the balance, and it is uncertain whether this surplus varies according to the same lav, being alvays the same proportion of the whole force of the spring. We ſind it an extremely diſficult problem to determine the law of variation of this surplus, even in the simplest ſorm of the spring; nay, it is by no means an easy problem to determine the law of oscillation of a spring, unloaded with any balance; and ve can easily shew that there are such forms of a spring, that although the velocity with which the different parts approach to their quiescent position be exactly as their excursion from it, this is by no means the law of velocity which this spring will produce in a balancee The matter of ſact is, that when the spring is a simple straight steel wire, suspending the balance in the direction of its axis, the motions of ie, if not immoderate, are precisely agreeable to Huyghens's and Hooke's rule; and that the motion of a balance urged by a spring wound up into a flat, or a eylindrical spiral, as in common watches, and those of Arnold, deviates sensibly from it, unless a certain analogy be preserved between the length and the elasticity of the spring. Iſ the spring be immoderately long, the wide vibrations are slower than the narrow ones; and the contrary is observed when the spring is immoderately short. A certain taper, or gradual diminution of the spring, is also found to have an effect in equalizing the wide and narrow vibrationss. There is also a great difference between the force with which a part of the spring unbends itself, and the action of that force in urging the balance round its axis; and the performance oſ many vatches, good m other respects, is oſten faulty ſrom the manner in which this unbending force is employed. But, since these corrections are in our pover in a considerable degree, ve may suppose them applied, and the true motion (Which we shall call the cycloidal) attained; and we may then adapt the construotion oſ the scapement to the pre- 552 VATCH-WORE. should not, however, be quite so close, because an inequality on the teeth might prevent D from escaping at al. For if E touch the pallet CB beſore D has quitted GA, all vill stand stil. This fault will be corrected by withdrawing the wheel a little from the verge, or by shortening the pallets. The proportions are as follow. The distance between the ſront of the teeth (that is, of G, F, E, D) and the ai C of the balance is one-fiſth of FA, the distance between the points of the teeth. The length CA, CB of the pallet is three fifths of the same distance The pallets make an angle ACB of 95 degrees, and the front DH or FX oſ the teeth make an angle oſ 25° with the axis oſf the cromnvwheel. The sloping side of the tooth must be of an ericycloidal form, suited to the relative motion of the tooth and pallet. From these proportions it appears that the pallet A ean throw out, by the action of the tooth D, till it reaches a, 120 degrees from CL, the line of the crown-wheel axis. For it can throw out till the pallet B strike against the front of E, which is inclined 25 to CL. To this add BCA,  95°, and ve have LC a  I20. In like manner B vill throw out as ſar on the other sidee From 240°, the sum of these angles, take the angle of the pallets 95°, and there remains 145 for the greatest vibration which the balanæ can make without striking the front oſ the teeth. This extent of vibration supposes the teeth to terminate in pomts, and the acting surſaces of the pallets to be planes directed 10 the very axis of the verge But the points oſ the teeth must be rounded off a little for strength, and to diminish frietion on the ſace of the pallets This dimnishes the angle of scapement very considerably, by shortening the teeth Moreover, we must by no means allow the point of the pallet to bank or strike on the foreside of a tooth. This vould greatly derange the vibration by the violence and abruptness oſ the check which the wheel would give to the VATCH-WORN. 583 pallett. This circumstance makes it improper to continue the vibrations much beyond the angle of scapement. Onethird of a cirele, or 1209, is thereſore reckoned a very proper vibration for a scapement made in these proportions. The impulse of the wheels, or the angle of scapement, may be increased by making the face oſ the pallets a little concave (preserving the same angle at the centre) The vibration may also be widened by pushing the wheel nearer to the verge This would also diminish the recoil. Indeed this may be entirely removed by bringing the front of the wheel up to C, and making the ſace oſ the pallet not a radius, but parallel to a radius and behind it, i. e. by placing the pallet CA so that its acting face may be where its back is just now. In this case, the tooth D would drop on it at the centre, and lie there at rest, while the balance completes its vibration. But this would make the banking (as the stroke is called) on the teeth almost unavoidable. In short, after varying every circumstance in every possible manner, the best makers have settled on a scapement very nearly such as we have describedl. Precise rules can scarcely be given; because the law by which the force acting on the pallets varies in its intensity, deviates so widely from the action oſ the balance spring, especially near the limits of the excursions. The discoveries of Huyghens and Newton in rational mechanices engaged all the mathematical philosophers of Europe in the solution of mechanical problems, about the end of the last century. The vibrations of elastio plates or ires, and their influence on wateh balances, became familiar to every body. The great requisites for producing isochronous vibrations were well understood, and the artists were prompted by the speculatists to attempt constructions of scapements proper for this purpose. It appeared clearly, that the most efſectual means for this purpose was to leave the balance unconnected with the wheels, especially near the extremities oſ the vibration, where the motion is languid, and vwhere every inequality of maintaining power must act VATCH-WORE. 585 ĩt had lost by ſriction, &c. during the two preceding vibrations. It is evident that this construction obviates all the objeotions to the former recoiling scapement, and that, by suſficiently diminishing the diameter of the cylindrical part, the frietion may be reduced to a very small quantity, and the balance be made to move by the action of the spring during the whole of the excursion, and of the returning vibration. Yet this construetion does not seem to have come much into use, owing, in all probability, to the great diſficulty of making the drop so accurate in all the teeth. The smallest jnequality in the length of a tooth would oceasion it to drop sooner or later; and iſ the cylinder was made very small, to diminish friction, the formation of the noteh was almost a microscopieal operation, and the smallest shake in the axis of the verge or the balance- wheel would make the tooth slip past the cylinder, and the watch run down amain. About the same time, a French artist in London (then the school of this art) formed another scapement, with the same vieus. We have not any distinet account of it, but are only informed (in the 7th volume of the Machines approuvéies par I Acad. des Sciences) that the tooth rested on the surſace of a hollow cylinder, and then escaped by acting on the inclined edge of itt. But ve may presume that it had merit, being there told that Sir Isaac Newton wore a watch of this kind. A much superior scapement, on the same principle, was invented by Mr. Geo. Graham, at the same time that he changed the recoiling scapement ſor pendulums into the dead beat. Indeed it is the same scapement, accommodated to the large vibrations of a balance In Plate IX. fig. S. DE represents part oſ the rim of the balance-wheel. A and C are two of its teeth, having their faces b e formed into planes, inclined to the circumſerence oſ the wheel, in an angle oſ about I5 degrees; s0 that the length b e of the face is nearly quadruple of its height em. Suppose a cir- 556 VATCH-WORE. cular arch ABC described round the centre of the wheel, and through the middle of the faces of the teeth. The a of the balance passes through some point B oſ this arch, and we may say that the mean circumſerence of the teeth pase: through the eentre of the verge. On this axis is fixed a portion of a thin hollow cylinder b c d, made of hard tempered steel, or of some hard and tough stone, such as ruby or sapphire Agates, though very hard, are brittle. Chalcædony and cornelian are tough, but inferior in hardnesss. This cylinder is so placed on the verge, that when the halance is in its quiescent position, the two edges b and d are in the circumſerence which passes through the points of the teeth. By this construction the portion of the cylinder will occupy 2100 of the circumſference, or S0 more than a semicirele. The edge b, to which the tooth approaches from without, n rounded off on both angles The other edge d is formed into a plane, inclined to the radius about 300. Nov, suppose the wheel pressed forvard in the direction AC. The point b of the tooth, touching the rounded edge, vill push it outwards, turning the balance round in the diretion be . The heel e oſ the tooth will escape from this edge when it is in the position à, and e is in the position ſ7 The point b of the tooth is now at d, but the edge oſ the cylinde has now got to i. The tooth, thereſore, rests on the inside oſ the cylinder, while the balance continues its vibration a little way, in consequence of the shove which it has receivel from the action of the inclined plane pushing it out of the way, as the mould- board of a plough shoves a stone aside When this vibration is ended, by the opposition of the holance- spring, the balance returns, the tooth (now n the position B) rubbing all the while on the inside of the cyſinder. The balance comes hack into its natural position b è d, with an accelerated motion, by the action of its spring, and would oſ itselſ, vibrate as ſar, at least, on the other sidee But itis aided again by the tooth, which, pressing on the edge è, pushes it aside, till it come into the position E, when the WATCH- WORK. 587 tooth escapes from the eylinder altogether. At this moment the other edge of the cylinder is in the position I, and therefore is in the way of the next tooth, now in the position A. The balance continues its vibration, the tooth all the while resting, and rubbing on the outside of the eylinder. When this vibration, in the direction d e b, is ſinished, the balance resumes its ſirst motion b c d, by the action oſ the spring, and the tooth begins to act on the first edge b, as soon as the balance gets into its natural position, shoves ĩt aside, escapes ſrom it, and drops on the inside oſ the cylinder. In this manner are the vibrations produced, gradually increased to their maximum, and maintained in that state. Every suoceeding tooth of the wheel acts first on the edge b, and then on the edge d; resting first on the outside, and then on the inside of the eylinder. The balance is under the influence oſ the wheels while the edge b passes to h, and while d passes to ; and the rest oſ the vibration is perſormed vithout any aetion on the part oſ the wheels, but is a little obstructed by friction, and by the clamminess oſ the oil. In the construction now described, the arch of action or scapement is evidently 300, being twice the angle which the face of a tooth makes with the circumſerence. The reader will perceive, that when this scapement is executed in such a manner that the succeeding tooth is in contact with the cylinder at the instant that the preceding one escapes ſrom it, the face oſ the tooth must be equal to the inside diameter of the cylinder, and that the distance between the heel of one tooth and the point of the following one must be equal to the outside diameter When the scapement is 50 close there is no drop. A good artist approaches as near to this adjustment as possible; because, while a tooth is dropping, but not yet in contact, it is not acting on the balance, and some ſforce is lost. The execution is accounted very good, if the distance between the centres oſ two teeth is twice the external diameter of the eylinder. This allows WATCH-WORE. 589 linder, it vibrated 90 seconds, or 20 times as long; so much did the friction on the eylinder exceed that of the pivots. We are not suſficiently acquainted with the laws of either of these obstructions to pronounce decidedly whether they will increase or diminish the time oſ the whole vibrationss We observe distinctly, in motions with considerable ſriction, that it does not increase nearly so ſast as the velocity of the motion; nay, it is oſten less when the velocity is very great. In all cases it is observed to terminate motions abruptly. The friction requires a certain force to overcome it, and if the body has any less it will stop. Now this will not only contract the excursion of the balance, but will shorten the time. But the return to the angle of impulsion ill undoubtedly be of longer duration than the excursion; for the arch oſ return, from the extremity oſ the excursion to its beginning, where the angle oſ impulsion ends, is the same with the arch oſ excursionn. The velocity which the balance has in any point of the return is less than what it had in the same point of the excursion; because, in the excursion, it had velocity enough to carry it to the extremity, and also to overcome the ſriction. In the return, it could; even without friction, only have the velocity whieh would have earried it to the extremity; and this smaller velocity is diminished by friction during the return. The velocity being less through the whole return than during the excursion, the time must be greater. It may therefore happen that this retardation of the return may compensate the contraction of the excursion atd the diminution oſ its duration. In this case the vibration will occupy the same time as if the balance had been free ſrom the wheelss But it may more than compensate, and the vibrations will then be slower; or it may not fully compensate, and they vill be quicke. We cannot therefore say, à priori, which oſ the two will happen: but we may venture to say that an increase of the force of the wheels will make the watch go slower: for this vill exert a greater pressure, give a greater impulsion, pro- 590 WATCH- WORK. duce a wider excursion, and increase the frietion during ſhat greater excursion, making the vide vibrations slower than the narrow ones; because the angle oſ impulsion remaming the same, the pressures exerted must be quadrupled, in order to double the excursion, and thereſore the friction æill be increased in a greater proportion than the momentum which is 1o overcome it. But, with respeet to the obstrution arising from the viscidity of the oil, ve know that it follows a very different law. It bears a manifest relation b the velocity, and is nearly proportional to it But still it is difficult to say how this will afſect the whole vibration. The duration of the excursion will not be so much contracted as by an equal obstruction from friction, because it will not terminate the motion abruptly. There are thereſore more chances of the increased duration of the return exceeding the diminution of it in the excursion. All that we can say, thereſore, is, that there vill be a compensation in both cases The time of excursion will be contracted, and that of retum augmentedNov, as the friction may be greatly diminished by ſine polish, fine cil, and a small diameter of the cylinder, we may reasonably expect that the vibrations of such a balance vil not vary nearly so much from isochronism as with a reciling scapement, and vill be litile aſfected by changes in the force of the wheelss Accordingly, Graham's cyſindrical scapement supplanted all others as soon as it was generally known. We cannot compare the vibrations with those oſ æ free balance, because we have no way of making a free halance vibrate ſor some hours But we find that doubſing or trebling the force of the wheels makes very little alteration in the rate oſ the wateh, though it greatly enlarges the angular motionn. Any one may perceive the immense superiority of this scapement over the common recoiſing scapement, by pressing forward the movement of a horizontal watch with the key, or by keeping it back. No great change can be observed in the frequency of the beats, however hard VATCH- WORK. 501 ve press. But a more careful examination shews that an increase oſ the power of the wheels generally causes the wateh to go slower; and that this is more remarkable as the watch has been long going without being cleaned. This shews that the cause is to be ascribed to the ſriction and oil operating on the wide arches of excursion But when this scapement is well executed, in the best proportions of the parts, the performance is extremely gooddc We know such watches, which have continued for several weeks without ever varying more than 7 in one day from equable motion. We have seen one vhose cylinder was not concentric with the balance, but so placed on the verge that the axis of the verge was at o (Plate IX. fig. 3), between the centre B of the cylinder and the entering edge b, and B e was equal to the thickness of the eylinder. The watch was made by Emery of London, and was said to go with astonishing regularity, 30 as to equal any time. piece while the temperature of the air did not vary; and vhen clean, was said to be less affectæd by the temperature than a watch with a free scapement, but unprovided with a compensation piece It is evident that this watch must have a minute recoil. This was said to be the aim of the artist, in order to compensate for the obstruction caused by ſriction during the return of the balance from its excursions. It indeed promises to have this effeet; but we should fear that it subjects the excursions to the influence of the wheelss. We suspect that the indiſferent perſormance of cylinder watches may oſten arise from the cylinder being off the centre in some disadvantageous manner. The watch ſrom which the proportions here stated were taken, is a very fine one made by Graham for Archibald Duke of Argyle, which has kept time with the regularity now mentioned. We believe that there are but few watches which have so large a portion of the cylinder: few indeed have more than one half, or 180° of the circumſerence. But this is too littlee. The tooth of the wheel does not begin to 579 vATCH- WORK. act on the resting cylinder till its middle point A or B touch one oſ the edgess. To obtain the same angle of seapement, the inclination of the face of the tooth must be increased (i must be doubled); and this requires the maintaining power to be increased in the same proportion. Besides, in such a scapement it may happen that the tooth will never rest on the cylinder; because the instant that it quits one edge it falls on the other, and pushes it aside, so that the balancæ acquires no wider vibration than the angle of scapement, and is continually under the influence of the wheels. The scapement is in ĩts best state vhen the portion of the cylinder exceeds I60° by twice the inclination of the teeth to the circumſerence of the wheel. It would employ volumes to describe all the scapements vhich have been contrived by diſferent artists, aiming at the same points vhich Graham had in viev. We shall only take notice of such as have some essential difſerence in principle. Plate IX. fig. 4. represents a scapement invented in France, and called the Echappement à VirouLE, because the pallet resembles a comma. The teeth A, B; C, oſ the holance wheel are set very oblique to the radius, and there is formed on the point of each a pin, standing up perpendicular to the plane oſ the whee. This greatly resembles the wheel of Graham's scapement, when the triangular wedge is cut off from the top of the pin on which it stands. The axis c oſ the verge is placed in the cireumference passing through the pins. The pallet is a plate oſf hard steel a e f d b, having its plane parallel to the plane of the wheel. The inner edge oſ this plate is formed into a coneave cy lindricl surface between o and b, whose axis c coincides with the axis of the verge. Adjoining to this is the acting face b d of the pallett. This is either a straight line b d, making an angle of nearly 300 with a line c b  drawn from the centre, or it is more generally curved, according to the nostrum oſ the artist. The back of the pallet o eſ is also a eylindrical su- WATCH-WORE. 508 face (convex) concentric with the other. This extends about 100° from a to  The part between f and d may have any shapee. The interval a o is formed into a convex surface, in such a manner as to be every where intersected by the radius in an angle of 30° nearly; i. e. it is a portion oſ an equiangular spira. The whole oſ this is connected vith the verge by a crank, which passes perpendicularly through it between f and e; and the plate is set at such height on the crank or verge, that it can turn round clear of the wheel, but not clear of the pins. The teeth oſ the vheel are set so obliquely, and made so slender, that the verge may turn almost quite round without the cranks banking on the teeth. The part fd b, called the hom, is of such a length, that when one pin B rests on the outside cylinder at a, the point d is just clear oſ the next pin A Whahen the wheel is not acting, and the balance spring is in equilibrio, the position of the balance is such that the point d of the horn is near i, about 30° ſrom d. The figure represents it in the position which it has when the tooth A has just escaped ſrom the point d of the horn. In this position the next tooth B is applied to the convex eylinder, a very little wvay (about 5) from its extremity a. This description vill enable the reader to understand the operation of the virgule scapement. Now suppose the pin A just escaped from the horn. The succeeding pin B is now in contact with the back of the ylinder; and the balance, having got an impulse by the action of A along the concave pallet b d, continues its motion in the direction d h, till its force is spent, the point of the horn arriving perhaps at h, more than 9° from d. All this while the following tooth B is resting on the back e f of the cylinder. The balance now returns, by the action of its spring; and when the horn is at ĩ, the pin gets over the edge a o, and drops on the opposite side of the concave cylinder, where it rests, while the horn moves from ĩ to &, vhere it stops, the force of the balance being again spent. VOL. Iv. 2r VATCH- WORE. 595 of the balance-wheel, he avoided the use oſ the outside cylIinder altogether. The scapement is of such a singular form, that it is not easy to represent it hy any drawingg We shall endeavour, however, to deseribe it in such a manner as that our readers, who are not artists, will understand its manner of actingg Artists by proſession will easily comprehend how the parts may be united which we represent as separate. Let ABC (Plate IX. ſig. 5.) represent part of the rim of the balance- wheel, having the pins I, 2, 3, 4, 5, &e. projecting from its faces; the pins, I, 3, 5, being on the side next the eye, but the pins 2 and 4 on the farther sidee D is the centre of the halance and verge, and the small circle round D represents its thickness But the verge in this place is erooked, like a erank, that the rim of the wheel may not be interrupted by it. This will be more particularly deseribed by and bye There is attached to it a piece of hard tempered steel a b c d, of which the part a b c is a concave arch of a circle, having D for its centre. It wants about 30° of a semicircle The rest of ĩt c d is also an arch of a circle, having the same radius vith the balance-wheel. The natural position of the balance is such, that a line drawn ſrom D, through the middle of the face c d, is a tangent to the circumſerence of the wheel. But, suppose the balance turned round till the point d oſ the horn comes to d', and the point c comes to 2, in the circumſerence in which the pins are placedlc Then the pin, pressing on the beginning of the horn or pallet, pushes it aside, slides along it, and escapes at d, aſter having generated a certain velocity in the balance. So far this scapement is like the virgule scapement described already. But now let another pallet, similar to the one now described, he placed on the other side of the vheel, but in a contrary position, with the acting face of the pallet turned away from the centre of the wheel. Let it be so placed at E, that the moment that the pin I, on the upper side of the wheel, escapes from the pallet c d, the pin WATCH-WORE. 597 æqual to the interval between two succeeding pins, and the distance of the centres D and E must be double of this. The radius D e or E g& may be as small as we please. The concave arches c ba and g fe must be continued ſar enough to keep a pin resting on them during the whole excursion oſ the balance The angle oſ scapement, in which the balance is under the influence of the wheels, is had by drawing D c and D d. This angle c D d is about 30°, but may be made greater or less. Plate IX. Fig. 1l. vill give some notion how the two pallets may be combined on one verge. KL represents the verge with a pivot at each end. It is bent into a crank MNO, to admit the balance wheel between its branches, BC represents this wheel seen edgevise, with its pins, alternately on diſferent sides. The pallets are also represented edgewise by b c d and h g f, fixed to the inside oſ the branches of the crank, fronting each other. The position of their acting faces may be seen in the preceding ſigure, on the verge D, where the pallet gh is represented by the dotted line 2i, as being situated behind the pallet c . The remote pallet 2 ĩ is placed so, that when the roint d of the near pal]et is just quitted by a pin I on the upper side of the wheel, the angle ſormed by the face and the arch of rest of the other pallet is just ready to receive the next pin 2, which lies on the under side of the rimm A little attention will make it plain, that the action will be precisely the same as when the pallets were on separate axes. The pin I escapes from d, and the pin 2 is received on the arch of rest, and locks the wheel while the balance is continuing its motion. When it returns, 2 gets oſf the arch of rest, pushes aside the pallet 2i, escapes ſrom it when ĩ gets to l, and then the pin 3 ſinds the point c ready to to receive it, &e. The vibrations may be increased by giving a sufſicient impulse through the angle oſ scapement. But they cannot be more than a certain quantity, otherwise the top N of the erank will strike the rim of the wheel. By placing the pins at the very edge of the wheel, the vibrations may easily be increased to a semicircle ByY VWATCH-WOEE. 6Ol pended during the excursion beyond the angle of impulsion, by making a tooth rest on the surſace oſa small concentric cylinder. In such scapements, the balance, during its excursions, is almost free from any connection with the wheels, and its isochronism is disturbed by nothing but the friction on this surfaceWe come now to scapements of more artſul construction, in which the balance is really and completely free during the whole of its exeursion, heing altogether disengaged ſrom the wheel-work. These are called nETACHED ScAPEMENTS. They are of more recent datee. We believe that Mr. Le RRoi was the ſirst inventor of them, about the year 1748. In the memoirs oſ the Academy of Paris for that year, and in the Collection of approved Machines and Inventions, ve have deseriptions oſ the contrivance. The balance wheel rests on a detent, while the balance is vibrating in perſect ſreedom. It has a pallet standing out from the centre, which, in the course of vibration, passes close by the point of a tooth of the wheel. At that instant a pin, connected vith this pallet, withdraws the detent from the wheel, and the tooth just noW mentioned follows the pallet with rapidity, and gives it a smart push forvard. Immediately aſter, another tooth of the wheel meets the other claw of the detent, and the wheel is again lockedd When the balance returns, the pin pushes the detent back into its former place, where it again locks the vheel. Then the balance, resuming its first direction, unlocks the wheel, and receives another impulsion from it. Thus the balance is unconnected with the wheels, except while it gets the impulsion, and at the moments of unlocking the wheels. This contrivance has been reduced to the greatest possible simplicity by the British artists, and seems scarcely capable of farther improvement. The following is one of the most approved constructionss. In Plate IX. fig. 7. a be represents the pallet, vhich is a eylinder of hard steel or stone, having a notch a  A portion of the balance- wheel is represented by AB. It is placed 50 near to the cylinder, VATCH- ORX. E3 u b ę, til ĩts force is again spent; ĩt stops, returns, again unlocks the wheel, and gets a new impulsion And in this manner the vibrations are continued. Thus we see a vibration, almost ſree, maintained in a manner even more simple than the common cruteh scapement. The impulse is given direct without any decomposition by oblique action, and ĩt is continued through the œhole motion oſ the wheel. No part of this motion is lost, as in Dupleixs scapement, by the grodual approach of the tooth to its active position Very little force is required for unlocking the wheel, because the spring DFE is made slender at the remote end E, s that it turns round E almost like a lever turning on pivotlss. A sudden twitch of the wateh, in the direction b u, might chance to unlock the wheel. But this will only derange one vibration, and even that not considerably, because the teeth are 30 close to the cylinder that the wheel cannot advance till the notch comes round to the place of scapement. A tooth vill continue pressing on the cylinder, and by its ſriction vill change a litile the extent and duration of a single vibration. The greatest derangement will happen iſ the wheel should thus unlock by a jolt, while the noteh passes through the arch of scapement in the returning vibration. Even this will not greatly derange it, vhen the wateh is elean and vibrating wide; because, in this position, the balance has its greatest momentum, and the direction of the only jolt that can unlock the wheel tends to increase this mumentum reIatively. In short, considering it theoretically, it seems an almost perſect scapement; and the performance oſ many of these watches abundantly confirms that opinionn. They are Eknown to keep time for many days together, without varying one second from day to day; and this even under considerable variations of the maintaining power. Other detached scapements may equal this, but we scarcely expect uny to exceed it; and ĩts simplicity is 50 much superior to -uny that we have seen, that, on this account, wæ are disposæd to give it the preſerence We do not mean 1o sa3 that 604 WATCH- WORE. it is the best for a pocket watch. Perhaps the scapement oſ Dupleix or Graham may be preferable, as being suceptible of greater strength, and more able to withstand joltss Yet it is a fact, that some of the watches made m this form by Arnold and others, have kept time in the wonderful manner above- mentioned while carried about in the pocket. Mr. Mudge of London invented, about the year 1763, another detached scapement, of a still more ingenious construction. It is a counterpart of Mr. Cumming's scapement for pendulums. The contrivance is to this effect. In Plate IX. fig. S. a b c represents the balance. Its axis is bent into a large crank EFGHIK, suſficiently roomy to admit within it two other axes M and L, with the proper cocks ſor receiving their pivots. The three axes form one straight line. About these smaller axes are coiled two auxiliary springs, in opposite directions, having their outer extremities ſixed in the studs A and B. The balance has its spring also, a usual, and the three springs are so disposed that each oſ them alone would keep the halance at rest in the same position, which we may suppose to be that represented in the figure The auxiliary springs A and B are connected with the halance only oceasionally, hy means of the arms m and n projecting from their respective axes. These arms are catched on opposite sides by the pins o, p, in the branches of the crank; so that when the balanee turns round, it carries one or other of those arms round vith it, and, during this motion, it is aſfected by the auxiliary spring connected with the arm so carried round by it Let us suppose that the balance vibrates 120° on each side of its quiescent position a b ę, so that the radius E o aquires, alternately, the positions E band E c. The auxiliary springs are connected with the wheels by a common deadbeat pendulum scapement, so that each can be separately wound up about 307, and retained in that position. Let us also suppos that the spring A has been wound up 30° n iS VATCH- WORE. 605 the direction a b, by the wheel-work, and that the point a of the rim of the halance, having come ſrom e, is passing through a vith its greatest velocit. When the radius E o has passed a 300 in its course lowards b, the pin o ſinds the arm m in its vay, and carries it along ith it till a gets to h. But, by carrying avay the arm m, it has unlocked the wheelwork, and the spring B is now wound up 30° in the other direction, but has no connection with the balance during this operationn. Thus the balance finishes its semivibration a b of 1200, opposed by its own spring the whole way, and by the auxiliary spring A through an angle of 900. It returns to the position E a, aided by A and by the balance spring, through an angle of 120°0. In like manner, vhen Ea has moved 300 toward the position E e, the pin ꝑ meets with the arm n, and carries it along vith it through an angle of 90°, opposed by the spring B, and then returns to the position E q, assisted by the same spring through an arch of 1200. Thus it appears that the balance is opposed by each auxiliary spring through an angle of 909, and assisted through an angle oſ 120 This difference of action maintains the vibrations, and the necessary winding up of the auxiliary springs is performed by the wheel-work at a time when they are totally disengaged from the balancee No irregularity of the wheel- work can have any influence on the force of the auxiliary springs, and thereſore the balance is completely disengaged from all these irregularities, except in the short moment of unlocking the wheel that winds up the springs. This is a most ingenious construetion, and the nearest approach to a free vibration that has yet been thought of. It deserves particular remark that, during the whole of the returning or accelerated semivibration, the united force of the springs is proportional to the distance from the quiescent position. The same may be said of the retarded excursion beyond the angle of impulse: therefore the only deviation oſ the ſorces ſrom the law of eycloidal vibration is during VATCH- WORE. õ0 the cylindrical surface of the verge. The scapement of the crutch EDF is not accurately a dead beat scapement, but has a very small recoil beyond the angle of impulsionn. BY this circumstance, the branch A (now at B) is made to press most gently on the eylinder, and keeps the wheel locked, while the balance is going round in the direction BHA. The point A gets moving from A to B by means of a notch in the cylinder, which turns round at the same time by the action of the branch AG on the pallet C; but A does not touch the eylinder during this motion, the notch leaving free room for its pussage. When the balance returns from its excursion, the pallet C strikes on the branch A (till at B), and unlocks the wheel. This now acting on the cruteh pallet F, causes the branch b of the ſork to follow the pallet C, and give it a strong impulse in the direction in which it is then moving, causing the balance to make a semivibration jn the direction AHB. The fork is now in the situation A g a, similar  B gb, and the wheel is again locked on the crutch pallet E. The mtelligent reader will admit this to be a very steady and effective scapement. The lockage of the wheel is pro. eured in a very ingenious manner; and the friction on the eylinder, necessary ſor effecting this, may be made as small as ve please, notwithstanding a very strong action of the wheel: For the pressure of the fork on the cylinder depends entirely on the degree of recoil that is formed on the pallets E and F. Pressure on the cylinder is not indispensably necessary, and the crutch scapement might be a real dead beat. But a small recoil, hy keeping the fork in contact with the cylinder, gives the most perfect steadiness to the motion. The ingenious inventor, a man of approved integrity and judgment, declares that her Majesty's watch was the best pocket watch he had ever seenn. We are not disposed to question its excellency We saW an experiment watch of this construction, made by a country artist, having a balance s0 heavy as lo vibrate only twice in a second. Every WATCH- WORK. 609 brations were but of half the extent of those made during the first revolution. Without minding the real rate of going, he only compared the duration of the first and last revolution of the minute hand. An artist of our acquaintance repeated these experiments, and with the same result: But, unfortunately, could derive little beneſit from them; because in one state of the oil, or with one balance, he found the lengths of the same spring, which produced isochronous vibrations, were different from those which had this effect in another state of the oil, or with another balancee He als0 observed another difſerence in the rate, arising from a difference oſ position, according as XII, VI, III, or IX, was uppermost; which difference plainly arises from the swagging of the spring by its weight, and, in that state, acting as a pendulum. This unluckily put a stop to his attempts to lessen this hurtſul influence by employing a cylindrical spiral oſ small diameter and great length *.  It is much to be regretted, that the preceding dissertation is the only one that Dr. Robison has written, upon the very interesting subject of Timekeepers, which he had studied with particular attention. So early as the year 1793 he had projected a magniſicent work on the History, Theory, and Practice of Horology; and in a letter addressed to Mr. Thomas Reid of Edinburgh, and containing an account of the plan and object of the work, he requested that this able and experienced artist would co-operate with him in the undertaking. Mr. Reid's occupations did not permit him to agree to this ſlattering request; and it was probably on this account that Dr. Robison abaudoned the work. Many valuable materials respectiug the history of Horology, and many profound views respecting its principles, have thus been lost to science. It is ſortunate, however, that the practical part which Mr. Reid would have contributed, has been lately published in the article HoroLOGY, which he has writteu ſor the Eninsunon ExcrcroPæpia. Ep. VOIL. IV. 20 SEAMANSHIP. 419. BY this word we express that noble art, or, more purely, the qualifications which enable a man to exercise the noble art of working a ship. A sEAMAN, in the language of the profession, is not merely a mariner or labourer on board a ship, but a man who understands the structure of this wonderful machine, and every subordinate part of its nechanism, 50 as to enable him to employ it to the best advantage for pushing her forward in a particular direction, and for avoiding the numberless dangers to which she is exposed by the violence of the winds and waves. He also knows what courses can be held by the ship, according to the wind that blows and vhat cannot, and which of these is most conducive to her progress in her intended voyage: and he must be able to perform every part of the necessary operation with his own hands. As the seamen express it, he must be able ⸗ to hand, reef, and steer 420. We are justified in calling it a noble art, not only by its importance, which it is quite needless to amplify or embellish, but by its immense extent and diſficulty, and the prdigious number and variety oſ principles on which iĩt is 612 SEAMANSHIP. and are hoth surprised and sorry that Britain has contributed s0 little in these attempts. Gordon is the only one of our countrymen who has given a professedly æientiſic treatise on a small branch of the subjec. The government of France has always been strongly impressed with the notion of great improvements being attainable by systematic study of this art; and we are indebted to the endeavours of that ingenious nation ſor any thing of practical importance that has been obtainedl. M. Bouguer was professor oſ hydrology at one of the marine academies of France, and was enjoined, as part of his duty, to compose dissertations both on the construetion and the working of ships. His Traitẽ du Novire, and his Manæuvre des Vaisseaux, are undoubtedly very valuable performances: So are those of Euler and Bernoulli, considered as mathematical dissertations, and they are wonderſul works of genius, considered as the productions of persons who hardly ever saw a ship, and were totally unac quainted with the profession of a seaman. In this respect Bouguer had great superiority, having always lived at a seport, and having made many very long voyages. His treatises therefore are infinitely better accommodated to the demands oſ the seaman, and more directly instructive; but still the author is more a mathematician than an artist, and his performance is intelligible only to mathematicianss. It is true, the academical education of the young gentlemen oſ the French navy is such, that a great number oſ them may acquire the preparatory knovledge that is necessary; and we are vell informed that, in this respect, the officers oſ the British navy are greatly inferior to them. 423. But this very circumstance has furnished to many persons an argument against the utility of those perſormances. It is said that,  notwithstanding this superior mathematical education, and the possession of those boasted perſormances of M. Bouguer, the French are greatly inſerior, in point of seamanship, to our countrymen, who have not a page in their language to instruct them, and who could not SEAMANSHIP. 613 peruse it if they had it Nay, so little do the French themselves seem sensible oſ the advantage of these publieations, that no percon among them has attempted to make a familiar abridgment oſ them, written in a way fitted to attract attention; and they still remain neglected in their original abstruse and uninteresting form. 424. We vish that we could give a satisſactory answer to this ohservation. It is just, and it is important. These very ingenious and learned dissertations are by no means so useful as ve should expect. They are large books, and appear to contain much; and as their plan is logical, it seems to occupy the whole subject, and thereſore to have done almost all that can be donee But, alas! they have only opened the subject, and the study is yet in its infancy. The whole science oſ the art must proceed on the knowledge of the impulsions oſ the wind and water. These are the forces which act on the machine; and its motions, which are the ultimatum of our research, whether as an end to be obtained or as a thing to be prevented, must depend on these forces. Now it ĩs with respeet to this fundamental point that we are as yet almost totally in the dark. And, in the perſormances of M. Bouguer, as also in those of the other authors we have named, the theory of these forces, by which their quantity and the direction of their action are ascertained, is altogether erroneous; and its results deviate so enormously from what is observed in the motions of a ship, that the person who should direet the operations on shiphoard, in eonformity to the maxims deducible from M. Bouguers propositions, would he baſfled in most of his attempts, and be in danger of losing the shipp. The whole proceeds on the supposed truth of that theory which states the impulse of a fluid be in the proportion of the square of the sine of the angle of incidence; and that its action on any small portion, such as a square foot oſ the sails or hull, ĩs the same as if that portion were detached from the rest, and were exposed, single and alone, to the wind or water in the same* ngle. But we 3 EEAMANSHTP. c15 cumstances absolutely necessary for enabling us to say what will be their energy in producing a rotation round any particular axis In like manner, we cannot, by such a computation, find the spontaneous axis of conversion (see RoraTion), or the velocity of such conversion. In short, we eannot pronounce with tolerable confidence 2 priori what will be the motions in any case, or what dispositions oſ the sails vill produce the movement we wish to perform. The experienced seaman learns by habit the general effects of every disposition of the sails; and though his knowledge is far from being accurate, it seldom leads him into any very blundering operation. Perhaps he seldom makes the best adjustment possible, but seldomer still does he deviate very for from it; and in the most general and important problems, such as working to windward, the result oſ much experience and many corrections has settled a trim of the sails, which is certainly not ſor from the truth, but ſit must be acknowledged) deviates widely and uniformly from the theories of the mathematician's closet. The honest tar, thereſore, must be indulged in his joke on the useless labours of the mathematician, vho can neither hand, reef, nor Bteer. 425. Aſter this account of the theoretical performances in the art of seamanship, and what we have said in another place on the small hopes we entertain of seeing a perſect theory of the impulse of fluids, it will not be expected that we enter very minutely on the subject in this place; nor is it our intention. But let it be observed, that the theory is defective in one point only; and although this is a most important point, and the errors in it destroy the conclusions of the chief propositions, the reasonings remain in full foree, and the modus operandi is precisely such as is stated in the theory. The principles of the art are therefore to be founo in these treatises; but false inſerences have been drawn, by computing from erroneous quantitie. The rules and the practice oſ the computation, however, are still beyond con- SEAMANSHIP. õT d by any person accustomed to consider mechanical subjects, and every seaman oſ experience has observed it. It is of importance to consider it in this point of view, because it gives us the most familiar notion of the manner in which these forces of the wind and water are set in opposition, and made to halance or not to halance each other by the intervention of the ship, in the same manner as the goods and the weights balance each other in the scales by the intervention of a beam or steel-yard. 428. When a ship proceeds steadily in her course, without changing her rate of sailing, or varying the direction oſ her head, we must in the first place conceive the accumulated impulses oſ the wind on all her sails as precisely equal and directly opposite to the impulse of the water on her bows. In the next place, because the ship does not change the direction of her keel, she resembles the balanced steelyard, in whieh the energies of the two weights, which tend to produce rotations in opposite directions, and thus to change the position of the beam, mutually balance each other round the fulerum; so the energies of the actions of the wind on the difſerent sails balance the energies of the water on the different parts of the hull. 429. The seaman has two principal tasks to perſorm. The first is to keep the ship steadily in that course which will bring her farthest on in the line of her intended voyage. This is ſrequently very diſferent from that line, and the choice of the best course is-sometimes a matter of considerable diſficulty. It is sometimes possible to shape the course precisely along the line of the voyage; and yet the intelligent seaman knows that he will arrive sooner, or with greater saſety, at his port, by taking a diſferent course; because he vill gain more by increasing his speed than he loses by increasing the distance. Some principle must direct him in the selection of this course. This ve must attempt to lay beſore the reader. lS SEAMANSHIP. Having chosen such a course as he thinks most ad vangeous, he must set such a quantity of sail as the strength of the wind vill allow him to carry with saſety and eſſect, and must trim the sails properly, or so adjust their positions the direction of the wind, that they may have the greatest possible tendency to impel the ship in the line of her couræ, and to keep her steadily in that direction. His other task is to produce any deviations which he seæ proper ſrom the present course of the ship; and to produæ these in the most certain, the safest, and the most expeditious manner. It is chieſly in this movement that the mechanical nature of a ship comes into view, and ĩt is here that the superior address and resource of an expert seaman is to be perceived. It is perfectly consonant to experience that the impulææ of ſfluids is in the duplicate ratio of the relative velocity. Let it be supposed that when water moves one foot per æcond its perpendicular pressure or impulse on a square fout is m poundss. Then, if it be moving with the velocity V estimated in feet per second, ĩts perpendicular impulsæ on a surſace S, containing any number of square feet, must be m SV2 In like manner, the impulsæ oſ air on the same surface may be represented by n SV?; and the proportion of the impulse oſ these two fluids vill be that of m tonn We may express this by the ratio of q to l making ã = q 430. M. Bouguer's computations and tables are on the supposition that the impulse of sea-water moving one foot per second is 23 ounces on a square ſoot, and that the impulæ of the wind is the same when it blows at the rate oſ 24 ſeet per second. These measures are all French. They by mo means agree with the experiments of others; and what we have already said, when treating oſ the RESISTANOE Of Fluids, is enough to shew us that nothing like precise measures can be expected. It was shown as the result of a ræ- BEAMANSHIP. cl9 tional investigation, and confirmed by the experiments oſ Buat and others, that the impulsions and resistances at the same surſace, with the same obliquity oſ incidence and the same velocity oſ motion, are diſferent according to the form and situation of the adjoining parts. Thus the total resitance of a thin board is greater than that of a long prism, having this hoard for its front or bow, &e. We are greatly at a loss what to give as absolute measures of these impulsions. 1. With respect to waterr. The experiments oſ the French academy on a prism two feet broad and deep, and ſour ſeet long, indicate a resistance of 0,973 pounds avoirdupois to a square ſoot, moving with the velocity of one foot per second at the surſace of still water. Mr. Buats experiments on a square ſoot wholly immersed in a stream were as follow: A square foot as a thin plate - 1,81 pounds. Ditto as the ſront oſ a box one foot long 1,42 Ditto as the front of a hox three ſeet long 1,29 The resistance of sea-water is about 7, greater. 2. With respect to air, the varieties are as great. The resistance of a square ſoot to air moving vith the velocity of one ſoot per second appears ſfrom Mr. Robins's experiments on 16 square inches to be on a square foot 0,001596 pounds. Chevalier Bordas on I6 inches 0,001757 on 8l inches 0,002042 Mr. Rousæs on large surſaces 0,002201 Precise measures are not to be expected, nor are they necessary in this inquiry. Here we are chieſly interested n their proportions, as they may he varied by their mode of action in the different circumstances oſ obliquity and velocity. 4\l. We begin by recurring to the fundamental propositioh concerning the impulse of fluids, viz. that the absolute pressure is always in a direction perpendicular to the impel- SEAMANSHIP. 62l box which shall have the same resistances headwise and sideise. 433. Let EFGH (Plate X. fig. I.) be the horizontal section oſ such a box, and AB its middle line, and C its centree In whatever direction this box may chance to move, the direction of the whole resistance on its two sides will pass through C. For as the whole stream has one inclination to the side EF, the equivalent of the equal impulses on every part will be in a line perpendicular to the middle of EF. For the same reason, it will be in a line perpendicular to the middle of FG. These perpendiculars must cross in C Suppose a mast erected at C, and YCy to be a yard hoisted on it carrying a sail. Let the yard be first conceived as braced right athwart at right angles to the keel, as represented by Y 5. Then, whatever be the direction of the wind abaſt this sail, it ill impel the vessel in the direction CB. But if the sail has the oblique position Y 5, the impulse will be in the direction CD perpendicular to CY, and will both push the vessel ahead and sidewise: For the impulse CD is equivalent to the two impulses CK and CI (the sides of a reetangle of vhich CD is the diagonal). The ſorce CI pushes the vessel ahead, and CK pushes her sidewise She must thereſore take some intermediate direction a b, such that the resistance oſ the water to the plane FG is to its resistance to the plane EF as CI to CK. The angle b CH between the real course and the direction oſ the head is called the LEEWAY; and in the course of this dissertation we shall express it by the symbol . It evidently depends on the shape oſ the vessel and on the position of the yard. An accurate knowledge of the quantity of leeway, corresponding to different circumstances of obliquity oſ impulse, extent oſ surface, &e. is of the utmost importance in the practice of navigation; and even an approximation is valuable The subject is so very diſficult that this must content us for the present. SEAMANSHIP. 623 far from the truth when the angle oſ incidence is great. In this present case the angle oſ incidence on the front FG is about 700, and the experiments just noW mentioned show that the real resistances exceed the theoretical ones only xſ5 But the angle oſ incidence on EF is only 2 45. Experiment shows that in this inclination the resistance is almost quadruple of the theoretical resistances. Thereſore the lateral resistance is assumed much too small in the present instancee Thereſore a much smaller leeway will suſfice for producing a lateral resistance which will balanee the lateral impulse CE, arising from the obliquity oſf the sail, viz. 3°. The matter of fact is, that a pretty good sailing ship, vwith her sails braced to this angle at a medium, vill not make above five or six degrees leeway in smooth water and easy weather; and yet in this situation the hull and rigging present a very great surface to the wind, in the most improper positions, so as to have a very great effect in increasing her leeway. And if we compute the resistances for this leeway of six degrees by the actual experiments of the French Academy on that angle, we shall find the result not far from the truth; that is, the direct and lateral resistances vill be nearly in the proportion of CI to ID. It results from this view of the matter, that the leeway is in general much smaller than what the usual theory assigns. 435. We also see, that according to whatever lavw the resistances change by a change of inclination, the leeway remains the same vhile the trim of the sails is the same. The leeway depends only on the direction of the impulse oſ the wind; and this depends solely on the position of the sails with respect to the keel, whatever may be the direction of the wind. This is a very important observation, and vill be frequently referred to in the progress of the present investigationn. Note, however, that we are here considering only the action on the sails, and on the same sails. We are not considering the action of the wind on the hull and rig- SEAMANSHIP. 625 the keel to the direction of the motion, or to the direction of the stream, is analogous to the leeway. All this must be evident to any person accustomed to mechanical disquisitions. 437. A most important use may be made of this illustration. If an accurate model be made of a ship, and if it be placed in a stream of water, and ridden in this manner by a rope made ſast at any point D oſ the bow, it will arrange itself in some determined position AB. There vill be a certain obliquity to the stream, measured by the angle B o b; and there vill be a corresponding obliquity of the rope, measured by the angle FCB. Let v CY be perpendicular to CF. Then CY will be the position of the yard, or trim of the sails corresponding to the leeway H CB. Then, if we shiſt the rope to a point of the bow distant ſrom D by a small quantity, we shall obtain a new position of the ship, both with respect to the stream and the rope; and in this way may he obtained the relation between the position of the sails and the leeway, independent of all theory, and susceptible of great accuracy; and this may be done with a variety oſ models suited to the most usual forms of ships. 435. In farther thinking on this subject, we are persuaded that these experiments, instead of being made on models, may vith equal ease be made on a ship of any size. Let the ship ride in a stream at a mooring D (Plate X. fig. 3.) by means oſ a short hawser BCD from her bow, having a spring AC on it carried out from her quarter. She will swing to her moorings, till she ranges herself in a certain position AB vith respect to the direction a b of the stream; and the hawser DC vill be directed to some point E in the line of the keel. Now, iĩt is plain to any person acquainted with mechanical disquisitions, that the deviation BE b is precisely the leeway that the ship will make when the average position oſ the sails is that of the line GEH perpendicular to ED; at least this vill give the leeway which is produced by the sails alone By heaving on the spring, vOI.. IV. Lnx 626 SEAMANSHIP. the knot C may be brought into any other position we please: and for every new position of the knot the ship will take a new position with respect to the stream and to the hawsr And ve persist in saying, that more inſormation will be got by this train of experiments than ſfrom any mathematical theory: ſor all theories oſ the impulses of fluids must pro ceed on physical postulates with respeet to the motions of the filaments, which are exceedingly conjectural. 4389. And it must now be farther observed, that the substitution which ve have made of an oblong parallelopiped for a ship, although vell suited to give us elear notions of the subject, is of small use in practice: for it is next to impossible (even granting the theory of oblique impulsions) to make this substitution. A ship is of a form which is not reducible to equations; and therefore the action of the water on her bow or brondside can only he had by a most laborious and intricate calculation for aimost every square ſoot of its surfacee (See Besout's Cours de Mathem vol. 5. p. 7ę, &) And this must be different for every ship. But, which is more unlucky, when we have got a parallelopiped which will have the same proportion of direct and lateral resistance ſor a particular angle of leeway, it will not answer for another leeway of the same ship; for when the leeway changes, the figure actually exposed to the action of the water changes alsoo. When the leeway is increased, more of the leequarter is acted on by the water, and a part of the weatherbow is now removed from its actionn. Another parallelopiped must therefore be discovered, whose resistances shall suit this new position of the keel with respect to the real curæ of the ship. We thereſore beg leave to recommend this train oſ experiments to the notice oſ the AssocraTioN FoRrR THE IuPIOVMENT OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE as a very promising method ſor ascertaining this important pointt. And we proceed, in the next place, to ascertain the relation between the velocity oſ the ship and that of the wind, modified æ SEAMANSHIP. 621 they may be by the trim of the sails and the obliquity of the impulse. 440. Let AB (Plate X. fig. 4, 5, and 6.) represent the horizontal section of a shipp In place of all the drawing sails, that is, the sails which are really filled, we can always substitute one sail of equal extent, trimmed to the same angle with the keel. This being supposed attached to the yard DCD, let this yard be first of all at right angles to the keel, as represented in Plate X. fig. 4 Let the wind blow in the direction WC, and let CE (in the direction WC continued) represent the velocity V of the wind. Let CF be the velocity o of the ship. It must also be in the direction of the ships motion, because when the sail is at right angles to the keel, the absolute impulse on the sail is in the direetion of the keel, and there is no lateral impulse, and consequently no leevay Drav EF, and complete the parallelogram CFE e, producing e C through the centre oſ the yard to u Then w C will be the relative or apparent direction oſ the wind, and C e or FE vill be its apparent or relative velocity: For if the line C e be carried along CF, keeping always patallel to its first position, and if a particle of air move uniformly along CE (a fixed line in absolute space) in the same time, this particle will always be found in that point of CE where it is intersected at that instant by the moving line Ce; so that if C e were a tube, the particle of air, which really moves in the line CE, would always be found in the tube C . While CE is the real direction of the wind, Ce vill be the position of the vane at the mast head, which will thereſore mark the apparent direction of the wind, or its motion relative to the moving ship. We may conceive this in another vay. Suppose a cannon shot fired in the direction CE at the passing ship, and that it passes through the mast at C vith the velocity of the wind. It will not pass through the offside of the ship at P, in the line CE: for while the shot moves ſrom C to P, the point P has gone forward, and the point ꝓ is now in the SEAMANSHTP. 629 we know that a good ship, with all her suils set and the wind on the beam, will in such a situation sail above I0 knots an hour in smooth waterr. There is an observation made by every experienced seaman, which shows this diſference between the real and apparent directions oſ the vwind very distinctly. When a ship that is sailing briskly with the wind on the beam tacks about, and then sails equally ell on the other tack, the wind always appears to have shifted and come more ahead. This is ſamiliar to all seamen. The seaman judges of the direction of the wind by the position oſ the ships vanes. Suppose the ship sailing due west on the starboard tack, with the wind apparentIy N.N. W. the vane pointing S. S. E. If the ship puts about, and stands due east on the larboard tack, the vane will be found no longer to point S. S. E. but perhaps S. S. W. the wind appearing N. N. E. and the ship must be nearly closehauled in order to make an east coursee The wind appears to have shiſted ſour points. Ifthe ship tacks again, the wind returns to its old quarter. We have oſten observed a greater difference than this The celebrated astronomer Dr. Bradley, taking the amusement of sailing in a pinnace on the river Thames, observed this, and was surprised at it, imagining that the change of vind was owing to the approaching to or retiring from the shore The boatmen told him that it always happened at sea, and explained it to him in the best manner they were able The explanation struck him, and set him a musing on an astronomical phenomenon which he had been puzzled by for some years, and which he called THE ABEREATION OF THE FIXED STAES. Every star changes its place a small matter for half a year, and returns to it at the completion of the year. He compared the stream of light ſrom the star to the wind, and the telescope of the astronomer to the ship's vane, while the earth was like the ship, moving in opposite directions when in the opposite points of its orbitt. The telescope must always be pointed ahead of the real direction of the star, in the same 630 SEAMANSHIP manner as the vane is always in a direction ahead of the vwind; and thus he ascertained the progressive motion of light, and discovered the proportion of its velocity to the velocity of the earth in its orbit, by observing the deviation which was necessarily given 1o the telescope Observing that the light shiſted its direction about 40, he coneluded its velocity to be about II,000 times greater than that of the earth; just as the intelligent seaman would conclude from this apparent shiſting oſ the wind, that the velocity oſ the vind is about triple that of the ship. This is indeed the best method for discovering the velocity of the wind Let the direction of the vane at the mast-head be very accurately noticed on hoth tacks, and let the velocity of the ship be also accurately measured. The angle between the directions of the ship's head on these different tacks being halved, will give the real direction of the wind, which must be compared vith the position of the vane in order to determine the angle contained between the real and apparent directions of the vind or the angle EC e; or halſ oſ the observed shiſting of the wind will show the inclination of its true and apparent directions. This being found, the proportion of EC to FC Plate X. fig. 6.) is easily measured. We have been very particular on this point, because since the mutual actions of bodies depend on their relative motions only, we should make prodigious mistakes if we estimated the action oſ the wind by its renl direction and velocity, when they differ so much from the relative or apparent. 442. We nov resume the investigation of the velocity oſ the ship (Plate X. fig. 4.), having its sail at right angles to the keel, and the wind blowing in the direction and with the velocity CE, while the ship proceeds in the direction oſ the keel with the velocity CF. Produce E e, which is parallel to EG, till it meet the yard in g, and drav FG perpendicular to E 2. Let a represent the angle WCD, contained between the sail and the real direction of the wind, and let à SEAMANSHIP. 631 be the angle of trim DCB. CE the velocity oſ the wind was expressed by V, and CF the velocity oſ the ship by v. The absolute impulse on the sail is (by the usual theory) proportional to the square of the relative velocity, and to the square of the sine of the angle of incidence; that is, to FE? x sin.. w CD. Now the angle GFE =u CD, and EG is equal to FE x sin. GFE; and EGis equal to Eg3 GBut Eg  EC x sin. EC g5,V X sin. a; and g G CF, = v. Thereſore EG = V x sin. 2—nu, and the impulse is proportional to Væ sm. a—v2. If S represent the surſuce of the sail, the impulse, in pounds, will be n S (V x sin. a bp)t. Let A be the surface which, when it meets the vater perpendicularly with the velocity 0, will sustain the same pressure or resistance which the bows of the ship actually meets with. This impulse, in pounds, will be m A r?. Thereſore, because we are considering the ship's motion as in a state oſ uniſormity, the two pressures balance each other; and therefore nAu? n S (V xX sin. av)?, and avæ S (V X sin. a b)t; therefore Jæ/a x v=5 X V X sin. a  /5, and /5 x V x sin.a V x sin. a Vx sin. a We see, in the first place, that the velocity of the ship is ſcateris poribus) proportional to the velocity of the wind, and to the sine of its incidence on the sail jointly; for vhile the surſace of the sail S and the equivalent surſace for the bows remains the same, v increases or diminishes at the same rate with V- sin. . When the wind is right ustern, the sine of a is unity, and then the ship's velocity is BEAMANSHIP. 633 Let us, in the next place, consider the motion of a ship whose sails stand oblique to the keel. 443. The construction for this purpose differs a little from the former, because, when the sails are trimmed to any oblique position DCB (Plate X. fig. 5. and 6.), there must be a deviation from the direction of the keel, or a leeway BCS Call this . Let CF be the velocity oſ the ship. Drav, as before, E g& perpendicular to the yard, and FG perpendicular to Eg; also draw FH perpendicular to the yard: then, as beſore, EG, which is in the subduplicate ratio of the impulse on the sail, is equal to EQG . Now Eg™ is, as before, /V x sin. u, and G⸗ is equal to FH, which is = CF x sin. FCH, or=n X sin. (b+ æ). Therefore e have the impulse=n S (V- sin. av sin. & + æ))⸗ This expression of the impulse is perfectly similar to that in the former case, its only difference consisting in the subductive part, which is here » x sin + æ instead of . But it expresses the same thing as beſore, viz. the diminution of the impulse The impulse being reckoned solely in the direction perpendicular to the sail, it is diminished solely by the sail withdrawing itselſ in that direction from the wind; and as g E may be considered as the real impulsive motion of the wind, GE must be considered as the relative and eſfective impulsive motion. The impulse would have been the same had the ship been at rest, and had the wind met it perpendicularly with the velocity GE. 444. We must now show the connection between this impulse and the motion of the ship. The sail, and consequently the ship, is pressed by the wind in the direction CI perpendicular to the sail or yard with the force which we have just now determined. This (in the state of uniform motion) must be equal and opposite to the action of the water. Draw IL at right angles to the kee. The impulse in the direction CI (which we may measure by CI) is equivalent to the impulses CL and LI. By the first the ship is impelled right forward, and hy the second she is driven sidewise. There- 634 SEAMANSHTP. fore we must have a leeway, and a lateral as well as a direct resistance We suppose the form oſ the ship to be known, and therefore the proportion is known, or discoverable, between the direct and lateral resistances corresponding to every angle æ of leeway Let A be the surface vhose perpendicular resistance is equal to the direct resistance of the ship corresponding to the leeway x, that is, whose resistance is equal to the resistance really felt by the ships bows in the direction of the keel when she is sailing with this leeway; and let B in like manmer be the surface whose perpendicular resistance is equal to the actual resistance to the ship's motion in the direction LI, perpendicular to the keel. (V. B. This is not equivalent to A' and B' adapted to the rectangular box, but to A cos. ? æ and B' sin. ?æ.) We have therefore A: B=CL: LI, and LI- o Also, because CI = CL?LT;, we have A: / 5V Ba = CL: CI, and J5 T/: c1æ+5ſie resistance in the direction LC is properly measured by m A v?, as has been already observed. Thereſore the resistance in the direction IC must he expressed by m / &7 B v?; or (making C the surface which is equal to X7 FB, and which vill thereſore have the same perpendicular resistance to the water having the velocity ) it may bæ expressed by m C ⸗. Therefore, because there is an equilibrium between the impulse and resistance, we have m C ę?, =n S (Vsin. av — m sin. 5F ã)? and C è, or ꝗ C  æ S (V- sin. av sin b+æ), and / 5 Co =VS (V-5in. abv. sin. b +7) V5 Vsin. a ii Therefore v v VCF 75 m 5 æ = SEAMANSHIP. 635 Observe that the quantity which is the coeſficient of V in this equation is a common number; for sin. a is a number, being a decimal fraction of the radius I. Sin.  æ is also a number, for the same reasonn. And since m and n were numbers of pounds, - or ꝗ is a common number. And because C and S are surſaces or quantities of one kind, is also a common number. This is the simplest expression that we can think of for the velocity acquired by the ship, though it must be acknowledged to be too complex to be of very prompt usee Its complication arises from the necessity of introducing the leevay x. This aſſects the whole oſ the denominator; for the surface C depends on it, because C is = / A B, and A and B are analogous to A cos.2 æx and B' sin.? æ. 445. But we can deduce some important consequences from this theorem. While the surſace S oſ the sail actually filled by the wind remains the same, and the angle DCB, which in future we shall call the TriM of the sails, also remains the same, both the leeway x and the substituted surſace C remain the same. The denominator is thereſore constant; and the velocity oſ the ship is proportional to / S V- sin. a; that is, directly as the velocity of the wind, directly as the sine of the absolute inclination of the wind to the yard, and directly as the square root of the surſace of the sails. We also learn from the construction of the figure that FG parallel to the yard euts CE in a given ratio. For CF is in a constant ratio to E g, as has been just now demonstrated. And the angle DCF is constant, Therefore CF sin. b, or FH or G4, is proportional o Eg, and OC to EC, or EC i is cut in one proportion, whatever may be the angle ECD, 50 long as the angle DCF is constant. We also see that it is very possible for the velocity oſ the ship on an oblique course to exceed that of the wind. This 636 SEAMANSHIP. sin. a vill be the case when the number .c ſ q 5 + sin. b+2 æſ C ceeds unity, or vhen sin. a is greater than 5 +sin b Fæ Nov this may easily be by sufficiently enlargings and diminishing  +æ. It is indeed frequently seen in ſine sailers with all their sails set and not hauled too near the vind. We remarked above that the angle oſ leeway æ affects the whole denominator of the fraction which expresses the velocity. Let it be observed that the angle ICL is the complement of LCD, or of b. Therefore CL: LI, or A: BS l: tan. ICL, =I: cot. b, and BA. cotan. . NoW A is equivalent to A cos.? x, and thus  becomes a function of 2z. C is evidently so, being / / A? + B?. Thereſore before the value oſ this fraction can be obtained, we must be able to compute, by our knowledge of the form oſ the ship, the value of A for every angle æ of leeway. This can be done only by resolving her bows into a great number oſ elementary planes, and computing the impulses on each mi adding them into one sum. The computation is of immens labour, as may be seen by one example given by Bouguer When the leeway is but small, not exceeding ten degree the substitution oſ the rectangular prism of one determined form is abundantly exact for all leeways contained within this limit; and ve shall soon see reason for being contented with this approximation. We may nowv make use oſ the formula expressing the velocity for solving the chieſ prblems in this part oſ the seamans task. 446. And first let ĩt be required to determine the best p& sition of the sail ſor standing on a given course a b, vhen CE the direction and velocity oſf the wind, and its angh vith the course W CF, are givenn. This problem has exercised the talents of the mathematicians ever since the day of Newton. In the article PNEUNATICS we gave the sl- SEAMANSHIP. 637 tion of one very nearly related to it, namely, to determine the position of the sail which would produce the greatest impulse in the direction of the coursee. The solution was to place the yard CD in such a position that the tangent oſ the angle FCD may be one-half of the tangent of the angle DCW. This will indeed be the best position oſ the sail for beginning the motion; but as soon as the ship begins to move in the direction CF, the effective impulse of the wind is diminished, and also its inclination to the sail. The angle DC u diminishes continually as the ship accelerates: for CF is now accompanied by its equal e E, and by an angle ECe, or WCu. CP increases, and the impulse on the sail diminishes, till an equilibrium obtains between the resistance oſ the water and the impulse of the wind. The impulse is now measured by C æ? x sin. ? e CD instead oſ CE? x sin.? ECD, that is, by EG instead of E g. This introduction of the relative motion of the wind renders the actual solution of the problem extremely diſficult. It is very easily expressed geometrically: Divide the angle u CF in such a manner that the tangent of DCF may be half of the tangent of DC , and the problem may be constructed geometrieally as follows. Let WCF (Plate X. fig. 7.) be the angle between the sail and course Round the centre C deseribe the circle WDFY; produce WC to Q, so that CQ42W C, and drav QY parallel to CF cutting the circle in Y; bisect the arch WY in D, and drav DC. DC is the proper position of the yard. Draw the chord WY, cutting CD in V, and CF in T; draw the tangent PD cutting CF in S, and CY in R. It is evident that WY, PR, are both perpendicular to CD, and are hisected in Vand D; thereſore (by reason oſ the parallels QY, CF) 4: 3QW: CW, / YW: TW, =RP: SP. Therefore PD: PS 2:3, and PD: DS 2: . Q. E. D. But this division cannot be made to the best advantage till the ship has attained its greatest velocity, and the angle w CF has been produced. 636 vill be the case l ceeds unity, or b 2 Now th and diminishin sailers with all BEAMANSHIP. 630 onl process is the same as the former, only e is here a constant quantity. 449. These are the three principal problems which can be solved by means oſ the knowledge that we have obtainæd of the motion of the ship when impelled by an oblique sail, and therefore making leeway; and they may be considered as an abstract of this part oſ M. Bouguer's work. We have only pointed out the process ſor this solution, and have even omitted some things taken notice of by M. Bezout in his very elegant compendium. Our reasons vill appear as we go onn. The learned reader will readily see the extreme diſſiculty oſ the subject, and the immense caleulations which are necessary even in the simplest cases, and vill grant that it is out of the power of any but an expert analyst to derive any use ſrom them; but the mathematician can calculate tables for the use of the practical seaman. Thus he can calculate the best position oſ the sails for advancing in a course 9 from the wind, and the velocity in that course; then for 85, 80, 75, &e. M. Bouguer has given a table of this kind: but to avoid the immense diſficulty oſ the process, he has adapted it to the apparent direction oſ the wind. We have inserted a few oſ his numbers, suited to such cases as can he of service, namely, when all the sails draw, or none stand in the way oſ otherss Column Ist is the apparent angle of the wind and course; column 2d is the corresponding angle of the sails and keel; and column 3d is the apparent angle of the sails and vind. I 2 3 w CF DCB w CD 109° 5 420 30 Gle2u 99 13 40 50 13 94 25 37 30 56 55 89 28 E 54 2 s84 29 32 30 51 53 79 06 30 49 06 73 39 L7 30 46 90 65 / 43 ſ SEAMANSHTP. 641 smaller we make the angle of incidence, real or apparent, the smaller will be the velocity of the ship; but it may happen that we shall gain more to windward, or get sooner avay ſrom a lee-coast, or any object of danger, by sailing slowly on one course than by sailing quickly on another. We have seen that while the trim of the sails remains the same, the leeway and the angle of the yard and course remains the same, and that the velocity of the ship is as the sime oſ the angle of real incidence, that is, as the sine of the angle of the sail and the real direction of the wind. Let the ship AB Plate X. fig. 8.) hold the course CF, with the wind blowing in the direction WC, and having her yards DCD braced up to the smallest angle BCD which the rigging can admit. Let CF be to CE as the velocity of the ship to the velocity of the wind; join FE and drav C u parallel to EF; it is evident that FE is the relative motion of the wind, and w CD is the relative incidence on the sail. Draw FO parallel to the yard DC, and describe a circle through the points COF; then we say that iſ the ship, with the same wind and the same trim oſ the same drawing sails, be made to sail on any other course Cf, her velocity along CF is to the velocity along Cf as CF is to Cf; or, in other words, the ship ill employ the same time in going from C to any point of the circumference CFO. Join f O. Then, because the angles CFO, C f O are on the same chord CO, they are equal, and ſ O is parallel to d C d, the new position of the yard corresponding to the new position oſ the keel a b, making the angle d C L=DCB. Also, by the nature of the cirele, the line CF is to Cf as the sine of the angle COF to the sine of the angle CO, that is (on account of the parallels CD, OF and Cd, O,) as the sine of WCD to the sine of WC d. But when the trim of the sails remains the same, the velocity of the ship is as the sine of the angle of the sail with the direction oſ the wind; thereſore CF is to C ſ as the velocity on CF o that on Cf, and the proposition is demonstrated. VOL. IV. 25 SEAMANSIIP. G43 452. It is plain that this problem includes that of plying to windward. We have only to suppose ECM to be 9°; then, taking our example in the same ship, with the same trim and the same leeway, we have , + x = 40°. This taken from 90 leaves 500 and WC n = 9  25=065, and the ship's head must lie 60 from the wind, and the yard must be 25° ſrom it. It must be observed here, that it is not always eligible to select the course which vill remove the ship fastest from the given line CM; it may be more prudent to remove ſrom it more securely though more slowly. In such cases the procedure is very simple, viz. to shape the course as near the wind as is possible. The reader will also easily see that the propriety oſ these practices is confined to those courses only where the practicable trim of the sails is not sufficiently sharp. Whenever the course lies so far ſrom the wind that it is pussible to make the tangent oſ the apparent angle of the wind and sail double the tangent of the sail and course, it should be done. 453 These are the chief practical consequences which can be deduced from the theory. But we should consider how far this adjustment of the sails and course can be performed. And here occur diſſiculties so great as to make it almost impracticablee. We have always supposed the position of the surſace oſ the sail to be distinetly observable and measurable; but this can hardly be aſfirmed even with respect to a sail stretched on a yard. Here we supposed the surface of the sail to have the same inclination to the keel that the yard has. This is by no means the case; the sail assumes a concave form, of which it is almost impossible to assign the direction of the mean impulse. We believe that this is always considerably to leeward of a perpendicular to the yard, lying between CI and CE (Plate X. fig. 6.) This is of some advantage, being equivalent to a sharper trim We cannot aſfirm this, however, with any confidence, because it renders ] SEAMANSHIP. 645 ticle on the tESiIsTancE oſ Fluidls We subjoin another abstract oſ them in the following table; where col. Ist gives the angle of incidence; col. 2d gives the impulsions really observed; col. 3 the impulses, had they followed the duplicate ratio of the sines; and col. 4th the impulses, if they were in the simple ratio of the sines Anvi] Impui- ſIupub:] Impuise oſ sion ns Incid ſobserved.] Sine⸗. 1000 980 958 908 845 T 698 615 548 480 440 424 414 406 400 Here ve see an enormous difference in the great obliquities. When the angle of incidence is only six degrees, the observed impulse is forty times greater than the theoretical impulse; at 120 ĩt ĩs ten times greater; at I& ĩt is more than four times greater; and at 24 it is almost three limes greater. No wonder then that the deductions from this theory are 50 useless and so unlike what we fæmiliarly observe. We took notice oſ this vhen we were considering the leeway oſ a rectangular box, and thus sav a reason for admitting an incomparably smaller leeay than what would result from the laborious computations necessary by the theory. This error in theory has as great an influence on the impulsions oſ air when acting obliquely on a sail; and the experiments of Mr. Robins and of the Chevalier Borda on the oblique 3 SEAMANSHIP. 647 337; and the trim 62], with the incidence only 6, gives 353. Hence it would at first sight appear that the angle DCB of 6 and WCD of 6 would be better for holding a course within six points of the wind than any more oblique position of the sails; but it will only give a greater initial impulse. As the ship accelerates, the wind apparently comes ahead, and ve must continue to brace up as the ship freshens her way. It is not unusual for her to acquire halſ or two thirds of the velocity of the wind; in which case the wind comes apparently ahead more than two points, vhen the yards must be braced up to 350, and this allows an impulse no greater than about 7. Now this is very frequently observed in good ships, which in a brisk gale and smooth water vill go five or six knots close-hauled. the ship's head six points from the wind, and the sails no more than just ſull, bui ready to shiver by the smallest luſ. All this would be impossible by the usual theory; and in this respect these experiments of the French academy give a fine illustration of the seaman's praotic. They account for what we should otherwise be much puzzled to explain; and the great progress which is made by a ship close-hauled being perfectly agreeable to what we should expect ſrom the law of oblique impulsion deducible from these so often mentioned experiments, vhile it is totally incompatible with the common theory, should make us abandon the theory without hesitation, and strenuously set about the establishment of another, founded entirely on experiments. For this purpuse the experiments should be made on the oblique impulsions oſ air on as great a scale as possible, and in as great a variety of circumstances, 50 as to ſurnish a series of impulsions for all angles of obliquity. We have but four or five experiments on this subject, viz. tvo by Mr. Robins and two or three by Borda. Having thus gotten a series of impulsions, it is very practicahle to raise on this ſoundation a practical institute, and to give a table oſ the velocities of a ship suited to every angle SEAMANSHIP. 649 impulse of ſluids, which is found so inconsistent with observation, and of vhose ſallacy all its authors, from Newton to DAlembert, entertained strong suspicions Again, we beg leave to recommend this view of the subject to the attention of the SociETY POR THE INPROVEMENT OF NAVAL AxcuiTECTURE. Should these patriotic gentlemen entertain a favourable opinion of the plan, and honour us with their corFespondence, we will cheerſully impart to them our notions of the vay in which both these trains of experiments may be prosecuted with success, and results obtained in which we may confide; and we content ourselves at present with offering to the public these hints, which are not the speculations of a man of mere science, but of one vho, with a competent knovledge of the laws of meehanical nature, has the experience oſ several years service in the royal navy, where the art of working of ships was a ſfavourite object of his scientiſic attention. 455. With these observations we conclude our discussion oſ the first part of the seaman's task, and now proceed to consider the means that are employed to prevent or to produce any deviations ſfrom the uniform rectilineal course which has been selected. Here the ship is to be considered as a body in ſree space, convertible round her centre of inertia. For whatever may be the point round which she turns, this motion may alvays be considered as compounded of a rotation round an axis passing through her centre oſ gravity or inertia. She is impelled by the wind and by the water acting on many surfaces differently inclined to each other, and the impulse on each is perpendicular to the surſacee In order thereſore that she may continue steadily in one course, it is not only necessary that the impelling forces, estimated in their mean direction, be equal and opposite to the resisting forces estimated in their mean direction; but alo that these two directions may pass through one point, otherwise she will be affected as a log of wood is when pushed in opposite direc- SEAMANSHIP. 651 bows: It would happen to the parallelopiped of Plate X. fig. 2. which was sustaining a lateral impulsion B.sin æ, and a direct impulsion Acos.? x. These are continued for a moment after the annihilation oſ the sail; but being no longer opposed by a force in the direction CD, but by a force in the direction C b, the force Bsin. x must prevail, and the body is not only retarded in its motion, but its head turns towards the wind. But this eſfect of the leeway is greatly increased by the curved ſorm of the ships bows. This occasions the centre of effſort of all the impulsions of the water on the lee side of the ship to be very far ſforward, and this so much the more remarkably as she is sharper aſoree It is in general not much abaſt the foremast. Now the centre of the ships tendency to continue her motion is the same with her centre of gravily, and this is generally but a little before the mainmast. She is therefore in the same condition nearly as if she were pushed at the mainmast in a direction parallel to C b, and at the foremast by a ſorce parallel to IC. The evident consequence oſ this is a tendency to come up to the wind. This is independent of all situation of the sails, provided only that they have been trimme d obliquely. 460 This tendency of the ships head to windward is called õRrIPING in the seaman's language, and is greatest in ships which are sharp forward, as we have said already. This circumstance is easily understoodc Whatever is the direction of the ship's motion, the absolute impulse on that part of the bow immediately contiguous to B is perpendicular to that very part of the surſace. The more acute, therefore, that the angle of the bow is, the more will the impulse on that part be perpendicular to the keel, and the greater vill be its energy to turn the head to windvard. 461. Thus ve are enabled to understand or to see the propriety of the disposition of the sails oſ a shipgg. We see her crouded with sails forward, and even many sails extended far before her bow, such as the spritsail, the bowsprit topsail, the ſore-topmast staysail, the jib, and flying jlb. The 652 BEAMANSHIP. sails abaſt are comparatively smalle. The sails on the miZenmast are much smaller than those on the foremast. All the staysails hoisted on the mainmast may he considered as headsails, because their centres of eſfort are considerably before the centre of gravity oſ the ship; and notwithstanding this disposition, it generally requires a small action of the rudder to counteract the windward tendency oſ the leebow. This is considered as a good quality vhen moderate; because it enables the seaman to throw the sails aback, and stop the ships vay in a moment, if she be in danger ſrom any thing ahead; and the ship which does not carry a litile oſ a weather helm, is always a dull sailer. 462. In order to judge somewhat more accurately oſ the action oſ the water and sails, suppose the ship AB (Plate X. ſig. 9) to have its sails on the mizenmast D, the mainmast E, and foremast F, braced up or trimmed alike, and that the three lines Dũ, E e, F, perpendicular to the sails, are in the proportion oſ the impulses on the sailss. The ship is driven ahead and to leeward, and moves in the path a C h. This path is so inclined to the line of the keel, that the medium direction of the resistance of the water is parallel t the direction oſ the impulse. A line CI may be dravn parallel to the lines D i, E e, F f, and equal to their sum: and it may be drawn ſrom such a point C, that the actions on all the parts of the hull between C and B may balance the momenta of all the actions on the hull between C and A. This point may justly be called the centre of effort, or the centre of resislance We cannot determine this point ſor want oſ a proper theory oſ the resistance oſ ſluidss Nay, although experiments like those oſ the Parisian academy should give us the most perſeet knovledge oſ the intensity oſ the oblique impulses on a square ſooſ, we should hardly be benefited by them, ſor the action of the water on a square foot oſ the hull at ꝑ, ſor instance, is so modified by the intervention oſ the stream oſ water which has struck the hull about B, and glided along the bow B o ꝑ, that the pressure SEAMANSHIT. 653 on ꝑ is totally different from what it would have been vere it a square foot or surface detached from the rest, and presented in the same position to the water moving in the direction b C. For it is found, that the resistances given to planes joined so as to form a vedge, or to curved surſaces, are videly diſſerent from the accumulated resistances, calculated for their separate parts, agreeably to the experiments of the academy on single surſaces. We thereſore do not attempt to ascertain the point C by theory; but it may be accurately determined by the experiments which we have so strongly recommended; and we offer this as an additional inducement for prosecuting them. 463. Drav through C a line perpendicular to CI, that is, parallel to the sails; and let the lines of impulse of the three sails cut iĩt in the points i, ſ, and m. This line i m may be considered as a lever, moveable round C, and acted on at the points i, ſ, and m, by three forces. The rotatory momentum of the sails on the mizenmast is Di X i C; that oſ the sails on the mainmast is E e X  C; and the momentum of the sails on the foremast is F  X m C. The two first tend to press ſorward the arm Ci, and then to turn the ship's head towards the wind. The action oſ the sails on the ſoremast tends to pull the arm Cm forward, and produce a contrary rotationn. If the ship under these three sails keeps steadily in her course, without the aid oſ the rudder, we must have Di x i C+ Ee X I CæPF f x m C. This is very possible, and is oſten seen in a ship under her mizen- topsail, main- topsail, and fore- topsail, all parallel to one another, and their surfaces duly proportioned by reefing. If more sails are set, ve must alvays have a similar equilibrium. A certain number of them will have their efforts directed from the larboard arm of the lever i m lying to leeward of CI, and a certain number will have their eſſorts directed from the starboard arm lying to windward of CI. The sum oſ the products of each of the ſirst set, by their distancefrom C, must be æqual to the sum of the similar produets oſ SEAMANSHI?. 655 lever ſorward perpendicularly in the point  E e, impelling it forward in the point 7; F f, impelling it forward in the point v; and CI, impelling it backward in the point t. These forces balance each other both in respeet of progressive motion and of rotatory energy; for CI was taken equal to the sum of Dd, Ee, and F f; so that no acceleration or retardation of the ships progress in her course is supBut by taking avay the mizen-topsail, both the equilibriums are destroyedc A part D d of the accelerating foree is taken away; and yet the ship, by her inertia or inherent force, tends, ſor a moment, to proceed in the direction Cꝓ with her former velocity; and by this tendency exerts for a moment the same pressure CI on the water, and sustains the same resistance IC. She must thereſore be retarded in her motion by the excess of the resistance IC over the remaining impelling forces E e and F, that is, by a force equal and opposite to D d. She vill therefore he retarded in the same manner as if the mizen- topsail were still set, and a force equal and opposite to its action were applied to G the centre of gravity, and she would soon acquire a smaller velocity, which would again bring all things into equilibrium; and she would stand on in the same course, without changing either her leeway or the position oſ her head. But the equilibrium of the lever is also destroyed. It is nov acted on by three forces only, viz. E e and F f, impelling it forward in the points r and ⸗, and IC impelling it backward in the point t. Make rv: ro=Ee +Ff: Fſ, and make o ꝑ purallel to CI and equal to E e +F ſ. Then we knov, from the common principles of mechanies, that the force o ꝑ acting at o will have the sume momentum or energy to turn the lever round any point whatever as the two forces E e and F ſ applied at r and 9; and now the lever is acted on by two forces, viz. IC, urging it backwards in the point t, and o ꝑ urging it forwards in the point o. It musttherefore turn round like a floating log, which gets two BEAMANSHIP. 657 the part oſ the reader will now enable him to trace the modus operandi through all its steps. We now see that, in respect both of progressive motion and of conversion, the ship is affected by shivering the sail D, in the same manner as if a force equal and opposite to D d vere applied at D, or at any point in the line Dd. We must now have recourse to the principles of rotatory motion. Let p represent a particle of matter, r its radius vector, or its distance » G from an axis passing through the centre oſ gravity G, and let M represent the whole quantity of matter oſ the ship. Then its momentum of inertia is&= ſ Pr (See RorarioN)y) The ship, impelled in the point D by a force in the direetion d D, vill begin to iurn round a spontancous vertical axis, passing through a point S of the line G, which is drawn through the centre oſ gravity G, perpendicular to the direction d D of the external force, and the distance GS of this axis from the centre of gravity is ſe õ ;4 Rorarioy,) and it is taken on the opposite side . from q, that is, S and  are on opposite sides of G. Let us express the external force by the symbol F. It is equivalent to a certain number of pounds, being the pressure of the wind moving with the velocity V and inclination au on the surface of the saill D; and may thereſore be computed either by the theoretical or experimental law of oblique impulses. Having obtained this, we can ascertain the angular velocity of the rotation and the absolute velocity of any given point of the ship by means of the theorems established under RoraTioN. 466. But beſore we proceed to this investigation, we shall consider the action of the rudder, which operates precisely in the same manner. Let the ship AB (Plate X. fig. 11.) have her rudder in the position AD, the helm being hard VOL. Iv. 2r SEAMANSHIP. 659 moorings, so that her bow may be a fixed point. Let a small tow. line be laid out ſrom her stern or quarter at right angles to the keel, and connected with some apparatus fitted up on shore or on board another ship, by which the strain on it may be accurately measured; a person conversant with mechanies ill see many ways in which this ean be done. Perhaps the ſollowing may be as good as any: Let the end of the tow. line be fixed to some point as high out of the water as the point of the ship from which it is given out, and let this be very high. Let a block with a hook be on the rope, and a considerable weight hung on this hook. Things being thus prepared, put down the helm. to a certain angle, so as to cause the ship to sheer off from the point 1o which the ſar end of the tow- lne is attached. This will stretch the rope, and raise the weight out oſ the water. Now heave upon the rope, to bring the ship back again to her former position, with her keel in the direction oſ the stream. When this position is attained, note carefully the form of the rope, that is, the angle which its two parts make vith the horizonn. Call this angle . Every person acquainted with these subjects knows that the horizontal strain is equal to half the weight multiplied by the cotangent of a, or that 2 is to the cotangent of a as the weight to the horizontal strain. Nov it is this strain which balances and therefore measures the action oſ the rudder, or D e in Plate X. fig. 1. Therefore, to have the absolute impulse D d, we must increase D e in the proportion of radius to the secant of the angle b which the rudder makes with the keel In a great ship sailing six miles in an hour, the impulse on the rudder inclined 30 to the keel is not less than S3000 pounds. The surface oſ the rudder of such a ship contains near 80 square feet. It is not, however, very necessary to know this absolute impulse D d, because it is its part De alone which measures the energy of the rudder in produeing a conversionn. Such experiments, made with various positions of the rudder, vill give its encrgies corresponding SEAMANSHIP. ſiſiJl perpendicularly at . The consequence of this will be, an incipient conversion of the ship about a vertical axis passing through some point S in the line ꝗ G, lying on the other side of G from ꝗ; and we have, as in the former case, GS  r Gq 469. Thus the action and eſfects oſ the sails and oſ the rudder are perſectly similar, and are to be considered in the same manner. We see that the action of the rudder, though of a small surface in comparison of the sails, must he very great: For the impulse oſ water is many hundred times greater than that of the wind; and the arm ꝗ G of the lever, by which it acts, is incomparably greater than that by which any of the ĩmpulsions on the sails produces its effect; accordingly the ship yields much more rapidly to its action than she does to the lateral impulse of a sail. Observe here, that if G were a fixed or supported axis, it would be the same thing whether the absolute force D d of the rudder acts in the direction D d, or its transverse part De acts in the direction De, both would produce the same rotation; but it is not so in a free body. The force Dd both tends to retard the ship's motion and to produce a rotation: It retards it as much as if the same force D d had been immediately applied to the centree And thus the real motion of the ship is compounded of a motion of the centre in a direction parallel to Dd, and of a motion round the centre These two constitute the motion round S. 470. As the effects of the action oſ the rudder are both more remarkable and somewhat more simple than those of the sails, ve shall employ them as an example of the mechanism of the motions of conversion in general; and as we must content ourselves in a work like this with what is very general, we shall simplify the investigation by attending only to the motion of conversion. We can get an accurate notion of the whole motion, if wanted for any purpose, by combin- 662Q SEAMANSHIP. ing the progressive or retrograde motion parallel to D d with the motion of rotation which we are about to determine. In this case, then, we observe, in the first place, that the Dd qG angular velocity (see Rorariox,) is 7r ; and, as vas pr shown in that article, this velocity of rotation increases in the proportion of the time of the ſorces uniform action, and the rotation would be uniformly accelerated if the ſorces did really act uniformly. This, however, cannot be the case, because, by the ship's change oſ position and change oſ progressive velocity, the direction and intensity of the impelling force is continually changing. But if two ships are performing similar evolutions, ĩt is obvious that the changes of forcœ ure similar in similar parts of the evolution. Thereſore the consideration of the momentary evolution is suſficient for enabling us to compare the motions of ships actuated by smilar forces, which is all we have in view at present. The velocity v, generated in any time ? by the continuance of an invariable momentary acceleration (hich is all that we mean by saying that it is produced by the action of a constant accelerating ſorce,) is as the acceleration and ſhe time jointly. Now what we call the angular velocity is nthing but this momentary accelerationn. Thereſore the veF qG 2t. r 471. The expression of the angular velocity is also the expresion of the velocity » of a point situated at the distance I from the axis G. Let æ be the space or arch oſ revolution deseribed in the the time t by this point, whose distance from G is æ l. locity v generated in the time ſ is= : . F G Then ? =v t tt, and taking the fluent : ſ r F qG t2. This arch measures the whole angle of rotation pr SEAMANSHIP. 633 accomplished in the time . These are therefore as the squares of the times from the beginning oſ the rotation. Those evolutions are equal which are measured by equal archess. Thus two motions oſ 45 degrees each are equal. Thereſore because ? is the same in both, the quantity F G ſi is a constant quantity, and ſ? is reciprocally proportional to , or is proportional to pr eu , and tis proportional to Tor . That is to say, the times oſ the similar evolutions of two ships are as the square root of the momentum of inertia directly, and as the square root of the momentum of the rudder or sail inversely. This will enable us to make the comparison easily. Let us suppose the ships perfectly similar in form and rigging, and to differ only in length L and I; ſ P R?is to ſ prẽas Lto I. For the similar particles P and ꝓ contain quantities of matter which are as the cubes of their lineal dimensions, that is, as L3 to I. And because the particles are similarly situated, R? is to r? as L tol. Therefore P R: p r mLò: 5. Nov I is to ſfas L to I'. Tor the surfaces oſ the similar rudders or sails are as the squares oſ their lineal dimensions, that is, as L to I'. And, lasily, G q is to gq as L to I, and therefore F G q: f g L8: F. Therefore we have T 472. Therefore the times of perſorming similar evolutions with similar ships are proportional to the lengihs of the ships when both are sailing equally ſast; and since the evolutions are similar, and the forces vary similarly in their different  I, and 664 SEAMANSHIP. parts, what is here demonstrated of the smallest incipient evolutions is true of the wholee They thereſore not only deseribe equal angles of revolution, but also similar curves A small ship, therefore, works in less time and n les room than a great ship, and this in the proportion oſ its length. This is a great advantage in all cases, particularly in wearing, in order to sail on the other tack close- hauled. In this case she will always be to windward and ahead of the large ship, when both are got on the other tack. It would appear at first sight that the large ship will have the advantage in tacking. Indeed the large ship is ſarther to windward when again trimmed on the other tack than the small ship when she is just trimmed on the other tack. But this happened before the large ship had completed her evolution, and the small ship, in the mean time, has been going forward on the other tack, and going to windward. She will thereſore he before the large ship's beam, and perhaps as far to windard. 473. We have seen that the velocity of rotation is proportional, cæteris paribus, to F X G . F means the absolute impulse on the rudder or sail, and is always perpendicular to its surfacee This absolute impulse on a sail depends on the obliquity of the wind to its surfacee The usual theory says, that it is as the square of the sine of incidence: but we find this not truee. We must content ourselves with expressing it by some as yet unknown function 9 of the angle oſ incidence a, and call it 9 a; and if S be the surface of the sail. and V the velocity of the wind, the absolute impulse is n V: S X  a. This acts (in the case of the mizen- topsail, Plate X. fig. 10.) by the lever ꝗ G, which is equal to DG X cos. DG q, and DG q is equal to the angle of the yard and keel; which angle we formerly called . Thereſore its energy in producing a rotation is n VS X 9 a X DG X cos. b. Leaving out the constant quantities n, V, S, and DG, its energy is proportional to 9  X cos. . In order, thereſore, that any sail may have the greatest power to produce a r- SEAMANSHIP. 665 tation round G, it must be so trimmed that  a x cos. b may be a maximum. Thus, if ve would trim the sails on the foremast, so as to pay the ship off from the wind right ahead vith the greatest effect, and if ve take the experiments of the French academicians as proper measures of the oblique impulses of the wind on the sail, ve ill brace up the yard to an angle of 48 degrees with the keel. The impulse eorresponding to 48° is 615, and the cosine of 45 is 669. These give a product of 411485. If we brace the sail to 54 44, the angle assigned by the theory, the effective impulse is 405274. If we make the angle 45°, the impulse is 408774. It appears then that 459 is preſerable to either oſ the others. But the difference is inconsiderable, as in all cases of maximum a small deviation ſrom the best position is not very detrimental. But the difference between the theory and this experimental mensure vill be very great when the impulses of the wind are of necessity very obliquee. Thus, in tacking ship, as soon as the headsails are taken aback, they serve to aid the evolution, as is evident: But i we were now to adopt the maxim inculcated by the theory, ve should immediately round in the weather-braces so as to increase the impulse on the sail, because it is then very small; and although we by this means make yard more square, and thereſore diminish the rotatory momentum of this impulse, yet the impulse is more increased (by the theory) than its vertical lever is diminished.Let us examine this a little more particularly, because it is reckoned one of the nicest points of seamanship to aid the ship's coming round by means of the headsails; and experienced seamen differ in their practice in this manœuvre. Suppose the yard braced up to 409, which is as much as can be usually done, and that the sail shivers (the bowlines are usually let go when the helm is put down), the sail immediately takes aback, and in a moment we may suppose an incidence of õ degrees. The impulse corresponding to this is 400 (by experiment), and the cosine of 40 is 766. This gives 306400 for the eſſective impulsee To 666 SEAMANSHIP. proceed according to the theory, we should brace the yard to 70°, which would give the wind (now 34 on the weatherbow) an incidence of nearly 360, and the sail an inclination oſ 20 to the intended motion, which is perpendicular to the keel. For the tangent of 20 is about  of the tangent of S6°. Let us now see what effective impulse the experimental law of oblique impulsions vill give for this adjustment of the sails. The experimental impulse for 369 is 480; the cosine of 70° is 342; the produet is 164160, not much exceeding the half of the former. Nay, the impulse for 369, calculated by the theory, would have been only 346, and the effective impulse only 118332. And it must be farther observed, that this theoretical adjustment would tend greatly to check the evolution, and in most cases would entirely mar it, by checking the sips motion ahead, and consequently the action of the rudder, which is the most powerful agent in the evolution; for here would be a great impulse directed almost astern. We vere justifiable, thereſore, in saying, in the beginning of this article, that a seaman would frequently find himself baſſled if he were to work a ship according to the rules deduced from M. Bouguer's work; and we see by this instance of what importance it is to have the oblique impulsions of fluids ascertained experimentallyy. The practice of the most experienced seamen is direetly the opposite to this theoretical maxim, and its success greatly confirms the useſulness of these experiments oſ the academicians so often praised by us. We return again to the general consideration of the rotai i F. qG j tory motion. We ſound the velocity v2/ / It is rm thereſore proportional, cæteris poribus, to 3 G. We have seen in what manner ꝗ G depends on the position and situstion oſ the sail or rudder when the point G is fixed. But it also depends on the position of G. With respect to the ac- SEAMANSHIP. 6617 tion oſ the rudder, it is evident that it is 30 much the more poverſul as it is more remote ſfrom G. The distance from G may be inereased either by moving the rudder farther aſt, or G farther forvard. And as it is oſ the utmost importance that a ship answer her helm with the greatest promptitude, those circumstances have heen attended to which distin~guished ſine steering ships from such as had not this quality; and it is in a great measure to he ascribed to this, that, in the gradual improvement of naval architecture, the centre of gravity has been placed ſar forvard. Perhaps the notion oſ a centre of gravity did not come nto the thoughts of the rude huilders in early times; but they observed that those boats and ships steered best which had their extreme breadth before the middle point, and consequently the bows not s acute as the stern. This is so contrary to what one would expect, that it attracted attention more forcibly; and, heing somewhat mysterious, it might prompt to attempts oſ improvement, by exceeding in this singular maxim. We believe that it has been carried as far as is compatible vith other essential requisites in a ship. 4T4. We believe that this is the chieſ cireumstance in vhat is called the trim of a ship; and it vere greatly to he vished that the best place for the eentre of gravity could he accurately ascertained. A practic| prevails, which is the opposite of vhat we are now advancing. It is usual to load a ship so that her keel is not horizontal, but lower abaſt. This is found to improve her steerage The reason of this is obvious. It increases the acting surface oſ the rudder, and allows the water to come at it with much greater ſreedom and regularity; and it generally diminishes the griping of the ship ſorward, by removing a part oſ the bows out of the water. It has not always this effect; for the form of the harping aloſt is frequently such, that the tendency to gripe is diminished by immersing more of the bow in the vater. 668 SEAMANSHIT. But waving these circumstances, and attending only to the rotatory energy of the rudder, we see that it is oſ advantage to carry the centre of gravity forward. The same advantage is gained to the action of the after sails But, on the other hand, the action of the headsails is diminished by it; and we may call every sail a headsail whose centre of gravity is before the centre of gravity of the ship; that is all the sails hoisted on the bowsprit and foremast, and the staysails hoisted on the mainmast; for the centre oſ gravity is seldom far before the mainmast. Suppose that when the rudder is put into the position AD Plate X. fig. Il.), the centre of gravity could be shiſted to g, 0 as to increase  G, and that this is done without increasing the sum of the products » ?. It is obvious that the velocity oſ conversion vill be increased in the proportion of 5 G to 5 8. This is very possible, by bringing to that side of the ship parts of her loading which were situated at a distance from G on the other sidee Nay, we can male this change in such a manner that ſ p r shall even be less than it was beſore, by taking care that every thing which we shiſt shall be nearer to  than it was ſformerly to G. Suppoæ it all placed in one spot m, and that m is the quantity oſ maiter s0 shiſted, while M is the quantity of matter in the whole ship. It is only necessary that mg G? shall be les than the sum of the produets p 7 corresponding to the malter which has been shiſtedl Now, although the matter which is easily moveable is generally very small in comparison to the whole matter of the ship, and therefore can make but a small change in the place of the centre of gravity, it may ſrequently be brought from places so remote, that it may occasion a very sensible diminution oſ the quantity ſr r3, which expresses the whole momentum of inertia. 475. This explains a practice of the seamen in small wherries or skiſfs, who in putting about are accustomed to place SEAMANSHIP. 669 themselves to leeward oſ the mast. They even find that they can aid the quick motions of these light boats by the way in which they rest on their two feet, sometimes leaning all on one foot, and sometimes on the other. And we have oſten seen this evolution very sensibly accelerated in a ship of war, by the crew running suddenly, as the helm is put down, to the lee-bow. And we have heard it asserted by very expert seamen, that aſter all attempts to wear ship (aſter lying-to in a storm) have failed, they have succeeded by the crev collecting themselves near the weather fore-shrouds the moment the helm was put down. It must be agreeable to the reflecting seaman to see this practice supported by undoubted mechanical principles. 476. It will appear paradoxical to say that the evolution may be accelerated even by an addition of matter to the ship; and though it is only a piece of curiosity, our readers may vish to be made sensible of it. Let m be the addition, placed in some point m lying beyond G from ?2. Let S be the spontaneous centre of conversion before the addition. Let v be the velocity of rotation round g, that is, the velocity of a point whose distance from g is I, and let è be the radius vector, or distance oſ a particle from 2. We have (toF 18&But we knov (Rorarion) TATION) vm— . sre +nn i g ht ſe=ſrr +M: G 5:. Thereſore » æ F ————/AS8Let us determine G g and ſrr 4M 6ę n nę. mg and ꝗ⸗. Let m G be called 22. Then, by the nature of the centre oſ gravity, M +m: M = G m: gm =/ z: gm, and 2 Et z. In like mangm=p +m* and m gm Mm: ner, M G ° ́ 2. Now m M?: +- M m æ ò70 SEAMANSHIP. Mm x M + m. Therefore M G 2 + m gm æ Mn x (M A+ m) M m æn , V  u- Let n be = 57 then M. G 4m gm =Mn æ. Alo G 2=n1 be ing = 3ĩ 2  Let ꝗG be called e: then 3591 +1: Also let SG be called e. We have now for the expression of the velocity o= Thereſore, finally, v=qJ” X Had there been no addition of matter made, ve should have had It remains to show, that æ may be s taken that  may be Iess than  Now, ifc be orase e to æ, that ĩs, if æ be taken equal to e, the two fractions will be equal. But if æ be less than e, that is, if the additional matter is placed anywhere between S and G, the complex fraction ill be greater than the ſraction = and the velocity of rotation will be increased. There is a particular distance which will make it the greatest possible, namely, when 2 is made / , (V/  + ncet), as vill easily be found by treating the ſraction a vith æ, considered as the variable quantity, ſor a maximum. In what we have been saying on this subject, ve have considered the rotation only in as much as it is perſormed round the centre of gravity, although in every moment it is really performed round a spontaneous axis lying beyond that centree. This was done SEAMANSHIP. . 671 because it aſſorded an easy investigation, and any angular motion round the centre oſ gravity is equal to the angular motion round any other point. Therefore the extent and the time of the evolution are accurately defined.From observing that the energy oſ the force F is proportional to ꝗG, an inattentive reader will be apt to conceive the centre of gravity as the centre of motion, and the rotation as taking place because the momenta of the sails and rudder, on the opposite sides of the centre of gravity, do not halance each other. But ve must always keep in mind that this is not the cause oſ the rotationn. The cause is the want oſ equilibrium round the point C (Plate X. fig. 10.), where the actions of the water halance each other. During the evolution, which consists of a rotation combined with a progressive motion, this point C ĩs continually shiſting, and the unbalanced momeuta which continue the rotation alvays respeet the momentary situation oſ the point C. It is nevertheless always true that the energy of a ſorce F is proportional ſ cæteris puribus) o qG;, and the rotation is alvays made in the same direction as if the point G vere really the centre oſ conversionn. Thereſore the mainsail acts always (when oblique) by pushing the stern away ſrom the wind, although it should sometimes act on a point of the vertical lever through C, which is a-head of C. These observations on the effects of the sails and rudder in produeing a conversion, are suſficient for enabling us to explain any case oſ their action which may occur. We have not considered the effects which they tend to produce by inclining the ship round a horizontal axis, viz. the motions of rolling and pitching. To treat this subject properly would lead us into the whole doctrine of the equilibrium of floating bodies, and it would rather lead to maxims of construetion than to maxims of manœuvre. M. Bouguer's Traitẽ du Navire and Euler's Scientia Navalis are excellent performances on this subject, and we are not here obliged to have recourse to any erroneous theory. 67; SEAMANSHIP. 477. It ĩs easy to see that the lateral pressure both oſ the wind on the sails and of the water on the rudder tends o incline the ship to one sidlee The sails also tend i1o pres the ships bows into the water, and, iſ she were kept from advancing, would press them down considerably. But by the ship's motion, aud the prominent form of her bows, the resistance of the water to the fore part oſ the ship produces a ſorce which is directed upwards. The sails also have a small tendency to raise the ship, ſor they constitute a surſace which in gencral separates ſrom the plumb-lIme below. This is remarkably the case in the staysiails, particularly the jib and ſore- topmast staysall. And this helps greatly to soſten the plunges oſ the ship's bows into the head seas. The upward pressure also of the water on her bows, which we just nov mentioned, has a great eſſect in opposing the immersion oſ the bows which the sails produce by acting on the long levers ſfurnished by the masts M. Bouguer gives the name of point velique to the point V. (Plate X. fig. 12) of the mast, where it is cut by the line CV, which marks th mean place and direction of the whole impulse of the water on the bows. And he observes, that if the mean direction of all the actions oſf the wind on the sails be made to pass also through this point, there will be a perſect equilibrium, and the ship will have no tendency to plunge into the water or to rise out oſ it; for the whole action of the water on the bows, in the direction CV, is equivalent to, and may be resolved into the action CE, by which the progressive motion is resisted, and the vertical action CD, by which the ship is raised above the wate. The force CE must be opposed by an equal foree VD, exerted by the wind on the sails, and the force CD is opposed by the weight of the ship. IF the mean eſſort of the sails passes above the point V, the ship's bows vill be pressed into the water; and iſ it pass below V, her stern vill be pressed dovn. But, by the union oſ thes forces, she will rise and ſall with the sa, keeping alæays n a parullel positionn. We apprehend that ĩt is of very Iitile SEAMANSHIP. 73 moment to attend to the situation of this point. Except when the ship is right afore the wind, it is a thousand chances to one that the line CV of mean resistance does not pass through any mast; and the fact is, that the ship cannot be in a state of uniſorm motion on any other condition but the perfeet union oſ the line of mean action of the sails, and the line of mean action of the resistance: But its place shiſis by every change of leeway or of trim; and it is impossible to keep these lines in one constant point of intersection for a moment, on account of the incessant changes oſ the surface of the water on which she floats M. Bouguer's observations on this point are, however, very ingenious and original We conclude this dissertation, by deseribing some of the chief movements or evolutions What we have said hitherto is intended for the instruction of the artist, by making him sensible of the mechanical procedure. The description is rather meant for the amusement of the landsman, enabling him to understand operations that are familiar to the seaman. The latter ill perhaps smile at the awkward account given oſ his business by one who eannot hand, reeſ, or steer. To tack Ship. The ship must first be kept full, that is, with a very sensible angle of incidence on the sails, and by no means hugging the vind. For, as this evolution is chieſly performed by the rudder, it is necessary to give the ship a good velocity. When the ship is observed to luff up of herself, that moment is to be eatched ſor beginning the evolution, because she will by her inherent force continue this motion. The helm is then put down. When the officer calls out Helms a-lee, the fore-sheet, fore-top bowline, jib, and ſlagsail sheets forvard are let go. The jib is frequently hauled down. Thus the obstacles to the ship's head coming VOL. Iv. 2u 674 SEAMANSHIP. up to the wind by the action of the rudder are removed. If the mainsail is set, it is not unusual to clue up the weather side, which may be considered as a headsail, beca use it is before the centre of gravity The mizen must be hauled out, and even the sail braced to windward. Its pover in paying oſf the stern from the wind conspires with the action of the rudder. It is really an aerial rudder. The sails are immediately taken aback. In this state the eſſeet of the mizen- topsail would be to obstruet the movement, by pressing the stern the contrary way to what it did before It is thereſore either immediately braced about sharp on the other tack, or loweredl. Bracing it about evidently tends to pay round the stern from the wind, and thus assist in bringing the head up to the wind. But in this position it checks the progressive motion of the ship, on which the evolution chieſly dependss For a rapid evolution, thereſore, it is as well to lower the mizen-topsail. Meantime, the headsails are all aback, and the action oſ the wind on them tends greatly to pay the ship round To increase this effect, it is not unusual to haul the foretop boline again. The sails on the mainmast are now almost becalmed; and therefore, vhen the wind is right ahead, or a little beſore, the mainsail is hauled round and braced up sharp on the other tack with all expedition. The staysail sheets are now shiſted over to their places for the other tack. The ship is now entirely under the pover oſ the headsails and oſ the rudder, and their actions conspire to promote the conversion. The ship has acquired an angular motion, and will preserve it, so that now the evolution is secured, and she ſalls oſf apace ſrom the wind on the other tack. The ſarther action of the rudder is thereſore unnecessary, and would even he prejudicial, by causing the ship to ſall off too much ſrom the wind beſore the sails ean be shiſted and trimmed ſor sailing on the other tack. It is therefore proper to right the helm when the wind ĩs right a- head, that is, to bring the rudder into the direetion oſ the SEAMANSHIP. 65 Keel. The ship continues her conversion by her inherent force and the action oſ the headsails. When the ship has fallen off about four points from the wind, the headsails are hauled round and trimmed sharp on the other tack with all expedition; and although this operation was begun with the wind four points on the bow, it will be six before the sails are braced up, and therefore the headsails ill immediately ſil. The aſter-sails have filled already, while the headsails were inactive, and therefore immediately check the farther ſalling oſf from the wind. All sails now draw, for the staysail sheets have been shiſted over while they were becalmed or shaking in the wind. The ship now gathers way, and will obey the smallest motion of the helm to bring her close to the wind. We have here supposed, that during all this operation the ship preserves her progressive motion. She must there fore have described a curve line, advancing all the while to windward. Fig. 18. is a representation of this evolution when it is performed in the completest manner. The ship standing on the course E a, with the wind blowing in the direction WF, has her helm put hard a-lee hen she is in the position A. She immediately deviates from her course, and describing a curve, comes to the position B, with the vind blowing in the direction WF of the yards, and the square- sails now shiver. The mizen topsail is here represented braced sharp on the other tack, by which its tendeney to aid the ;ugular motion (While it cheeks the progressive motion) is distinetly seenn. The main and foresails are now shivering, and immediately after are taken aback. The eſfect of this on the headsails is distinetly seen to be favourable to the conversion, by pushing the point F in the direction F i; but ſor the same reason it continues to retard the progressive motionn. When the ship has attained to the position C, the mainsail is hauled round and trimmed ſor the other tackk. The impulse in the direction F ĩ still aids the conversion and retards the progressive motion. 616 SEAMANSHIP. When the ship has attained a position between C and D, such that the main and mizen-topsail yards are in the ũirection of the wind, there is nothing to counteract the ſoræ oſ the headsails to pay the ship's head off from the wind. Nay, during the progress oſ the ship to this intermediate position, if any wind gets at the main or mizen topsæũs, t acts on their anterior surfaces, and impels the after parts of the ship away from the curve a b c d, and thus aids the revolutionn. We have thereſore said, that when once the sails are taken fully aback, and particularly vhen the wind is brought right ahead, it is scarce possible for the evolution to ſail; as soon thereſore as the main- topsail ſtrimmed for the other tack) shivers, ve are certain that the headsail⸗ will be filled by the time they are hauled round and rimmed. The staysails are filled before this, because their sheets have been shifted, and they stand much sharper than the square-sails; and thus every thing tends to check the falling off from the wind on the other tack, and this no sooner than it should be done. The ship immediately gathers way, and holds on in her new course d GBut it frequently happens, that in this conversion the ship loses her whole progressive motion. This sometimes happens while the sails are shivering beſore they are taken fully aback. It is evident, that in this case there is little hopes of success, for the ship nov lies like a log, and ne”ther sails nor rudder have any action. The ship drives to leeward like a log, and the water acting on the lee side of the rudder checks a little the driving oſ the sternn. The head thereſore ſalls off again, and by and by the sails fill, and the ship continues on her ſormer tack. This is called MISSING STAVS, and it is generally owing o the ship's having too little velocity at the beginning of the evolution Hence the propriety of keeping the sails well filled for some litile time beſore Rough weather, too, by raising a wave which beats violently on the weather-bow, ſfrequently checks the ſirst luſfing oſ the ship, and beats her oſf again. SEAMANSHIP. 677 Iſ the ship lose all her motion aſter the headsails have been fſully taken aback, and before we have brought the vind right ahead, the evolution becomes uncertain, but by no means desperate; for the action of the wind on the headsails will presently give her stern-way. Suppose this to happen when the ship is in the position C. Bring the helm over hard to windvard, so that the rudder shall have the position represented by the small dotted line o. It is evident, that the resistance oſ the water to the stern-way of the rudder acts in a favourable direetion, pushing the stern outwards. In the meantime, the action of the wind on the headsails pushes the head in the opposite direction. These actions conspire therefore in promoting the evolution; and if the wind is right ahead, it cannot fail, but may even be completed speedily, because the ship gathers stern-way, and the action of the rudder becomes very powerful; and as son as the wind comes on the formerly lee-bow, the action of the water on the now lee-quarter ill greatly accelerate the conversionn. When the wind therefore has once been brought nearly right ahead, there is no risk oſ being baſfled. But should the ship have lost all her head-way considerably before this, the evolution is very uncertain; ſor the action of the water on the rudder may not be nearly equal to its contrary action on the lee-quarter; in which case the action oſ the wind on the headsails may not be suſficient to make up the difference When this is observed, when the ship goes astern without changing her position, ve must immediately throw the headsails completely aback, and put the helm down again, which will pay off the ship's head ſrom the wind enough to enable us to fill the sails again on the same tack, to try our fortune again; or we must BOHAUL the ship, in the manner to be described by and by. Such is the ordinary process of tacking ship,a process in vhich all the different modes of action of the rudder and 578 SEAM A EEIP sheets till the square-sails are all shivering: ſor they continuing to drav with considerable force, æand bala/ each other olerably fore and aſt, keep up the sbũ: æcity very much, and thus maintain the power of thæ der. If we no let all fly vhen the square sils are si= ing, the ship may be considered as without sails, but æ2ed to the action of the water on the lee-bow; from =hæ urises a strong pressure of the bow to windward which oæ spires with the action of the rudder to aid the conversæ It evidently leaves all that tendency of the how 1o vini vard which arises from leeway, and even what was coterncted by the formerly unbalanced action of these heastuysailss. This method lengthens the whole time of ihæ ovolution, but it advances the ship to windward. Observe, too, that keeping fast the foretop bowline till the sail shivers, and then letting iĩt go, ensures the taking aback oſ that æil and thus instantly produces an action that is ſavourable the evolution. The most expert senmen, however, diſfer among themselves with respeet to these two methods, and the first is the most generally practised in the British navy, becaus the least liable to ſail. The forces which oppose the onversion are sooner removed, and the production of a ſavourable action by the backing oſ the foretop-sail is also soner obtained, hy letting go the foretop bowline at the fist Having cutered o minutely into the description and ronale of this evolution. wve have suſficiently tumed the SEAMANSHTP. 679 readers attention to the different actions which co-operate ĩn producing the motions of conversionn. We shall therefore be very brieſ in our description oſ the other evolutions. To wear Ship. WHEN the seaman sees that his ship will not go about head to vind, but will miss stays, he must change his tack the other way; that is, by turning her head away ſrom the wind, going a little way before the wind, and then hauling the wind on the other tack. This is called vEARING or VEERING ship. It is most necessary in stormy weather with little sail, or in very ſaint breezes, or in a disabled ship. The process is exceedingly simple; and the mere narration of the procedure is suſficient for showing the propriety of every part oſ it. Watch for the moment of the ship's ſalling off, and then haul up the mainsail and mizen, and shiver the mizen-topsail, and put the helm a-weather. When the ship ſalls off sensibly (and not before), let go the bowliness. Ease away the fore-sheet, raise the fore-tack, and gather aſt the weather fore-sheet as the lee-sheet is ensed avay. Round in the weather-braces of the fore and main-masts, and keep the yards nearly bisecting the angle of the wind and keel, so that when the ship is beſore the wind the yards may be square. It may even be oſ advantage to round in the weather- braces of the main- topsail more than those of the headsails; for the mainmast is abaſt the centre of gravity. All this while the mizen- topsail must be kept shivering, by rounding in the weather-braces as the ship pays oſf from the wind. Then the main-topsail will be braced up for the other tack by the time that ve have brought the wind on the weather quarter. Aſter this it will be full, and vill aid the evolutionn. When the wind is right aſt, shiſt the jib and staysail sheets. The evolution now goes on vith great 680 SEAMANSHIP. rapidity; therefore briskly haul on board the ſore and muin tacks, and haul out the mizen, and set the mizenstaysails as soon as they vill take the wind the right way. We must now check the great rapidity with which the ship comes to the wind on the other tack, by righting the helm before we bring the wind on the beam; and all must be trimmed sharp fore and aſt by this time, that the headsails may take and check the coming-to. All being trimmed, stand on close by the wind. We cannot help losing much ground in this movement. Therefore, though it be very simple, it requires much attention and rapid execution to do it with as little ground as possiblee. One is apt to imagine at first that it would be better to keep the headsails braced up on the former tack, or at least not to round in the weather- hraces so much as is here directedc When the ship is right aſore the wind, we should èxpect assistance ſfrom the obliquity of the headsails; but the rudder being the principal agent in the evolution, it is found that more is gained by increasing the ship's velocity, than by a smaller impulse in the headsails more favourably directedc Experienced seamen differ, however, in their practice in respect of this particular. To box houl a Ship. Tnis is a process performed only in critical situations, as when a rock, a ship, or some danger, is suddenly seen right a-head, or vhen a ship misses stays. It requires the most rapid execution. The ship being close hauled on a wind, haul up the mainsail and mizen, and shiver the topsails, and put the helm hard a-lee altogether. Raise the fore-tack, let go the head bowlines, and brace about the headsails sharp on the other tack. The ship ill quickly lose her way, get stern-way, and then ſall off, by the joint action of the headsails and of the inverted rudder. When she has ſallen off eight points, SEAMANSHIP. 681 brace the aſtersails square, which have hitherto been kept shivering. This will at first increase the power of the rudder, by increasing the stern-way, and at the same time it makes no opposition to the conversion which is going on. The continuation of her circular motion vill presently cause them to take the wind on their after surfacess. This will check the stern-way, stop it, and give the ship a little headway. Now shift the helm, so that the rudder may again act in conjunction with the headsails in paying her off from the wind. This is the critical part oſ the evolution, because the ship has little or no way through the water, and vill frequently remain long in this position. But as there are no counteracting forces, the ship continues to fall offThen the weather-braces of the aſter-sails may be gently rounded in, so that the wind acting on their hinder surſaces may both push the ship a little a-head and her stern laterally in conjunction with the rudder. Thus the wind is brought upon the quarter and the headsails shiverr. By this time the ship has acquired some head-way. A continuation of the rotation would now ſill the headsails, and their action would be contrary to the intended evolution. They are therefore immediately braced the other way, nearly square, and the evolution is now completed in the same manner with wearing ship. Some seamen brace all the sails aback the moment that the helm is put hard a-lee, but the after-sails no more aback than just to square the yards. This quickly gives the ship stern-way, and brings the rudder into action in its inverted direction; and they think that the evolution is accelerated by this method. There is another problem of scamanship deserving of our attention, which cannot properly be called an evolution. This is lying too This is done in general by laying some suils aback, so as to stop the head-way produced by others. But there is a considerable address necessary ſor doing this in such a vay that the ship shall lie easily, and under comVOL. Iv. 2x 685” SEAMANSHIP. mand, ready to proceed in her course, and easily brough under veigh. To bring to ith the fore or main topsail to the mast, brace that sail sharp aback, haul out the mizen, and clay the helm hard a lee. Suppose the fore-topsail to be aback, the other sils shoot the ship a-head, and the lee-helm makes the ship come up to the wind, which makes it come more perpendicularly on the sail which is aback. Then its impulse s00n exceeds those on the other sails, which are now shivering or almost shivering. The ship stands still avhile, and then ſalls off, 50 as to fill the aſter-sails, hich again shoot her a-head, and the process is thus repeatedl. A ship lying to in this vay goes a good deal a-head and also to leeward. If the maintopsail be aback, the ship shoots a-head, and comes up till the diminished impulse of the drawing sails in the direction oſ the keel is balanced by the increased impulse on the main topsail. She lies a long while in this position driving slowly to leeward; and she at last falls off by the beating of the water on her weather-bow. She falls off but little, and 300n comes up again. Thus a ship lying to is not like a mere log, but has a certain motion which keeps her under command. To get under weigh again, ve must watch the time of falling oſf; and when this is just about to finish, brace about briskly, and fill the sail which was aback. To aid this operation, the jib and foretopmast staysail may be hoisted, and the mizen brailed up: or, when the intended course is beſore the wind or large, back the foretopsail sharp, shiver the main and mizen topsail, brail up the mizen, and hoist the jib and foretopmast stay sails altogether. In a storm ith a contrary wind, or on a lee shore, a ship is obliged to lie to under a very low sall- Some sail is absolutely necessary, in order to keep the ship steadily down, othervise she would kick about like a cork, and roll so deep as to strain and work herselſ to pieces. Different ships SEAMANSHIP. 688 behave best under diſferent sailss In a very violent gale, the three lower staysails are in general well adapted for keeping her stendy, and distributing the strainn. This mode seems also vell adapted for wearing, which may be done by hauling down the mizen-staysail. Under whatever sail the ship is brought to in a storm, it is always with a fitted sail, and never with one laid aback. The helm is lashed down hard a- lee; thereſore the ship shoots a-head, and comes up till the sea on her weather-how beats her off again. Getting under weigh is generally diſficult; because the ship and rigging are lofty abaſt, and hinder her from falling oſf readily when the helm is put hard a-weather. We must watch the falling off, and assist the ship by some small headsail. Sometimes the crew get up on the weather fore-shrowds in a erowd, and thus present a surface to the ind. TuESE examples of the three chieſ evolutions will enable those vho are not seamen to understand the propriety of the different steps, and also to understand the other evolutions as they are deseribed by practical authorss We are not acquainted witli any performance in our language vhere the whole are considered in a connected and systematic manner. There is a book on this subjecet in French, called La Manœuvrier, by M. Burdẽ de Ville-Huet, which is in great reputation in Francee A translation into English was published some years ago, said to be the perſormance oſ the Chevalier de Sauseuil, a French oſficer But this is undoubtedly the work of some person who did not understand either the French language, or the subject, or the mathematical principles which are employed in the scientific partt. The blunders are not such as could possibly be made by a Frenchman not versant in the English language, but natural for an Englishman ignorant of French. No French gentleman or officer would have translated a work of this kind (Which he professes to think s 684 SEAMANSHIP. highly of) to serve the rivals and foes oſ his country. But indeed it can do no great harm in this way; for the sientiſic part of it is absolutely unintelligible for vant of science in the translator; and the practical part is full of blunders for want of knowledge oſ the F rench language. We offer this account of the subject with all proper respect and diffidence. We do not profess to teach; but, hy pointing out the defects of the celebrated works oſ M. Bouguer, and the course which may be taken to remove them, while we preserve much valuable knowledge which they contain, ve may perhaps excite some persons to apply to this subject, who, by a combination oſ what is just in M. Bouguers theory, with an experimental doctrine of the impulses of fluids, may produce a treatise of seamanship which ill not be confined to the libraries of mathematicians, but become a manual for seamen by proſession END OF VOLUME FOURTH. 